The Resurrection of Jesus.
Mat 28 2 And behold there was a great earthquake: for the Angel of the Lord
descended from heaven and came and rolled back ye stone from the door, and
sat upon it. And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead
men. And the Angel said unto the woman. Fear not ye, for I know, that ye seek
Jesus, that was crucified. He is not here for he is Risen, as he said.
depiction of the resurrection of Jesus

JESUS AND THE RESURRECTION Justified by Witnesses IN HEAVEN AND IN EARTH.

In Two Parts.

The First showing That Jesus is the SON OF GOD; the Second, That in him we
have ETERNAL LIFE.

By SIMON PATRICK, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

(...). S. Chrysostom. in Johan. Hom. lxvii. Printed for R. Royston. MDCLXXVII.

THE Witnesses TO CHRISTIANITY.

THE WITNESSES TO CHRISTIANITY; OR, The Certainty of our FAITH and HOPE: In a
Discourse upon 1 S. JOHN v. 7, 8.

BY SIMON PATRICK, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty, at the
Angel in Amen-Corner, 1675.

TO The most Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, By Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of CANTERBURY, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan; and one of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please Your Grace
TO permit these Papers to go abroad under your Name, which are writ in defense
of that most holy Religion, of which your Grace is the prime Minister in this
Kingdom. They contain an explication but of a very few words; yet in them lies
the whole Evidence for the Christian Cause. I hope I have done something to
clear their sense, and to illustrate diverse other passages in the holy Books. I
have, at least, done my endeavor, and opened the way to the plainest and most
Apostolical method of asserting the truth of our Religion. They that come after
may supply the defects, and rectify the mistakes, which they find in this
account that I have given of the Witnesses to Christianity. Who speak so fully
and with such Authority, that it is a matter of just wonder there should be any
Infidels in Christian Countries.

We can find no other cause of it, but that in stead of considering upon what
grounds our Faith relies, they scornfully presume that it has none. If they
would but lay aside their lightness, and become serious, and if they would be
so humble as to think it is possible they may learn of one of the despised
Ministers of Jesus Christ; I doubt not they would, with a little study, soon
see him to be so great a Lord, that they ought to have a due respect to the
meanest of his Servants, for his sake. Nay, they would not envy to them such
high Dignities, as your Grace worthily holds in the Church of Christ. For the
Lord himself is honored, in the honor that is done to his Ministers. And
thereby they are made capable to do him still better service; and with the more
authority to promote the honor of his Religion.

Of which how much your Grace has deserved, by your prudent care and vigilance
for its preservation, and by the countenance and encouragement you give to
those that labor in its service; posterity perhaps may be better judges than
this present Age. Though that cannot be so ungrateful as not to acknowledge
your great Munificence and Bounty; of which there are such public and lasting
Monuments, as declare you to be Primate of all England, not only in the dignity
of your Office, but, which is more, in the generosity of your Spirit.

Long may our Sovereign enjoy such a wise Counselor, the Church such a Prudent
Governor, Learning such a liberal Patron and Benefactor, and, when through
mere Age you must resign and exchange it for a higher and better place, your
See such a Successor.

As for my self, if your Grace will be pleased to pardon this Address, and
reckon me in the number of those, that reverence your Virtues as well as your
Greatness, I shall not doubt but my Design in this Work will obtain your Graces
approbation; and that your known Candor will pass a favorable Judgment upon
the weak endeavors of

the Churches and Your Graces affectionate Servant, SY. PATRICK.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE scope of this Discourse, which is to prove that Jesus is the Son
of God, page 1, etc. The meaning of that phrase in this place, p. 8. and in
some other places of Scripture, p. 10. derived from the Old Testament, p. 14,
15. many passages in that, relating to this matter explained, Ib. and p. 16,
17, etc. A Prayer, p. 22, etc. CHAP. II. Concerning the Witnesses in general,
p. 25. and particularly of the testimony of the FATHER, p. 29. which was given
three times, p. 30. first at his Baptism, which is explained, p. 30. unto 42.
Secondly, in the Holy Mount, which is explained at large, in many remarkable
circumstances which accompanied it, to p. 56. Thirdly, in the way between
Bethany and Jerusalem, to p. 66. There the pretenses of the Jews to a Bath Col
under the second Temple is considered and confuted, to p. 78. The difference
between this voice which testified to our Savior, and that in ancient times,
p. 78. to the end. A Prayer. CHAP. III. Concerning the Testimony of the WORD,
p. 85. Who the WORD is, p. 86. Why so called, p. 87. First testimony he gave to
S. Steven, p. 90. The second to S. Paul, p. 101. Christ's first apparition to
him considered and expounded at large, p. 104. a second, p. 115. others, p.
116, etc. Third testimony of the WORD to S. John, p. 122. Several other visions
he had of him, p. 128, etc. An Answer to an objection about the Authority of
the Revelation, p. 135. To another, which gives an account of the sense of two
places in S. John 's Gospel, which seem opposite, p. 137. A Prayer, 142. CHAP.
IV. Concerning the Testimony of the HOLY GHOST, p. 147. First at our Savior's
Baptism, p. 148. When the SCHEKINAH or Divine Glory descended, Ib. what it was,
149, etc. of its coming down, p. 153. like a Dove, 155. and making his abode in
him, p. 159, etc. which was never known before, p. 164. Whereby he was
anointed, p. 165. And now began his reign, 168. The Alcoran confesses this
descent of the holy Ghost, p. 173. Whereby he became the Temple of God, 176. As
appears by six demonstrations of a Divine Presence in him, from p. 177. to 198.
The second Testimony of the HOLY GHOST on the day of Pentecost, 199. explained
by three observations, 201. to 225. The last Testimony of the HOLY GHOST, 225.
to 238. A Prayer, 239. CHAP. V. Concerning the Witnesses on EARTH, 245. First
of the WATER, 248. As it signifies the purity of Christ's Doctrine and Life,
249. The purity of his Doctrine, 250. And the purity of his Life, 261. Both
these proofs of his Divinity, 267. to 275. The Testimony of John the Baptist to
him, 276, etc. The place where he gave it very remarkable, 288. Jesus his own
Baptism a testimony to him, several ways, 292. to 308. The conclusion we are to
draw from hence, 308, 309, etc. A Prayer, 312. CHAP. VI. The Testimony of the
BLOOD, 317. Jesus died to witness this truth, that he is God's Son, 320. The
strength of this Testimony in xiv. Considerations, 322. The first, Ib. The
second and third, 323. The fourth, 324. The fifth, 327. The sixth, 328. The
seventh, 331. The eighth, 332. The ninth, 334. The tenth, 339. The eleventh,
343. The twelfth, 345. The thirteenth, which contains a narration of the trial
of our Savior before Pontius Pilate, 349. to 363. The fourteenth, 363, etc.
The conclusion, in two observations belonging to this matter, 366. A Prayer,
372. CHAP. VII. Concerning the Testimony of the SPIRIT, 379. The difference
between the SPIRIT and the HOLY GHOST, 381. His miraculous works were the first
testimony of the Spirit, 383. particularly casting out Devils, 388. and raising
the dead, 396. the raising of Lazarus a remarkable testimony to Jesus, 402. The
reason why the Apostles relate so many of his miracles, 410. Our Savior
appeals to them, 418. The different ways that God and men take for establishing
a Religion, 425. The second testimony of the Spirit, was by the Resurrection of
Christ from the dead, 431. First, as it was a sign given his Apostles and the
People, 438. and the greatest sign, 442. and such an one as his enemies
acknowledge to be satisfactory, 448. An explication of that place, 1 John
50.51. and of the blasphemy against the holy Ghost, 457. to 467. These
Witnesses all well known, 467. A Prayer. 473. CHAP. VIII. Concerning the
Witness of the Apostles, 479. who testified to our Savior all these three
ways, by WATER, 487. and by BLOOD, 497. and by the SPIRIT, 503. The difference
between them and all pretenders to miraculous works, 509. No just exception
against the Records we have of their testimony, 514, etc. No body ever
undertook to disprove them, 523. A few remarks upon some passages of the N.T.
which speak of these witnesses, 525. particularly the Two Witnesses xi. Rev. 3.
527. The testimony of all the Martyrs, 533. A Prayer, 535. CHAP. IX. The great
importance of this Truth, that Jesus is the Son of God, 542. appears in many
considerations, 543. We ought therefore to settle it in our hearts, 545. and
not think such discourses needless, 546. The laziness of Christian people, 548.
We ought to be cautious in our belief, and examine before we trust, 550. If we
examine duly we shall find the Faith of Christians to be perfectly rational,
554. No Religion relies on such testimonies, 555. That of Mahomet considered in
all the foregoing regards, 556. to 566. There the Religion of Moses is
considered. Which had no such witness from the FATHER as ours has, Ib. nor
from the WORD, 570. nor from the HOLY GHOST, 571. nor such a Testimony of
WATER, 572. nor of BLOOD, 574. nor of the SPIRIT, 575. A Prayer, 580. CHAP. X.
Containing other Uses we are to make of the Testimony of these Witnesses, 585.
The third is, we ought to believe them, and heartily embrace the Christian
Faith, 589. no excuse for those that do not, 593. This is as certain a way of
knowing things as any other, 598. These Witnesses greater than any other, 602.
The Christian way to belief, 608. The plain account of our Faith, 609. The
fourth Use we are to make of this Testimony, 613. Obedience the necessary
consequence of Faith, 614, 615, etc. All these Witnesses call for it, 617, etc.
The Devils will shame us, if we hearken not to them, 622. The fifth, concerning
the power of the Christian Faith to baffle all temptations, 629. First the
hatred of men, 631. Secondly, troubles and calamities, Ib. 632, etc. Thirdly,
the lust of the flesh, lust of the eyes, and pride of life, 634, etc. How
inviting the voice of these Witnesses is, 639, etc. The sixth, concerning the
power of this Faith to make us do our duty cheerfully, 645. Christ's
Commandments not grievous, 646. According to our faith so is our strength, 648.
The unreasonableness of men's complaints of Christ's yoke, 650, 651. What fancy
will make men do, 653. Faith therefore is more powerful, 654. We ought now to
be Christ's Witnesses by our good lives, 655. So the ancient Christians were,
656. Whereby we shall convey this Faith to posterity, 657. Wickedness the cause
of Infidelity, 658. A Prayer, 659.
ERRATA.
PAge 635. line 15. read, signifies that sort. p. 636. l. penult. r. which is a
thirst. p. 637. l. 18. r. seeks. p. 641. l. 24. r. temptations. p. 642. l. 12.
r. ever: p. 643. l. 10. for desire, r. defy. p. 645. l. 14. for yet, r. yea.
p. 654. l. 2. for him, r. us.

1 S. JOHN v^^. 7, 8. For there are three that bear witness in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one:

And there are three that bear witness in Earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and
the Blood; and these three agree in one.


PART I.
CHAP. I. An Introduction to the Ensuing Discourse, showing the Scope of it.
IT is not my design in this Discourse, to explain and establish the Doctrine
of the Holy Trinity; which several great Writers have inferred, with much
appearance of reason, from the remarkable difference there is between those
words whereby S. John expresses the Unity of the first three witnesses, and
those whereby he expresses the Unity of the last: But to settle the Faith and
Hope of Christian Souls, in the Lord Jesus; which is the true scope of the
Apostle in this part of his Epistle, though in no Treatise, that I have met
withal, it has from hence been distinctly and fully represented.

That this is the drift of the Apostles Discourse, and ought to be the
intention of mine; will be very apparent, if we go but back so far as the
fourth Verse of this Chapter, and from thence take our rise for that Argument,
which I purpose to pursue. To know that we are born of God, and so shall be his
Heirs, is a thing in which, above all others, we are most highly concerned.
That we may have therefore a certain character of one divinely descended, S.
John lays down this General mark of him whereby he may be known, that
Whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the World. By this a Christian is to be
tried, and hereby he discovers himself what he is, whether the child of God in
name only or in deed and in truth. If when he meets with any thing in this
world that would seduce or affright him from his duty, he not only defies it
and sets himself against it, but makes it yield to his resolution of steadfast
obedience to God's Commandments (which every man, he says in the foregoing
verse, that loves God, will certainly keep and not think them grievous neither)
it is a plain demonstration that he is dear to God, and has his very Spirit in
him.

Now next to this there is nothing more necessary and desirable to be known,
than how we may obtain this great and matchless victory over every thing in the
world that opposes our Christian resolution; and so undoubtedly approve our
selves heroical persons, as they were anciently called, that are born from
above. And here also the Apostle lends us his assistance; telling us in the
latter end of that fourth Verse, that we must atchieve it by Faith. And this is
the victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith. So courageous, so
powerful, so successful is an hearty lively Faith, that you see he calls it by
the name of victory it self. If we believe steadfastly, we shall tread the world
under our feet, and easily despise all its temptations; as those valiant
Worthies did, whose example another Apostle sets before us, in the Eleventh
Chapter to the Hebrews: A portion of Scripture which he that means to be a
conqueror, should think he can never read too often.

But there is a farther enquiry remaining, which every body will be apt to
make; and that is, what this Faith may be, which is so victorious and
triumphant. And therefore the Apostle takes care to satisfy us in this matter
also; when he tells us, Verse 5. it is nothing else but to believe that Jesus
is the Son of God. To be heartily persuaded, he means, that that great person,
who was born of the Virgin Mary, and was known by the name of Jesus, and
overcame the world so gloriously, was indeed sent from God unto us, and owned
by him as the express image of his person; so that we may as infallibly depend
upon the truth of what he has said, either of himself, or concerning us, as we
can upon any thing of Sense or Reason; by which we think our selves bound to
guide and determine our resolutions and actions in this life.

But still after all this, there is one thing more that we cannot but desire to
be very sure of; without which all the rest will stand us in no stead, but we
shall flag and despair of success, viz. That Jesus is indeed the Son of God.
This if it be not well proved by substantial arguments, we can have no solid
faith, and so no victory; and so no sonship, no hope in another world. The
Apostle therefore, that he may serve us in bringing some evident demonstration
of this so important a truth, tells us in the next words (Verse 6.) that Jesus
did not only say he was God's Son, and confidently affirm himself to be the
Divine person so long looked for, to come into the world; but that he came with
very sufficient and unreproveable witnesses of it, viz. the WATER, the BLOOD,
and the SPIRIT: which made this truth good to all those, who considered their
testimony. If the first of these [WATER] should not be thought great enough to
merit belief; yet the [BLOUD] joined with it adds great force to its
persuasion. Or if both these seem too weak, yet this last, the SPIRIT, the
Apostle doubts not is so strong to conquer men's minds, and make them believe in
Jesus, that he says, The Spirit is truth. That is, such an undoubted proof that
Jesus was what he pretended to be, the Son of God; that no man can be deceived
who relies upon it, and no man can refuse, if he give heed to it, to rely and
depend upon such a witness.

Now this was a thing notorious in those days, and needed no proof at all, the
whole Country of Judaea could witness it, that he came by (or rather with)
Water, Blood and the Spirit. And therefore the Apostle does not go about to
make this good, that there were such Witnesses (it being a matter confessed)
but rather repeats it over again, as the strongest proof of his Divine
Authority: adding moreover there-withal, that there were three other Witnesses,
who by their concurrent testimony would unanimously justify this Truth. For,
says he, in the words I have chosen to explain, There are three that bear
record (or witness) in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and
these three are one. And there are three that bear witness in Earth, the
Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood: and these three agree in one. As if he
had said, You cannot reasonably doubt of that which we preach concerning Jesus,
if you go but to those three witnesses, to which I have sent you, the Water,
the Blood and the Spirit; for they all affirm with one mouth, that he was the
Son of God. And as they testify this to you upon the Earth; so there are three
other Witnesses also who declare it to you from Heaven: to whom I first direct
you; and then to those three that here on Earth, as I have told you, bear their
record to him.

There are not a few Copies of the New Testament, it must be confessed, which
leave out the Testimony of these three Witnesses that speak from Heaven, not
reading the seventh Verse; as is noted not only by Socinus and his followers,
but by Erasmus, Grotius, Curcellaeus, and our Learned Seldom, whose collections
to this purpose far exceed all former observations. But yet this last named
Great Author, has said so much L. 2. de Syned. cap. 4. number. 4.
to justify the Antiquity of our present Reading, and to keep the seventh
Verse in the place wherein it now stands, that I make no question these are the
words of S. John, concerning the three Heavenly Witnesses, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost; and accordingly I shall in the first place appeal to
their testimony for the confirming of this Truth, and for the supporting
thereby of our Faith, that Jesus is the Son of God.

And if any body shall say, What need is there of this in a Christian Country?
There are no Infidels sure among us; nor are we in danger to turn Pagans, Turks
or Jews, who blaspheme the Lord Jesus? I shall not labor to stop their mouths,
by casting reproaches on others; nor complain of the apostasy which some think
they have reason to lay to the charge of too many in this present untoward
generation: But desire them to take their Answer from S. John himself, in the
thirteenth Verse of this very Chapter: Where they will find that he thought it
not unnecessary to write these things to them that believe on the name of the
Son of God; that they might know how happy a thing it was to be a Christian,
and that they might believe (i. e. continue to believe) on the name of the Son
of God. And I may modestly suppose, that what he thought good to assert here
with so much care and exactness, it will not be thought an unprofitable
diligence if I study to expound and enlarge, for the benefit of believers. It
will be some satisfaction to me however, to have had it in my heart to do some
honor to my Savior, and to have endeavored to make any part of his holy Book
more clearly understood; especially if what I write shall increase the Faith of
any Christian Soul, and fill it with an assured hope in Jesus, by abiding
constant in this belief, that he is the Son of God.

That being the thing which is to be proved by these witnesses, it will be
necessary to search a little into the meaning of the Phrase, before we take
their examination about it. And it must be confessed, that though Jesus be the
Eternal Son of the Father, God of God, begotten of him before all Worlds; yet
this is not always meant when he is called his Son: which is a name in the holy
style, not so much expressing his Nature as his high Authority and Sovereign
power, which he has received, as the Mediator between him and us, from God the
Father Almighty. So I think we are here to understand the Apostle, who under
the Name Jesus comprehends all that belongs to his person, both his Divine and
Humane nature; and affirms that this person has Sovereign Authority committed
to him by God the Father of all: who has given him Commission, and deputed him
in his stead to declare his mind, and acquaint us with his will; and, having by
himself purged our sins, promoted him to sit down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high, as that great King and Lord of all, by whom we are to be
governed now, and to be judged at the last day. Sure I am, in many places of
the holy Scripture which say, he is the Son of God, the meaning is expounded in
other places to be this; that he is the Christ, or the anointed of God. That
is, Jesus, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary,
crucified under Pontius Pilate, rose again from the dead, and afterward
appointed S. John and the rest of the Apostles, to preach those things to all
Nations which we read in the holy Gospel; was indeed sent of God (according to
the ancient Prophecies) with his own power and authority, and is now, by the
suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor, to be our King and Sovereign
Lord, whom we are all to obey, and from whom alone we are to expect all our
rewards.

And there is great reason to think that these are phrases of the very same
import, here in S. John, if we compare but the first Verse of this Chapter with
the fifth. In the former we read, that whosoever believes that Jesus is the
Christ, is born of God: In the latter he tells us, that he who overcomes the
world, believes that Jesus is the Son of God. It is the very same Faith no
doubt whereby we are born of God, and whereby we overcome the world; and
therefore it is the very same thing to believe that Jesus is the Christ, and to
believe that Jesus is the Son of God. Express it how you please, either of
these ways, this alone is the Faith which can regenerate a man and put a Divine
Spirit into him; that is, make him a conqueror over the world as Jesus was. Let
the second Chapter of this Epistle, ver. 22. be consulted also, and there you
will find, that Christ and the Son are terms equivalent, and have the same
signification. To which if you add some places in the Evangelists, they will
make you see this more evidently. When S. Peter made this confession, xvi.
Matthew. 16. that Jesus was Christ the Son of the living God, there is no more
meant, one would think, by those words, the Son of God, than what the other
word, Christ, includes: because when our Savior would have them know that it
was not fit for them, as yet, to divulge this truth which S. Peter confessed,
he only charges his Disciples ( ver. 20.) that they should tell no man that he
was Jesus the Christ. And if this be not ground enough to conclude the identity
(as we speak) of these words, the other Evangelists will put it out of doubt.
For S. Mark makes the confession of S. Peter to have been no more than this,
Thou art the Christ, viii. 29. And S. Luke relates it not much otherwise, when
he says that he acknowledged our Savior to be the Christ of God, ix. 20. To be
the Christ, or to be the Son, the Christ of God, or the Son of God, according
to the understanding of these Divine writers, is the very same; and in these
places nothing different. And indeed, it is very probable that S. Hieroms
opinion is true, who believed that the Apostles were not yet such proficients
as to understand the eternal generation of our Lord Jesus from the essence of
the Father. For we find them very ignorant of diverse things that were easier to
be learnt than this, which if they had known, they would not have expected to
see him settle his Throne upon Earth, nor doubted of his Resurrection from the
dead, and many other things, as they did.

But the comparing of two other places will make this still more manifest. In
the xxvi. Matthew. 63. we read that the High Priest adjured our Savior to tell
him, if he were the Christ, the Son of God. They all expected one to appear
under this character; This was the common title of that great person, who they
believed would shortly come: But they meant no more by it, than one appointed
by God to be their King, as is apparent from S. Luke, who relates that question
barely thus; xxii. 67. Art thou the Christ? tell us. And after our Savior had
made that answer which we read both in him and S. Matthew; he tells us ( ver.
70.) they all replied again, Art thou then the Son of God? which was no more
than to say, must we take this for confessed then, that thou affirmest thy self
to be sent, anointed, and set over us by God? Will thou stand to that which
thou just now ownedst, when we asked thee that question? For without all doubt
the Chief Priests and the Scribes intended nothing by that phrase, the Son of
God, but what was comprehended in the other, the Christ. And therefore when
Pilate, upon their accusation, examined him upon the same matter, he asks
nothing else but this (as this Apostle S. John relates, xviii. 33.) Art thou
the King of the Jews? which is the plain interpretation of the word, Christ.
For that is not the proper name of any person, as Lactantius Nuncupatio
potestatis and regni. Sic enim Judaei Reges suos appellabant. L. 4. Cap. 7.
rightly observes, but a name of power and dominion, signifying him to be their
Sovereign: For in this style, says he, the Jews were wont to speak of their
Kings, whom they called Christ's, or Gods anointed.

Once more, when they were enraged at our Savior for calling himself the Son
of God (as S. John tells us, Chap. x.) He justifies himself by a reason which
signifies no more, but that he called himself, the Christ, the anointed of God,
as you may read, ver. 34, 35, 36. If they were called Gods in old time, to whom
the Word of God came ( i. e. who received commission and authority from God to
be the Judges and Rulers of his people) then it could be no offense, much less
a blasphemy, for him whom God had sanctified (i. e. set apart and anointed to
this office of being their Lord and King) to call himself the Son of God. For
so he was by his place; and there was no need he should say any thing of the
Divine nature that was in him. Well then, to be the Son of God and to be the
Christ, being but different expressions of the same thing; and the word Christ
signifying anointed, one set apart to an high office, and (in its eminent
sense) that person who was to sustain the place of God in this world, to be the
King of Israel, yea the Governor and Ruler of all mankind; we must conclude
that when the Apostle says here, Jesus is the Son of God, his meaning is, that
He is the Holy one of God, the person whom he sanctified by the unction of the
Holy Ghost, and sent into the World; to whom he has now given all power in
Heaven and in Earth, that every knee should bow to him as the Sovereign Lord of
the World; whom we are to hear and obey and depend upon in all things.

For this is the style you may observe of the Old Testament (from whence you
may learn the rise and original of this manner of speech) which calls those
Kings, who derived their authority immediately from God, by the name of his
Sons. Because when they were anointed by his order, they were made what they
were not before, and begotten (as they spoke) again: And being created by God
to their new dignity, they are therefore called his Sons. The first time we
meet with the phrase, is in the story of the first King of Israel, 1 Samuel xiii.
1. where Saul is called, as the words are in the Hebrew, the Son of one year in
his Kingdom. Because there was but a year passed since the time of his unction;
by which he was born Gods Vicegerent, and (as you read x. 6.) turned into
another man. And indeed we find this imitated in Ethnic writers, who call the
day their Emperors entered upon their Reign, their Birthday. So we read in
Spartianus that Adrian being informed by Letters that Trajan had named him for
his Successor, caused the birthday of his adoption to be celebrated. And two
days after, hearing of his death, he ordered they should keep the birthday of
his Empire Natalem imperii instituit celebrandum.
. But I do not intend to launch out of the holy story, where we find this more
plainly delivered in the History of the succeeding Kings of Israel. For when
the Philistines, the Moabites, the Syrians, the Ammonites and other neighboring
People with their Princes, conspired (after they had been conquered by David)
against the Lord and against his anointed; resolving to cast off their yoke:
the Psalmist shows ( Psalm. 2.) how vain and idle their attempt would prove,
because God had appointed him, whom he sent a Prophet to anoint, to be his
King. This decree of God he averrs, and openly declares ( ver. 6, 7.) that the
Lord said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day ( i. e. when he anointed him) I
have begotten thee. So that to rise against him, was to war with God Almighty,
whose Son, that is, Vicegerent he was in those Countries. And therefore if they
were well advised he exhorts them all to go and kiss the Son, ver. 12. i. e.
submit themselves, by that token of humble subjection, to him who had his
Authority immediately from God: Nay, was his firstborn, the most eminent
Prince, that is, that ever he made, lxxxix. Psalm. 27. And therefore he was the
prime type of our Lord Christ, to whom these words are applied, because he was
the Son of David, that great King, who was to reign over them for ever, as the
Angel said, i. Luke 33. And if you pass from hence to the next King, Solomon,
(who had a particular unction also, and in whose reign was prefigured the
glorious Kingdom of our Savior) you will find that God says by a Prophet
concerning him, I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son, 2 Samuel vii. 14.
Which words are a promise to make Solomon King, and settle him on the Throne of
his Father David. So He understood it, as appears by the speech which David
made, not long before his death, to all the great men of his Kingdom, 1 Chronicles.
xxviii. where he tells them ( ver. 4.) that as Jesse had many Sons, Yet God
liked him only to make him King over all Israel: So of the many Sons which the
Lord had given him ( ver. 5.) He had chosen Solomon to sit upon the Throne of
the Kingdom of the Lord. As is evident; says he, from those words of God
spoken by Nathan ( ver. 6.) I have chosen him to be my SON, and I will be hit
FATHER, i. e. made choice of him to be King of Israel in thy room, and as I
have been to thee, so I will be to him. Thus Solomon, one would think,
interpreted these words, when he prays God, who had made good one part of his
promise, to perform the other also, 2 Chronicles. i. 8, 9. Thou have showed great
mercy unto David my Father, and have made me reign in his stead (as much as to
say, made me thy Son) now, O Lord God let thy promise unto my Father be
established; that is, of being a Father to me, now that I am become thy son,
and set by thee over a people, like the dust of the Earth in multitude.

By this time I suppose it will be no wonder to any intelligent person, that
these Kings are called the Sons of God; who did not only govern in that
Country, which was called, it is well known, God's land, and the inhabitants
whereof were his peculiar people: but were appointed by his special direction,
and anointed with his holy oil (lxxxix. Psalm. 20.) and had, as it were, their
being and birth from God, who promoted them to sit upon his Throne, and to be
Kings for the Lord God, as you read 2 Chronicles. ix. 8. so that the Kingdom it self
is called in that Book the Kingdom of the Lord, xiii. 8. And the Judges also in
the Courts of that Kingdom are said to exercise the Judgment of the Lord and
not of man (xix. 6.) that is, to sit there in God's stead, to do men justice:
And because of this great power and trust committed to them by him, are called,
as you heard lxxxii. Psalm. 1, 6. Gods, and the children of the most High; whose
deputies they were, and for whom they judged. And therefore it is the less
wonder, that when this Great Prince came among them, to whom all judgment is
committed, and who has all power in Heaven and in Earth, and is Lord of all,
and appointed by God the heir of all things, He is called by the same name that
they were. If there were no other reason for it, his office would give him a
title to it: because he is the Lords Christ, anointed by God to the highest
dignity and government under him, not only over that Country, but over all
Nations on the Earth; who, by believing on him, were all to be made a chosen
generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet. ii.
9. But to show his most excellent greatness he is called the Son of God, with
two marks of his preeminence above all other who have had that name: First, he
is called, (...), that Son, that eminent King, the King of Kings; like to whom
none ever was. For, secondly, whereas those sons of the highest spoken of
before, were to die like other men, Psalm. 82.7.
and to fall like one of the Princes, in other Countries, He is called the Son,
(...), of that God who lives, xvi. Matthew. 16. that is, of the immortal eternal
God: And by consequence is like his Father, an everlasting King, of whose
Kingdom, as the Angel told his Mother, i. Luke 33. there shall be no end.

Thus the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, who understood this language
well enough, has discoursed in the First Chapter. Where he proves that Jesus
is the Son of God in a more eminent sense than any Angel in Heaven, according
to those ancient prophecies before named, concerning David and Solomon, as you
read ver. 4, 5. From whence the Jews learns to call the Messiah, who they
confess is in those places mystically spoken of, by that name of the Son of
God. Which the Apostle there shows is the greatest name of excellence, and
signifies the highest honor and dignity; such as God has conferred upon no
other. And then he proceeds to show, that according to other prophecies which
speak of his supereminence his Throne is for ever and ever: ( ver. 8.) For God,
who is his God (in a peculiar manner loving and rewarding him) has anointed
him with the oil of gladness (preferred him, that is) above all that partake of
Kingly dignity, ver. 9. He has made him indeed his firstborn, the Prince of
all the Kings of the Earth (as S. John speaks, i. Revel. 5.) to whom we are to
submit our selves with the greatest devotion of spirit, and from whom we may
then expect Protection, Blessing, and the noblest Rewards. For he is the long
expected Son of God, who excells all other that were ever called by that name;
the King of inconceivable Majesty, whose splendour could not so much as be
fore-shadowed by Solomon in all his glory. Thus Nathanael I observe puts these
two expressions together, in his confession of our Savior, out of a vehement
affection redoubling his words, Thou art that Son of God, thou art that King of
Israel, i. John 49.

This is the business upon which we are to examine these Witnesses; we are to
consider what they say to this point, that the Lord Jesus was sent from God as
Moses had formerly been: only Moses as a Servant, but he as a Son (according to
what you read, iii. Heb. 5, 6.) with a fullness of authority, with all the power
of God; so that we may confidently rely on every thing that he has said, as
the very mind and sense of God. This if we can hear them speak, they are
witnesses so beyond all exception, that we cannot choose but reverence him, and
receive him, and obey him, and put our trust in him, and rejoice in his royal
favor and love evermore. For the first three are no less persons than the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost. Whose gracious assistance let us humbly
implore, that this and all other our works may be begun, continued and ended,
to the glorifying of his holy Name.

A PRAYER.
O Father of lights, from whom comet^ every good, and every perfect gift
illuminate my mind in these Meditations that I may be able to enlighten others,
an^ lead them into a good understanding in a^^ things. Guide and direct my
thoughts, tha^ I may reason and discourse aright. Shine into all our Souls by
the light of the glorious Gosp^^ of Christ, John. 6.40
that we seeing the Son, may believe on him: and being made thy children by
adoption and grace, may be daily more an^ more renewed by thy holy Spirit.
Settle i^ our Souls that mighty faith, whereby we may have power and strength
to have victory, and to triumph over the Devil, the World, and the Flesh.
Strengthen it every day by constant Meditation on those things, which thou, O
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, have so many ways declared to us: that it may grow
still more victorious, and we may feel the happy fruit of it in greater joy and
triumph of spirit, in assured expectation of the Crown of righteousness, which
thou have promised to all faithful Souls.

O that none of the enticing allurements of this world may ever more deceive
us, and steal away our hearts from our true happiness: nor any of the
troublesome passages of this life ever hereafter dishearten us, and divert us
from the pursuit of it: But the Faith of Christ may so entirely possess our
hearts, as to keep us steadfast and upright, in the midst of all the
temptations, of what kind soever they be, that assault us. And looking up unto
Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith, we may still say with true
resolution of spirit, Thou art the Son of God most high, thou art the King of
incomprehensible Majesty, thou art the Lord of all. We will constantly adhere
to thee, as thy faithful subjects. We will follow thee in faith and love, and
patient obedience to the very death. And hope that as we feel, by thy power in
us, we are the children of God, so we shall be heirs, heirs of God,
joynt-heirs, with thee, O blessed Lord; to whom, with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be glory and dominion for ever. Amen.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Witnesses in general, and the Testimony of the FATHER
in particular.
IF any man urge us to receive a thing which is new and strange, we either turn
away our ears, if we take him for a frivolous person, or else require him to
show us good evidence for what he says, if he seem to be wise and serious. And
the more importunate he is to be believed, the more earnest we are to know what
he has to show for himself, and to call for his proofs: in which if he fail or
they come not home to the purpose, he is so far from gaining any credit with
those who examine them, that they prove a very considerable argument against
him. Especially when he pretends to come from God, and to bring us messages
from Heaven, we all expect the clearer and diviner demonstrations, before we
can resign our mind unto him. For that which is to make all things credible,
must have very pregnant Reasons accompanying it to win credit to it self. If
that which stands as a reason for all that a man says, be not it self grounded
upon the clearest and most undeniable, it turns against him and proves nothing
but a confutation of all that it was brought to assert.

Now Jesus pretending not only to this honor of coming from God (which is a
sufficient Argument for any thing that he says in his Name) but also to an
higher Dignity of being his Son; and so of being privy to all his secrets, of
lying in his very bosom, and being invested with a power equal to the
Almighties; if He and his Apostles (who affirmed the same of him, after he was
put to death, and that as a Malefactor) should be defective in their proofs of
so lofty and weighty a pretension, He would be rendered of all other the most
contemptible, and they become men most ridiculous, for obtruding him on the
world in such a quality, upon slight or no demonstrations. For the greater and
more concerning any Assertion is, which we propound to men's belief, the
stronger and more plentiful Arguments they justly expect to induce a
persuasion. Which if they be wanting, it is so far from being a fault not to
surrender their Souls to that proposition; that it is a virtue to refuse
admittance, and they could not excuse themselves from a great guilt, should
they be so easy as to let it find entertainment. Nay, it is a commendable
piece of caution and wariness, to suspend our belief in a matter of very great
importance, though there be some considerable proofs offered; if they be not
proportionable to the weight of the thing, unto which we are to deliver up no
less than our Souls.

Let us see therefore what evidence this Follower and Favorite (as I may call
him) of Jesus produces and lays before us, to make good this, which he preached
for a certain truth; that He is no less than the Son of God. Let us hear what
his Witnesses say, for so he calls his proofs, to this great point; and
consider whether they speak so home to it, that we cannot reasonably refuse to
believe it. The office of a witness is to give in all the evidence he can for
the clearing of any matter in question; for this very end, that there by the
controversy may be decided upon his credit. When the Apostle therefore calls
for his Witnesses, who are ready he says to justify this which he asserts, if
any body make a doubt of it, or be not well settled in this belief; his meaning
is, that it relies upon such solid grounds, that no man shall be able to deny
Jesus to be the only begotten of the Father, the Christ of God; unless he can
disprove the Authority of his witnesses, which he was sure would never be in
any man's power to do, they were of such known verity. If this be called in
question, whether Jesus be the Son of God or no, if any list to bring it to
trial, and examine it before the bar of impartial Reason; S. John here offers
his witnesses, faithful and just, of undoubted Truth and Integrity, who shall
make it good: So that if you will hear them, and consider what they say, and
then give sentence according to their evidence, you must needs judge that he is
what he said he was, The Son of God most high; and quit him in your Consciences
of all the calumnies and aspersions of the Jews, who said he was a deceiver of
the people.

Now the witnesses that he brings, you see, dwell in two very distant places;
three of them in the Heavens, and the other three in the Earth. From these two
several regions they give their Testimony; the former from above, the later
here beneath. For when the Apostle says that there are three, (...), testifying
or bearing witness in the Heaven, and as many that do the same, (...), on the
Earth; the meaning is not that the First three gave their testimony to those
that are in Heaven, and the last three to those that are on Earth: but that the
First three witnesses are themselves in Heaven, and the other three were on
Earth, and so from thence they gave their testimony to Jesus. They that dwell
in Heaven delivered their testimony and justified this Truth from above, and
the other residing on the Earth did there speak to it, and make it good. Let us
first hear these supreme and Heavenly witnesses, and take under examination
what they declare concerning him whom we acknowledge for our Lord, and what
Authority he has, according to their testimony, to exact all obedience of us,
as he is the Son of God. And first of all let us begin with the witness of the
FATHER: for the truth is, that as he is the First, and the Beginning of all
things, so he did first testify of Jesus; and by his voice from Heaven
proclaimed him to be his Son, before He, or any else was so bold as to affirm
it. And as he being the First, did bear witness to him, before any of the rest
spoke a word; so, according to the number of these Heavenly witnesses, He gave
his Testimony of him three times.

I.
The first time was when our Savior began to appear publicly among the
people; coming out of his privacy, from Nazareth of Galilee to be baptized of
John in Jordan. Matt. 3.13. Mark 1.9.
He had no need indeed of that Baptism, as John affirmed and our Savior did
not deny: but as became one who had put himself into the state of our meanness,
and appeared in our sinful flesh, he would omit nothing that belonged to the
duty of a pious person. And therefore he would have the Baptist do to him as he
did to others, knowing that he exercised this Ministry by the appointment of
God; whose institutions ought to be reverenced, and to whose will all good men
ought to conform themselves. Now he had no sooner given this example of humble
obedience, but as he came out of the Water, God the Father of Heaven declared
him in express terms to be what S. John here says he was, his only Son. Which
testimony of his is recorded by no less than three Evangelists, as you may find
if you read iii. Matthew. 17. i. Mark 11. iii. Luke. 22. who tells us that he saw
the Heavens at that time, opened to him, and a Divine Glory come from thence
and settle upon him, which was followed with a voice from Heaven, saying, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. So S. Matthew reports the words
of God the FATHER (from whom this voice came, it is plain, because he calls
Jesus his Son) or as they may be rendered more emphatically, This is that Son of
mine, that beloved one (whom the Prophets promised, particularly xlii. Isaiah
1. God would send to them, as Tertullian well expounds it) who is most dear to
me, and shall declare my whole will and pleasure. There is a mark set before
it, (...), lo, or behold; that we may all attend and listen diligently to this
voice: for now the word of God came to him (as he speaks in another place, I
told you, concerning those who were called Gods under the old Law, x. John 35.)
and in an audible manner authorized him, to begin to act as the Christ of God,
whom He had anointed, as you shall hear, with the Holy Ghost, just at this
moment, when He declared him his Son, by this voice from Heaven.

Which, if you carefully observe it, is expressed by the other Evangelists in
such a manner, that we may understand it was directed to himself; as that
commission which was sent him from Heaven, to give him power to exercise the
office of Gods supreme and only Minister in this world; in whom alone he was
well pleased, and in none else, but by him. For S. Mark says the voice was in
these words, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Which plainly
tell us that he spoke to Jesus (and not merely of him) that he might be
confident He was the person whom God had now sanctified and sent into the
world. And so S. Luke has recorded it more fully and expressly, Thou art my
beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased. As if he had said, Thou art the person
to whom I have a favor above all others. I have anointed thee above all thy
fellows: none that have had this name, are so dear to me as thou art; to whom I
commit my authority, and invest with my power, and entrust with all my mind and
will.

Now because we all suspect private Revelations, and think it no sufficient
ground to believe one that says God spoke to him, unless he can bring some
other very credible person besides himself to attest that he also heard it, or
be able otherways to demonstrate it; God was pleased therefore, not only by
other means to verify this, but so to direct S. Matthew's pen, that he has as
good as told us, that the voice which was directed to Jesus himself (telling
him he was his Son) was uttered likewise in the audience of John Baptist, a
person famed for his sanctity, reverenced by all the Nation of the Jews, and
acknowledged to be a Prophet. Though it was delivered I believe in those words
and syllables wherein S. Mark or S. Luke have set it down, for as the Heavens
were opened unto him (iii. Matthew. 16.) and he saw the Spirit descending, so the
voice which accompanied it, spoke in all likelihood unto him; yet it being
heard also by John, who had baptized him, and who saw all that went before it
as he himself declared, it was as if God had said to him, This is my beloved
Son, etc. and therefore so S. Matthew relates it. The Father Almighty by this
voice awakened the attention of the Baptist, and bade him, as it were, mark it,
that this person to whom he now spoke was the Messiah; who now entered upon his
office, being declared the Son of God, and should increase and grow (as he
presently after discerned, iii. John 30.) till he came to be declared by the
Resurrection from the dead, the Son of God with power (as S. Paul speaks, i.
Romans 4.) that is, with all the power belonging to his office, of Lord of all
things, the great King of Heaven and Earth.

Till this time he knew no more of the Christ, but that he was coming, God
having ordered him to make way for him; and that he should immediately appear,
and be so much superior to him (iii. Matthew. 11.) that he should not be worthy
to be one of his meanest servants: His countenance he was not acquainted
withal, nor could he say, this is the person, when he met with him, as he
himself confesses, i. John 31. But thus much he was told by him that sent him
to Baptize, as he there declares, ver. 33. that on whom he should see the
Spirit descend and remain, he should conclude that person was the Messiah, from
whom they might expect the gift of the Holy Ghost, which had been so long a
stranger to their Nation. And accordingly, having some intimation of him from
the Spirit, as soon as Jesus offered himself to receive his Baptism (iii.
Matthew. 14.) immediately after he was confirmed in his belief that this was the
Christ, by the fulfilling of the former sign (i. John 32.) And thereupon
publishes it openly to all in these words, ver. 34. I saw and bare record ( i.
e. gave my testimony of him) that this is the Son of God. So God himself taught
him to call our Savior; for it should seem by the words of S. Matthew, that he
had this further ground to believe it, and so was furnished with greater
ability to testify it; that he heard the voice from Heaven as well as saw the
Spirit descend upon him. Though the Father spoke the words to Jesus, yet it was
in the presence and hearing of this person (who was sent from God to be his
witness, i. John 6, 7.) and as if he had said to him, This is my beloved Son;
mind what I say; go and testify that this is He in whom I delight above all
others. Thou may be sure of it, for I tell thee so, who gave thee all the
Authority thou have. And accordingly you read that he went and did his office,
for which he was sent; that is, He bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This
was he of whom I spoke, He that comes after me is preferred before me; for he
was before me, 1. John 15. which he repeats in the same Chapter as his record (
ver. 19.) in behalf of our Savior, on two other occasions, ver. 27. and 30. to
let them know that the person of whom he gave this testimony before he was
baptized of him, was now come, and exalted to a far higher dignity than
himself, being a more mighty person, as the rest of the Evangelists speak, no
less than the Son of God. This he means by being preferred before him,
appointed by the Father of all to an incomparably more excellent office which
he entered upon after the preaching and baptism of John; who began indeed his
Ministry before Jesus, but it was not because he was greater, but rather
because he was less, and came to prepare his way, who was, as he acknowledges,
(...), the first of the two; not only in regard of his Divine Nature, but in
regard of his sublime office, into which he was now put, by being pronounced,
the beloved Son of God, by this voice from Heaven.

Which the Devil himself, one would think heard, and understood to be such a
testimony concerning Jesus, as committed the greatest Ministry to him, and was
a Divine warrant to go in Gods name to the world, as Moses, after the Angel
spoke to him out of the bush, did to the Jews. And therefore when immediately
after this our Savior was led by the Spirit into the wilderness, the Devil
would have had him give some proof of his Divine power, as Moses did, or rather
show himself, by a greater evidence than Moses gave, to be greater than he:
that he might be satisfied Jesus was no less than the voice declared him, the
Son of God. So you read iv. Matthew. 3. that the first thing he said to him was,
If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. As much as
to say, Thou art now in a starving condition (for he had taken no provision
with him into the wilderness, resolving to depend on that God who had expressed
such love to him, as to own him for his Son) here is a fit opportunity for thee
to exercise thy power, if thou have any, by bidding these stones turn into
loaves, which will be a greater wonder than Moses his bringing Manna out of the
clouds, and show indeed that thou art God's Son. To which our Savior answers,
as you read in the next Verse, out of Moses himself (viii. Deuteronomy. 3.) and tells
him he might learn from that story of the Manna, there was no need he should
employ his power, which God had committed to him, on this fashion; for as the
Israelites were maintained in the wilderness after a miraculous manner, so
might He: who would prove himself to be his Son, not this way by turning stones
into bread, but by trusting in God, and leaving him to provide for him as he
thought good. That Is his meaning when he says, Man shall not live by bread
alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. And so in the
following temptations he still held to this, that he was sufficiently satisfied
he was God's Son, and would not demand any farther proof of it, but such as he
himself would give, who at last, ver. 11. ordered the Angels to go and minister
unto him. To carry him food, it is like, and congratulate this his first
victory over the enemy of mankind. Who was not so dull, but he learnt by this
and many other things afterward, wherein he felt his power, that this voice
from Heaven was no vain rumor, no empty insignificant sound, but a true report
of the very mind of Almighty God: which he himself was forced to proclaim as
loudly as any body else.

For you find him, not long after this, with a whole Legion of his companions,
acknowledging Jesus to be the Son of God most high, and with humble
prostrations worshipping him, whom he had the confidence before to persuade to
worship himself; crying with a loud voice for Gods sake that he would not
torment him, v. Mark 6, 7, 8. viii. Luke 28. Nay, he was sensible, one would
think, of this as soon as ever that temptation was ended. For you read that
immediately after it, Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee,
iv. Luke 14. and there at Capernaum met with a man that had a spirit of an
unclean Devil, who cried out with a loud voice, saying, I know thee who thou
art, the holy one of God, ver. 34. which is thus interpreted, ver. 41. The
Devils came out of many, crying out, and saying, Thou art Christ the Son of
God: For they knew that he was Christ. But our Savior would not be beholden to
them for their suffrage; it was sufficient that God had declared him his Son,
and that John Baptist attested as much, and that the works which he did
(particularly his dispossessing them of their strongest holds) bare witness of
him. And therefore he imposed silence on them, as the Evangelist there tells
us; both because they might by their loud acclamations to him, give the
Pharisees occasion to calumniate him, who were too forward to say he had
confederacy with the Devil; and because it was not fit this should be published
in so many words, no not by his Apostles (xvi. Matthew. 20.) till after his
Resurrection and his Ascension to the Throne of his glory, and the coming of
the Holy Ghost; which demonstrated he was completely made both Lord and Christ,
as the Apostles then openly declared, ii. Acts 36.

But till then it seems to have been the work of the Father alone or
principally to bear witness of him: for John Baptist was his voice crying in
the wilderness, and the works our Savior did were those which his Father had
given him to finish, and the Spirit was the Finger of God, which pointed men to
him, as I may so speak, and bid them receive him as his beloved Son in whom he
was well pleased. And shall we not receive this for the greatest Truth, when
God himself says it? shall we not let him dispose of our Faith? is not He the
Truth? is it possible for him to falsify or deceive? or do we imagine He
cannot declare his mind, and speak to us as we do one to another? He that
formed the mouth, cannot He speak? is his power less than ours? can we manifest
what we would have and make it understood, and cannot He in the same manner
make us know his will and pleasure? If his express testimony then be of any
force, here you have it, by an audible voice from Heaven: And John the Baptist,
whom the Jews, the Enemies of our Savior, durst not but reverence, bare record
to him thereupon, that Jesus is the Son of God.

Now if any one should say that the certainty of this relies upon the testimony
of one single person, and that it is possible he might hear amiss (though there
be no color for such an objection, he being a Prophet, and acknowledged so to
be by those who did not acknowledge our Savior, yet) that this great truth
might not depend upon the credit of John Baptist alone, though a man well
acquainted with the manner of Divine Revelations; the FATHER was pleased a
second time, and in the audience of more witnesses than one, to declare again
what he had said before, that he was his Son.

II.
This was in the Holy Mount, as you may read in the xvii. Matthew. 5. and in the
two following Evangelists, ix. Mark 7. ix. Luke 35. where the Father of all was
pleased to declare in the same terms, as he had done at his Baptism, and with
an audible voice, which astonished those that heard it (xvii. Matthew. 6.) That
he was his beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased: to which Declaration he
added this command, HEAR HIM. That is, be assured that what he says to you, is
the Truth; and what I speak to the world, it shall be by his mouth. Now this
voice was uttered in the hearing of no less than three persons, whom our
Savior had selected from the rest of his company, to attend him unto this
Mountain, where God appeared to bear witness to him. Of which three, this
Disciple S. John was one; who therefore might with the greater confidence urge
here the Testimony of the Father, which he himself heard. And unless they to
whom he writes this Epistle could find him false, and guilty of forgery in any
other relation, they had no reason to call in question his honesty and
faithfulness in this report: which is the more considerable, because there were
others who heard it as well as he, who might be appealed unto, and asked about
it.

One of those who were there present and heard it together with him, was S.
Peter; a man timorous enough, and apt to deny a Truth, and therefore of no such
courage as to support a Lie, with the danger of his life. Who writing to
Christian people, as S. John here does, commends this voice to them as a sure
witness of that Truth, which he was shortly to seal with his Blood; and
professes his own sincerity in the relating of it. Read with attention 2 Pet.
1.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. where he tells them that our Lord having shown him he
must shortly die (when it is no time to dissemble with God or Man) he would
endeavor to settle in their minds such a solid ground of faith, that, when he
was gone, they should stand unshaken, if they did but remember it: And that it
was not a thing he had received by hearsay, much less a devised story that had
been forged in his own brain; but a matter of which he was an eye and
ear-witness, of which he, and others also, had a certain, clear and perfect
knowledge. For they saw then the glory wherein Jesus was, and they heard the
forenamed voice come from that excellent glory, which could be no other but the
glory of the Father. Then, and there in that Mount, Jesus received from the
Father honor and glory, when there came forth from the mouth of God this
voice, in all their hearing; This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

Here it will be necessary to take notice, that the voice, as all of them
relate it, was directed not to him, but to those who were there present with
him. None of them say, that it spoke thus, THOU art my beloved Son, etc.
(according as S. Mark and S. Lake report the former voice) but they unanimously
tell us in these four places, which I have named, that it was delivered in the
other form, THIS is my beloved Son, etc. As if He spoke to the company that
attended him, and bade them observe that here He owned this person to stand in
such a relation to him, as he and John Baptist had professed. The former voice
might come for his sake; but there being no need of his further satisfaction,
this was for theirs; that they might steadfastly believe, and that they might be
competent witnesses of him, and persuade others to the belief of that, which
upon their own certain knowledge they could affirm, was the very mind and will
of God. I shall have occasion hereafter to make a further enquiry into both
these Testimonies which the Father gave to his Son Jesus, and therefore I shall
now dismiss them with some observations concerning this: which will much help
to illustrate it, and add to the force of it.

The First is, that our Savior having at this time sequestered himself, with
three of his Apostles, into an high mountain to pray to God, was transfigured
before them as he was praying (xvii. Matthew. 2. ix. Luke 29.) so that his face
did shine as the Sun, and his very garments were all glistering. (...) (as S.
Greg. Nazianzen speaks Orat. 35. p. 575.
)showing beforehand what he was to be hereafter; and making an introduction to
the glory in which he should shine, in the high and holy place at the right
hand of the Father, where he makes perpetual intercession for us. For to shine
as the Sun is a phrase expressing something belonging to celestial Majesty in
the Kingdom of the Father, xiii. Matthew. 43. The white and splendid garments
also, it were easy to show, were proper to Kings and those who waited on them,
iii. Revel. 4. The Ministers and royal attendants in the Heavenly Court, were
wont always to appear in such radiant brightness; though short of this wherein
our Savior now began to shine, as the King, ere long, of Heaven and Earth. For
so S. John says, i. 14. We beheld his glory, as the glory of the only begotten
of the Father. And S. Peter when he speaks of this says, 2 i. 16. We were
eyewitnesses of his MAJESTY.

Of which, that they might be assured, this was a true representation, you may
observe, secondly, how they saw a very great Glory appear and approach toward
them; called by S. Mark and S. Luke simply a Cloud, but by S. Matthew xvii. 5.
a bright cloud: which had usually been the token of the presence of the Divine
Majesty. And therefore it is called by S. Peter in the place before named (
ver. 17.) the excellent or magnificent glory: and the voice which came out of
it, is said ( ver. 18.) to come from Heaven, because it came forth from the
presence of God, of which this bright cloud was the visible sign. For so He
appeared anciently to the Israelites, in a cloud that had a splendour or shining
light in it, like to the hottest fire, which sometimes brightly glistered and
sometimes was obscured. So you read, xix. Exodus 18. that the LORD descended in
fire upon the famous Mount Sinai, and a little after, xxiv. Exodus 16, 17. how
the glory of the Lord dwelt upon that Mount, and the cloud covered it ( i. e.
the glory of the Lord) for the space of six days: and then on the seventh day
He called unto Moses out of the midst of that cloud: And the aspect of the
glory of the Lord was as fire that burnt or glowed with great ardency in the
sight of the children of Israel. That is, on the seventh day, that Glory was
revealed and broke forth out of the cloud, wherein for six days it had been
wrapped up and hidden from their sight. And so you read in the xl. Chapter of
that Book, that as soon as Moses had reared up the Tabernacle for the constant
habitation of this Divine presence, the cloud covered it, and rested upon it
without, and the glory of the Lord filled it within ( ver. 34, 35.) which is
presently after explained to be a fire, which by night appeared upon the
Tabernacle to guide them in their journey. This is that bright flame, which
frighted them when they murmured against Moses, called the glory of the Lord
appearing in the cloud (xvi. Exodus 7.10. and xvi. Numb. 42.) threatening to
devour them if they were not more obedient. Such a glory, but more pure and
more delightful to behold, there was now upon this Holy Mount, as S. Peter
calls it: to make them apprehensive that now they were in the presence of God;
who as he did on that Mount (to speak in the words of Tertullian) initiate
their forefathers in the Religion of Moses, by showing his glory and by his
voice; so here on this Agnosce formam loci, etc. L. 4. adv. Marcionem, C. 22.
was going in the same manner to give testimony to them concerning his Son
Jesus, and to confirm them in the belief of whatsoever he should teach them.

For, thirdly, this was not Mut^. Nubes, as the same Tertullian there speaks, a
dumb cloud, a silent glory; but a voice came out of it, which was Novum Patris
testimonium super filio, the Fathers New testimony concerning his Son. In which
testimony He was pleased to apply those very words to Jesus, which had been
spoken by Moses concerning a Prophet whom he had bid them look for after him.
For in the xviii. of Deuteronomy he tells them from God himself ( ver. 17.)
that there should be raised up to them a Prophet like unto him, into whose
mouth ( ver. 18.) the Lord would put his own words, and who should speak all
that he should command him; UNTO HIM SHALL YE HEARKEN, ver. 15. as much as to
say, Be sure you attend to his words, and give obedience to them. Now these
very words and syllables HEAR HIM, are, by that God who made that promise to
Moses, spoken in this place to the Disciples with a manifest application to
Jesus: clearly denoting him to be the person whom Moses foretold the Lord their
God would send, to declare his mind unto them, as he himself already had done.
And that this was really the voice of God, as much as that voice which spoke to
Moses, we have the greater reason to conclude from this following, which is the
fourth, observation.

That Moses now stood by and heard it: and from thence learnt a great deal more
than he knew when he wrote his Book; that this person of whom he spoke was more
than a Prophet: being the Son of Gods dearest love. For these words which
declared him so, were spoken there where he was present: who durst not
contradict them, as sure he would have done, had he not known them to be the
very voice of God and no delusion.

I need not enlarge this; because the Evangelists tell us so plainly, that not
only He appeared in glory talking with our Savior upon this Mountain, but
Elias also accompanied him, which is next to be considered. Who being a great
Prophet might pretend as fairly as any other man, to be the person designed by
Moses in the words forenamed; and yet consented by his silence to the same
undoubted Truth, that the prophecy of Moses was not till now fufilled, but had
its utmost completion in Jesus. And indeed this voice from Heaven, making such
an open Proclamation concerning Jesus, before him that gave the Law, and before
the chiefest of the Prophets who had asserted it, and being heard by them with
the profoundest silence, without any contradiction; it did as good as tell the
Apostles that they might be assured this was He of whom the Law and the
Prophets had spoken, whom they were now to give ear unto; and that the Law and
the Prophets must from henceforth give way to an higher Revelation from God, by
this Jesus. If this had not been true, we cannot but think that this great
Zealot Elias, who had been always so jealous for the Lord of hosts, (1 Kings
xix. 14.) and this trusty servant of God, Moses, who was so faithful in all his
house (xii. Number. 7.) would have presently entered their protestation against it;
and required the Apostles in the Name of God, to give heed only to their voice,
but not to this. Which now might the rather be believed to come from Heaven,
because these inspired persons reverence it, and dare not venture in the least
to speak against it; when they were highly concerned so to do, if it had not
been the voice of God.

And if any one shall ask, how these Disciples could tell that these two were
Moses and Elias, whom they never saw; I think Theophylact has well resolved
it: that they knew them not by their faces, but by their discourse. Certain it
is that persons living in far distant Countries, known to others merely by
their works and manner of writing, have, after a little converse at an
unexpected meeting, been challenged by the Names that their Books carried,
without the help of any noted character in their face to distinguish them.
Nothing is more common than the story of Erasmus, whom his Friend here in
England greeted by his name, after a few repartees passed between them; though
he had never seen him, and little thought then to embrace him. Now we are
expressly told by all the three Evangelists, that Moses and Elias talked with
Jesus; and by S. Luke, that their discourse was concerning his decease or
departure out of this world, which he should accomplish at Jerusalem: and
consequently, it is very probable, of the glory that was to follow it by his
Resurrection. Which conference the Apostles hearing, they might easily know,
though not (...), by their pictures, which many of that Nation held it unlawful
to be made, yet (...), from their words and discourse (wherein either Jesus or
they, before it was done, had occasion to mention their Names or their offices,
or to describe their persons) that they were none else but those two men, who
then appeared to them. And it is possible, as Theophylact adds, that Moses
might say, I acknowledge thee to be the person, whose death I prefigured, by
the Lamb which was slain at the Passover: And Elias might join with him and
say, Thou art He whose Resurrection I did likewise fore-show, by calling again
the Widow's son to life. Some such kind of discourse we may reasonably conceive
passed between them, whereby they discovered themselves to be, the one the
Lawgiver, the other the noblest of all the Prophets: who now came to wait upon
Jesus, and acknowledge that he was greater than they; as the voice from Heaven
presently testified, which declared him the beloved Son of God, to whom now all
must attend, as they had formerly done to them.

And therefore it is very remarkable (which is the last thing I shall observe)
that no sooner was this voice heard, but Moses and Elias vanished and were seen
no more. As much as to say, That Jesus alone was now to be heard; the Law and
the Prophets were gone, and had nothing to do, but only to serve him. So S.
Mark relates, ix. 8. that suddenly when they had looked round about (after the
hearing of this voice) they saw no man any more, save Jesus only with
themselves. They turned their eyes every way to look for Moses and Elias, but
there was no further news of them. Nay, S. Luke tells us, ix. 36. that in the
very uttering of the voice from that Heavenly glory, they disappeared. So those
words, (...), plainly signify, While the voice was speaking, Jesus was found
alone. The clould out of which it came, covered them and took them into it. At
the same time it opened it self, to manifest him and to obscure them: that it
might be evident the voice spoke of him alone and none else; there being no
body but He to be seen by his Disciples, when it came forth from the presence
of God. So you read in all the Evangelists, that the cloud which appeared,
over-shadowed them ( viz. Moses and Elias) whereupon the Disciples were afraid
(as S. Luke tells us, ix. 34.) as they (that is, Moses and Elias) entered ^^to
the cloud: imagining it is like that it would approach nearer, and spread it
self over them; who dreaded to enter into it, as they saw those two persons
did. But there was no danger; it only parted Moses and Elias from Jesus, and
left him alone, and then came the voice out of that cloud, where Moses and
Elias were with God, giving their assent to what it said, This is my beloved
Son, hear him. Him, I say, Non Mosen jam and Eliam (as Tertullian L. 4. adv.
Marc. C. 22.
I now observe interprets it) Not Moses and Elias; who were shown, as his
language is, in the prerogative of brightness, and then dismissed, as being now
discharged both of their office and of their honor.

Thus I have briefly explained the second Testimony which God the Father gave
him, in the audience of three of his Disciples; who had a vision also, at the
same time, of the glory wherein he was to shine, after his departure out of
this world. To which testimony, our Savior would not have those Disciples, as
yet to add theirs: but to keep this as a secret till he was risen again from
the dead, xvii. Matthew. 9. It was fit for the Father alone to speak now, from
whom they were to learn what Jesus was: that being fully satisfied they might
be the better able to speak of him then, upon their own knowledge; who had been
eye and ear-witnesses of the honor and glory which he received from God the
Father, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice (S. Peter I told you
openly avers, 2 i. 17, 18.) he and others heard, when they were with him in the
holy mount.

But if any one should be so suspicious and distrustful, as to think that the
Testimony of three persons is not sufficient, to beget belief in us of such a
wonderful thing as this is, that God declared Jesus to be his Son; though there
is no just reason to doubt of any thing that is established out of the mouth of
but two good witnesses, yet such was the condescension of God the Father
Almighty, that he was pleased a little before our Saviors decease, which Moses
and Elias spoke of, to give his testimony to him again, and to declare this
more publicly, which was shortly to be proclaimed in all the world.

III.
For this Third voice which the Father was pleased to send from Heaven, to bear
witness to him, was not heard by so few as two or three, but by a great
multitude of people; which makes our belief of this Truth to rely still upon
surer grounds. For you read in the xii. John 1, 2, etc. that a great company of
people having heard what a miracle our Savior had wrought upon Lazarus, whom
he raised from the dead a little before at a neighboring town; flockt out of
Jerusalem to meet him, as he was coming thither to the seast of the Passover.
And being convinced that he was that King of Israel whom the Lord by his
Prophets had promised to send in his name, they met him with Palms of joy and
triumph in their hands, and with the loudest acclamations of praise in their
mouths; spreading their garments also in the way (as other Evangelists tell us)
to do him the greater honor, and wishing him all prosperity in his new
Kingdom. In this crowd, or among the rest of the people who were come to
worship at the feast, there were certain Greeks, as you read ver. 20. who were
desirous to see Jesus, whom the multitude thus magnified; and, it is likely,
wished to have some proof given them, that he was such a person as fame
reported him.

Now the first thing our Savior answers to those who presented them to him
(which must be diligently noted) is that ere long He should be glorified. But
first he must take the Cross in his way, and then the glory he should attain
thereby would be exceeding great; for his death would produce most precious
fruit, and be the means of enlarging his Kingdom, and bringing innumerable such
Gentiles as these were, unto God, ver. 23, 24. And thereupon He persuades his
Disciples ( ver. 25, 26.) to adventure their lives, according to his example,
for the good of mankind; which would redound also very much to their own
honor. As they might see already in Moses and Elias (who appeared, S.
Chrysostom thinks, for this end among others, to strengthen and encourage their
Christian resolution in their sufferings (...). Hom. 56. in Matthew.
) but should be more fully satisfied when they saw him ascend to that glory
after his sufferings, of which they had beheld but a shadow, when those two
illustrious persons came to wait upon him. A difficult work indeed it was, at
the thoughts of which He himself could not but be something sad ( ver. 27.) and
wished, according to the inclinations of Nature, there were some other way, if
God pleased, to deliver mankind. But since he had sent him into the world for
this end, that he should lay down his life for our Redemption, he resolves
presently to submit to God, and desires only this one thing of him, ver. 28.
Father, glorify thy Name. As much as to say, I know thou art my FATHER, and
since it is thy pleasure, to which I will always submit; behold, I offer my
self now to be an instrument of thy glory by my passion, as I have been
hitherto by my preaching, and the works thou have done by my hands. I am
content to receive the glory which I expect, and just now told my Disciples I
shall receive, in this way of humble suffering thy will and pleasure. I am
desirous thou should first be glorified; and if my death will serve that
end, I am ready to part with my life, for I know thou will be much more
glorified by my Resurrection and Ascension to Heaven. There is no reasonable
doubt to be made of the truth of this interpretation; for they glorify God
most remarkably who die for the testimony of the Truth, xxi. John 19. It is a
great honor to him, that they love him more than their lives, and will take
his word for their recompense, in an invisible world. This our Savior himself
calls, Gods being glorified in him, xiii. John 31. and therefore I make no
question he desires here, that his Fathers Name may be glorified by the same
means.

Now to this humble request of his, God the Father replies, by a voice from
Heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again. You
remember what S. Peter says in the place often cited already, 2 i. 17. that our
Lord by the former voice from Heaven, received honor and glory from God the
Father; and there is as much cause to think that in this there was the same
design, to do him honor by a declaration of the glory he should shortly
receive, at the right hand of God. The very connection of these words with the
foregoing, will not let us expound them otherwise. For having told his
Disciples, the Son of man should shortly be glorified, but first he must
glorify God by his passion, and then he doubted not but God would glorify him
with himself (as he speaks, xiii. 32.) that is, by the very same means,
glorify both himself and his Son, who had glorified him: Yes, says God himself
from Heaven, I have both glorified my Name (by what he had done for Jesus, and
by him) and will glorify it again, by that which remained still to be done.

And indeed (1.) it did him a great honor, that God was pleased to return any
answer to him, who had before called himself his Son (x. 36.) and had just now
addressed himself to him as his Father; calling upon him twice by this Name,
Father, save me from this hour, ver. 27. Father, glorify thy Name, ver. 28. It
was as much as to say, He owned the relation, allowed his pretenses, and
intended to justify them more and more by his Divine approbation. For (2.) the
Answer it self is a plain promise of the honor he would confer upon him
hereafter, by his Resurrection and Exaltation; when he again glorified himself,
by glorifying the Lord Jesas. You read expressly in the foregoing Chapter, that
the Glory he had gotten before, was by glorifying of his Son; for he says (xi.
4.) the sickness of Lazarus was for the glory of God, that the Son of God might
be glorified thereby. And therefore when he says he will glorify himself
again, the meaning is, that as they had seen his glory (xi. 40.) in the raising
of Lazarus from the dead, and in all the other miraculous works which Jesus had
done, for which the people gave him glory (v. Luke 26. vii. 16. xix. 37.) So he
would glorify himself more by the Resurrection of Jesus himself from the dead,
and by his Exaltation to an Heavenly Kingdom. For it was the working of the
might of his power (as the Apostle S. Paul speaks, i. Ephesians. 19.) which he
wrought in Christ, when the Father of glory raised him from the dead, and set
him at his own right hand in the Heavenly places, far above all principality,
and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in
this world, but also in that which is to come. Now he glorified his Son Jesus
indeed, as S. Peter speaks, iii. Acts 13. and gave him a name which is above
every name, that every knee should bow to him, and every tongue confess him to
be the Lord: but it was to the glory of God the Father, as S. Paul tells us
expressly, ii. Philip. 11. Hereby he glorified his own name, as by this voice
from Heaven he said he would; whose power, goodness, and wisdom, will be for
ever magnified and celebrated with the highest praises, by the whole Christian
Church, for setting such a glorious Prince over them, who is not ashamed to
call them Brethren, and yet has all things put in subjection under his feet;
that he may protect, succor and bless them, here and eternally.

Now by making this promise to the Lord Jesus, of glorifying himself by
glorifying him, in this manner; He plainly bare witness to him, that he was
what he pretended to be; very dear to him, his only begotten Son, and no
deceiver, as they falsely and blasphemously said, who were loath to be governed
by him. They ought presently to have glorified God, by honoring his Son, and
acknowledging him for their Lord and Master: who had such power with God
already, that he would give him whatsoever he asked (xi. John 22.) and was
shortly to receive greater, even all power in Heaven and in Earth, xvii. 1, 2.

For this voice, you may observe, was uttered at such a time, and so loud, that
the people who stood by heard it, ver. 29. Those who were at some distance
indeed, hearing only the sound, thought it had been a clap of thunder: but they
who were nearer, heard it so distinctly, that they were of opinion, an Angel
spoke to him. God, that is, by the Ministry of an Angel. For what is said in
one place of Scripture to be done by Angels, who are his principal servants, is
in another said to be done by God. As the Angel of the Lord we read, vii. Acts
30. appeared to Moses in the bush, and in the next verse, it is the voice of
the Lord which from thence is said to come to him. In like manner the Angel is
said ( ver. 38.) to speak with him in mount Sinai; where, we are told in the
book of Exodus xix. 20. the Lord came down and called Moses up to the top of
the Mount, and there spoke to him; as here he did to our Savior. Who tells the
people it was not for his sake, that God spoke now to him; it was for theirs;
whom he would have to know that when he was lifted up from the Earth (by
hanging upon the Cross, which was a step, contrary to all men's opinion, to his
Exaltation in the Heavens) he would draw all men to him: bring even the Gentile
world into subjection to him, and bow their hearts to acknowledge his Divine
authority, which the Jews opposed. He needed no further confirmation of this
truth himself, who knew how dear he was to God, and that he would glorify his
Name in him; but that his Disciples might be more confident of it, and the
people more inclined to believe it when they heard it preached, God spoke the
very same now in the ears of a great many, which he had done before to him and
a few besides in the former voices from Heaven.

It is true indeed, He is not called here Gods beloved Son, in express terms,
as he is in the other places. But this is so plainly supposed, and strongly
inferred, as I said, from the voice which now spoke, that it puts the matter
out of doubt, as much as the former. If he had falsely and proudly laid claim
to this high relation to God, whom he calls his Father, we may be confident God
would never have honored him with such an answer; but either have been silent,
or said the quite contrary: telling him, before all the company, that he would
not glorify himself by preferring, but by putting to shame such an one as he,
who thus arrogantly took upon him to be the Son of God. It is contrary to all
reason to think that God would stoop to seek the glory of any person (as our
Savior expresses the honor he had done him, viii. John 50.) but one who stood
so nearly related to him, as to be his Son: and therefore worthy to be
glorified by him again and again, until He had fully judged, as he there
speaks, between Him and his Adversaries; who denied him to be the Christ, but
was pronounced by God to be the Prince of life.

To conclude this, you may note that not long before God spoke in this manner
from Heaven to them, our Savior had said, That they had not heard his voice at
any time, v. John 37. John the Baptist had, and so had three of his Disciples.
And therefore John bare witness of him; whose testimony, he says, was true
(ver. 32.) though he did not stand in such need of it, as if his credit could
not be supported without it. No, He appealed to him, merely because they had
such an high opinion of him, ver. 33, 34. otherwise he had a greater testimony
than that of John (ver. 36.) which was not only the works that he did, which
testified of him, that the Father had sent him: but the Father himself who sent
him (note this, for he appeals now to what the voice from Heaven said) he has
born witness of him, ver. 37. And if they had had any goodness in them ( ver.
38.) they would have received him whom the Father sent. When did He send him,
but when he spoke by that voice from Heaven? which now he utters once more in
other words, for their greater and fuller satisfaction, when many of them were
assembled together; that they, who had not hitherto, might hear his voice as
well as Jesus himself and his Apostles; and be awakened hereby to attend to
what the other witnesses of him should say, especially after he was risen from
the dead.

I should pass now to the Examination of one of them, were it not fit, before I
part with this, to take notice of a Tradition which runs among the Jews,
concerning this way of Revelation by a voice from Heaven; which they say was
very usual in those ages. The Doctors deliver (so their words are in the
Babylonian Talmud In the title Sanhedrim, cap. 1.
) that from the death of the latter Prophets, Haggai, Zachariah and Malachy,
the Holy Ghost was taken away: but yet notwithstanding they had the Ministry of
the Bath Col, i. e. the daughter of a voice. By that name they call this way of
Revelation, because they say it was not a full and strong voice which they
heard, but a voice coming out of another voice, and heard when it was gone.
Just as sparks, say they, are called Been resheph, the sons of an hot coal,
because they leap out of the fire; so is this called the daughter of a voice,
because it resulted from a voice, and came, as it were, out of the womb of it:
being a kind of Echo after something that was spoken, which they could not
understand; but only caught hold of this tail, as I may call it, and conclusion
of it. And they would have us believe, that as under the first Temple they had
the benefit of Prophecy, Urim and Thummim, and the Holy Ghost; so this
succeeded them under the second Temple, and was proper to that age of the
world: being then only in use, when all the other were wanting. Hence many
Christian writers of these latter times, have fancied that God therefore
declared Jesus to be his Son by a voice from Heaven, because it was the only
way wherein he then communicated his mind to the Jewish Nation. Paulus Fagius
think was the first that started this notion of the Bath col: which was a
praeludium b^ imagines to that true, Divine and Heavenly voice, which was to
speak to them indee^ from Heaven; that is, our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom the
Bath col it self gave testimony, when it said, This is my belove^ Son in whom I
am well pleased. But (...) name shows it was not the true voice from Heaven,
but a mere type, signification and testimony of that true voice and word of God
which was to come shortly and speak to them. To whom alone this Bath col told
them they must all hearken. Thus he writes upon the Chaldee Paraphrase In
xxviii. Exodus 30.
. And he had said the same before in his notes upon the Fifth Chapter of Pirke
Avoth, where his word^ are, that God would accustom the world (...) little by
this beginning, to that true Heavenly voice, our Savior Christ, who was to
follow; in whom hereafter the Father would be heard.

But I think there is reason to doubt o^ all that the Jews say about this
matter their brags being many times beyond the Truth, and devised to obscure
the glory of our Savior. Who it is most likely had that honor done him now by
these voices from Heaven, which was not usual in those days; for he himself
tells them, as I observed before, Ye have not heard his voice at any time, v.
John 37. As for that which they pretend, that this Bath col, or daughter of a
voice was peculiar to the times of the second Temple, it is so far from Truth,
that it is contradicted by some of themselves: who find instances of the
contrary in the Holy Books. God called out of Heaven to Abraham, every body
knows, by his Angel, Genesis xxii. 11, 15. And Maimonides More Nevoch. part 2.
cap. 42.
observes, that he spoke to Hagar and Manoah's wife; though neither of them, he
says, had any thing of the spirit of prophecy, but only heard the Bath col.
Which interposed, if we could believe others, in the case of Thamar. And often
whispered to Moses, as the writer of his Life, in many places, affirms. Nay,
they tell us in the Eleventh Chapter of the forenamed Title in the Talmud, that
Nebuzaradan heard this Bath col (before the destruction of the first Temple)
bidding him make a fresh assault upon Jerusalem, and not be discouraged in his
attempt, nor fear the fate of Senacherib; For the time is at hand that the
Sanctuary shall be destroyed, and the Temple burnt.

But that there was any such thing under the second Temple, I see no ground at
all to believe. It is far more probable that they have devised a number of such
stories as we read in their Books, merely to gain some credit and reputation to
their Doctors. Can any man of sense imagine that God would bid Jonathan hold
his hand when he was beginning to Paraphrase upon the Prophets; saying to him
by a voice from Heaven, Who is this that reveals my secrets to the sons of men?
And that he, like a bold fellow, stood up and said, I am the man, who undertake
it for thy honor, and not my own? And yet Elias Levita has the confidence to
tell us, in his Preface to these Paraphrases, that as Jonathan was going to do
as much for the Holy writings (as they call them) as he had done for the
Prophets, he was absolutely prohibited by another voice from Heaven, which
said, Is it not sufficient that thou have divulged the mysteries of the
Prophets, but thou will prostitute also the secrets of the Holy Ghost? So the
good man desisted, and durst not do the Angels any further service; who came to
listen to him as he was expounding the Prophets. Which is as true, I make no
doubt, as all the rest: and we may as well believe the Earth quaked for forty
mile together, when he began his Paraphrase, and that if a fly did but sit upon
his Book in which he wrote, fire came down from Heaven and destroyed it,
leaving the Book untoucht, as believe a syllable of these voices speaking from
Heaven to him, for they have all the very same Authors. Who having got this by
the end, know not when to have done with it; but tell us for the honor of R.
Chanina, who saw the destruction of the last temple by Titus, that a voice came
from Heaven, which said (as David Ganz reports it in his Chronology Ad An. 4768.
) The whole world is sustained for the sake of R. Chanina my son. A very likely
matter, that he should lay an obligation on so many, and no body know it but
this obscure writer. Why did not all the world follow him, as they did Jesus,
if he were God's Son, and they so much indebted to him? This is but a
wretchedly dull counterfeit of what they had read of our Savior, who was Gods
Son, Upholding all things by the word of his power, i. Hebr. 2, 3. And so are
the other tales they tell in the Talmudical Title so often named, Chapter the
first, of a Bath col which came from Heaven as the wise men sat in Council at
Jericho, saying, There is one here who is worthy that the Divine majesty or
glory (by which they mean sometime the Holy Ghost) should rest upon him, as it
did on Moses; but the age wherein he lives is not worthy of that favor.
Whereupon they all cast their eyes on Hillel a famous man among them. And of
another voice as they were sitting together at Jafne, which said the very same
words again; and turned all their eyes toward R. Samuel the less. And, to name
but one more, R. Juda the Holy Doctor, they would have it believed, was assured
by this voice from Heaven, that his Prayer was heard, just as our Saviors was
in the place I have before opened. For when he was dying (and it was not many
days before our Savior's death, that he prayed in those words, Father,
glorify thy name) he lift up his ten fingers and said, Lord of the world, it
is known to thee that I have labored in the Law with my ten fingers, and have
not received the least advantage thereby, no not in my little finger. May it
please thee, that I may have peace in my rest. And then out came the Bath col
saying those words of Isaiah lvii. 2. He shall enter into peace: they shall
rest in their beds. Which, together with all other of the same kind, deserve to
be put under no other Title, than that of the Jewish Fables (mentioned by S.
Paul, i. Tit. 14.) or old-Wives tales (1 Timothy iv. 7.) wherewith little children
are wont to be entertained: being invented, it is likely, in imitation of the
Gospel story, to adorn and support the ruinous doctrine of their Rabbis, and
to bring it into some esteem with their sottish posterity.

But we may as well believe the idle tale which the factious Donatists told
concerning the Father of their Sect; August. Tract. 13. in Johan.
to whom God gave an answer from Heaven, they said, as he was praying to him:
as give ear to this Fable of R. Judah, who must be magnified by them because he
was the compiler of their traditional Law. And as for R. Samuel the less, whom
I mentioned before, he was the man who composed the famous Prayer against
Heretics for their public Devotions; wherein they desire God that he would
destroy all Heretics: whereby they mean Christians, who began in those days to
grow apace. And therefore it is no wonder that he is cried up to the skies, and
must be honored with praises from Heaven. But the best of it is, these petty
stories want vouchers; or those who offer themselves had need to bring some
better men to be bound for their honesty. They have no John Baptists to attest
any thing, much less such men as the Apostles, who with the power of Miracles
and Prophecy, were ready on all occasions to pawn their lives, that they did
not follow cunningly devised Fables, when they made known the power and coming
of our Lord Jesus, but were eyewitnesses, as you have heard, of his Majesty,
and heard the voice when they were with him in the holy Mount, which said, This
is my well beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Those Masters in Israel also
are not so cunning in their contrivances, nor such masters of their craft, but
they forget the old Rule which admonishes a Liar to have a good memory. For
they contradict themselves, while they tell us this Bath col was but the fag
end of a voice, a kind of Echo leaping out of another voice; and yet make it
deliver such long sentences. And what likelihood is there that God should grace
such men as they, who had turned their Religion into vain janglings and idle
disputes (witness the quarrel between the School of that Hillel now mentioned,
and the Schoolof Schammai) with such Elogiums from Heaven, as were fit to be
given only to the best of men, yea, to the Son of God himself?

One of these four things is far more probable. Either that their latter
writers have strained the words of their forefathers too far, who meant perhaps
no more by their hearing a Bath col, but that the thing whereof they write, was
as evident to them, as if they had had a Divine testimony for it. For in Pirke
Avoth I observe R. Joshuah says, that jotzeth Bath col, the daughter of a voice
goes forth day by day from mount Horeb, and proclaims, saying, Woe to men
because of their contempt of the Law. Which can signify no more, but that if
men would listen to the Law which God gave there, they would hear how dangerous
it is to disobey it. Or, secondly, there was something of a conjuration in it.
For in Pirke Elieser I find Chap. 8.
, that when there was a dispute only about the Leap-year, the Governor of the
School pronounced the Name with four Letters, and presently they heard a voice,
saying, The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, etc. As if they could have this
voice, whenever they did but pronounce that single word. Or, thirdly, they
were men of a strong imagination, which made them fancy they heard a voice from
Heaven, when it was only a blast of melancholy fumes and vapors whistling in
their brain. For this may be a fair account of those, who thought, as some
among us have done, that they heard such or such a place of Scripture sounding
in their ears, as an answer to their prayers or their doubts. Or, lastly, there
being many Jews in our Saviors time and afterward, who knew very well what had
been reported of him, but yet continued sworn enemies to his Religion; they
ventured to report the same of their own Doctors, and persuaded the people that
they were approved by voices from Heaven, and therefore ought to be received by
all posterity as men of a Divine stamp, who had the highest testimony from
Almighty God.

This I am sure of, there is nothing to make it credible that any man among
them in those Ages was thus honored by God. No body appears that dare say they
heard it. Nor does any of them pretend that they saw these Rabbis shine in the
least glimpse of such glory as our Savior did, when he was honored with that
glorious testimony from Heaven, which pronounced him the Head of all
principality and power. Much less were they, as S. Luke speaks, by many
infallible proofs (for we rely not upon the voice from Heaven by it self alone)
declared to be the men of God. And therefore, that which to me seems nearest to
the truth in this matter is, that there had been a perfect, deep silence since
the death of the latter Prophets, and no Revelation made of Gods mind, of any
sort whatsoever, in that Nation, till John the Baptist came, who was filled
with the Holy Ghost, and sent by God in the spirit and power of Elias to
prepare the way of our Lord. Who when he first appeared had such an approbation
given him by God the Father, in the audience of John, as had not been
vouchsafed to any person; and in such a manner (by a voice from Heaven) as had
not been in use for many ages; but yet was the most ancient way of his
communicating his mind to men. Thus God called to Adam in the Garden, and thus
he spoke to Abraham, and Moses, and Samuel; and therefore so he now speaks to
him who was the second Adam, the true seed promised to Abraham, the Prophet
like to Moses: Testifying both to him and to others by his own voice from
Heaven (which was the old way of Revelation before all others, and a clearer
way there cannot be) that he was his only begotten Son.

And here perhaps it may not be amiss to observe, that this voice anciently was
very low, like a small whisper in ones ear: whereas the voice to our Savior
was loud and strong, making a great noise in the ears of those that heard it.
So Eliphaz tells us, iv. Job 16. that in a vision which he had, There was
silence, and I heard a voice. The Hebrew is exactly rendered by Mercer, I heard
silence and a voice; that is, a still voice, as the Margin of our Bible has
it. And so Elias is said to hear a voice of silence, 1 Kings xix. 12. a still
small voice, as we render it; a speech next to silence, which did but whisper
very low, and made no noise at all in his ears. On the contrary you read in the
place last expounded (xii. John) the voice which spoke of our Savior was so
loud and audible, that the people, who were at some distance, thought it had
been a clap of thunder. It did not silently creep into their ears, but rent the
clouds to make its way with a great deal of power and force into them. I cannot
say that the other voice was so loud, which the Disciples heard on the holy
Mount, but it was so clear and piercing, that when they heard it (xvii. Matthew.
6.) they were astonished, and fell flat upon their faces. The light wherein he
appeared was not more visible than the voice which testified to him was
audible; and both were very amazing. Which may very well denote the excellency
of our Saviors person, and the efficacy of his doctrine, above all that had
been before him. He declared Gods mind more fully and perfectly, and spoke it
more plainly and perspicuously. He transcended all others in both these, as
much as a full voice is above a little murmur or whisper in the ear; or a
speech distinctly pronounced, is to be preferred before the lisping of
imperfect words.

But whatsoever become of this, we may certainly conclude from the audibleness
and clearness of the voice, whereby God gave his testimony to Jesus, that they
are the more to be believed, who affirm they heard this voice from Heaven and
report it to us; it not being easy for them to be deceived. This voice was
like that of an Herald who proclaims a Prince; and it said, in effect, I have
set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee. Which had a most eminent and full completion at his Resurrection
and Exaltation; but began to be fulfilled when he was tranfigured upon this
holy hill, and had a representation of his future glory made to him. Which he
did not assume to himself, as the Apostle discourses, v. Hebr. 4, 5. but was
called unto it by him that said then, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee; and said now, This is my well beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,
hear him.

And thus you see, having made an enquiry into the Testimony of one of these
Witnesses, the first and greatest, we find it so full and clear on his behalf,
that we must either disbelieve God, or else believe in Jesus, and receive him
for the Son of God. For he received more than once honor and glory from God
the Father. Who was so highly glorified also by Him, that he has now
completely glorified him with himself, and therefore expects that his Name
should be perpetually glorified and praised by us, in some such words as these.

A PRAYER.
ADored be thy love, O Lord of Heaven and Earth, adored be thy great and
wonderful love, which has thus glorified thy Son Jesus; and given us such
abundant satufaction, that in him thou art well pleased. Lord, what is man that
thou should speak from Heaven, with so much kindness to him! that thou
should so often tell us, thou have sent thy dearly beloved Son, in great
humility to visit us! what an amazing love is this, that thou should admit
any of us into such a familiarity with thy self, as to hear thy voice, and
behold the brightness of thy glory? Our heart ought to answer thee again, with
the voice of joy, thanksgiving and praise. Thy high praises ought to be in all
our mouths. It becomes us to say continually, with the most elevated minds and
hearts, Glory be to thee, O Lord; Glory be to thee, O Lord: who dwell on
high, and yet humblest thy self to behold the things that are in Heaven and in
Earth. For ever be thy Name glorified by us and by all mankind; who have
honored our Nature so highly in the person of thy only begotten Son Christ
Jesus: whom after thou had several ways glorified on Earth, thou have now
advanced to the Throne of thy glory in Heaven.

The hearts of all mankind, with all the love they have, is too small a
Sacrifice to be offered unto thee: whose love is like thy self, far beyond all
that we are able to express. O that our love and affection to thee were so
likewise! a most grateful resentment of thy kindness to us, greater than can be
uttered! O that our minds and wills, to make some poor expressions of their
thankfulness, may most humbly bow themselves and perfectly stoop to thee; who
have thus graciously condescended unto us! That we may, with the most thankful
hearts, receive thy testimony concerning thy Son! sincerely reverence him as
our Lord and Savior! and obediently hearken to his voice; believing his
Revelations, following his Instructions; submitting to his Precepts, and
rejoicing for ever in the comfort of his precious Promises.

There is all reason that we should thus study to approve our selves to thee.
And it is our interest also to be careful to fulfill all righteousness as our
Savior did: That we may have the testimony of a good Conscience at present,
and a joyful hope to be openly commended and praised by thee hereafter; when we
shall hear that voice of the King of glory, calling to us, and saying, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world. Amen.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Testimony of the WORD.
IT is time now to proceed to the Examination of the next Witness, which is the
WORD, and to weigh the evidence which He gives concerning Jesus: that is,
concerning him who was born of the blessed Virgin Mary, and called by that
Name; who said, He was the Son of God. I make no doubt but we shall find his
testimony as full and as strong as the former to verify this; when we have in
a few words (according to my intended brevity) declared, who this WORD is, who
now comes and desires to be heard as a Witness for Jesus.

And we are told by this very Apostle in the first Verse of his Gospel, that
the WORD is a Divine being, which had a subsistence in the beginning of all
things. For he was then with God, the World was made by him, and therefore He
was God. That is, God of God the Father; to whom he has such a relation (to
speak in the words of S. Greg. Nazianzen) as a word or inward thought has to
the mind. Not only in regard of his generation, (...). Orat. 36.
without any passion, but because of his intimate conjunction with Him, and of
his power to declare Him. For the Father is known by the Son; who is a brief
and easy demonstration of the nature of the Father, as every thing that is
begotten is (...), the silent Word of that which begat it.

Now this WORD, whom the Ancients call the Eternal Reason, the Wisdom, the
Power of the Father, S. John there tells us, ver. 14. was made flesh; and
became so related to that Man who was born of the Blessed Virgin, as to dwell
in Him, and be made one with Him. A mystery, as Gregory Thaumaturgus
excellently speaks, (...), etc. Sermon. 3. in Innunc.
which is to be adored, not scrupulously and nicely weighed; to be discoursed
of in Divine words, not measured by humane reasons. And therefore I shall say
no more of it; but that from hence it is that afterward, the whole person
God-man is called the WORD, as you read in the very entrance of this Epistle of
S. John. Where the WORD is described to be such a person as may be seen, and
felt, and handled, as well as heard. And He is very properly called by this
Name, because it is his office to declare the mind and will of God to men (as
we by our speech declare ours one to another) which otherways we could not
know. For no man has seen God at any time (i. John 18.) the only begotten Son,
which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.

In these words we have a plain and full account, why our Lord Jesus is called
the WORD of God. Not merely because he has revealed to us the Counsel and the
pleasure of God, for so did the ancient Prophets, and the holy Apostles: but
First, because he was the immediate Interpreter of the Divine mind and will, as
the word which we speak is of ours. For he was in the very bosom of the Father;
that is, knew his mind not by the instructions of an Angel, not by Visions or
Dreams, nor only by the Holy Ghost; but by a more intimate discovery of Gods
counsels and purposes to him, as a person that was one with him. We cannot
understand less by his being in his Fathers bosom: which is a phrase that
signifies He had the nearest familiarity with Him, and was privy to his most
secret counsels. Which He was able also to accomplish and bring to pass, and
for that reason (which is the second) may be called the WORD of God. Because he
has such a power in Heaven and Earth, that at his word or command all things
are presently done according to his will. For Jesus being represented, you may
observe, in a vision to S. John, as the King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
clothed in a purple, i.e. a royal robe; is called by the name of the Word of
God; xix. Rev. 13
after he had done publishing God's mind and will, and was then only executing
some of his Decrees, by that power which he has at God's right hand. A power
so great, that he can by his Word alone (as the Scripture speaks in other cases
of God Almighty, xxxiii. Psalm 6.) without any visible means to effect it,
compass his ends, and fulfill what he has spoken either in his threats or
promises. And lastly, the Article before this Name, (...), the WORD, denotes
Him to be the person to whom this Title so particularly and eminently belongs,
that it can be given to none else. Because he has most perfectly declared
God's mind and will to us, and revealed to us all his secret purposes
concerning us in the fullest manner that can be; and has a power far
surmounting all creatures, to do every thing as he has declared.

And thus, I suppose, we are to take the word in this place; for the WORD made
flesh, that is, for Jesus himself. Who manifested his own greatness and glory,
as you have begun to discern already, and bare witness concerning himself in a
very eminent and glorious manner, that he was the Son of God. But you must not
expect that I should here produce all the demonstrations, which He gave of this
Truth, from the time of his being made flesh and coming to dwell among us. No,
we are to consider that the Apostle is now speaking of those Witnesses which
are in Heaven, and thence give their testimony: And therefore we must not, at
present, seek for any evidences which He produced, while he was on Earth, to
justify his high Authority, which is comprehended under the Name of the Son of
God; but enquire after those only, which He has given of it, since He went to
Heaven, and ascended to the Throne of his glory. From whence this Word of God
has been pleased to speak, or in some very remarkable manner to assert this
Truth, upon no less than three several occasions.

I.
First of all He showed himself to his first Martyr S. Steven, in a sensible
Majesty; standing at the right hand of God, in the splendour of the Divine
glory. Read but the vii. Acts 55, 56. and there you will find He made himself
so plainly appear to be the Son of God, and that with power (as S. Paul you
have heard speaks in 1. Romans 4.) that is, the King of Heaven and Earth, next to
the most supreme Majesty of God the Father Almighty) that nothing can be said
against it; unless any man will be so audacious as to fancy that this holy and
glorious Martyr was strongly deluded. But there is a clear demonstration
against that, from the whole story of his Life and Death. For He was a man of
great note and eminency in the Church; who held the very first place among the
seven Deacons (vi. Acts 5.) that were chosen to attend the daily ministration
to the poor. The feeding of whose bodies He did not think the only thing
belonging to his charge; but such was his zeal, he likewise broke and dispensed
the Bread of life to all his neighbors. He justified the Christian Faith (of
which he was full, vi. Acts 5, 8, 10.) against all opposers; with singular
wisdom, great fervor and mighty demonstrations, by the power of the holy
Ghost. He confounded all those whom he disputed withal, though he could not
overcome them. He stopped their mouths by the wisdom and spirit wherewith he
spoke: which made them wish they could stop his, though there was no other way,
they saw, to silence him, but by taking away his life. They suborned therefore
false witnesses against him, whom they knew not how to confute. They brought
him before their Great Council to be tried. Where all his Judges fixing their
eyes upon him, saw he was so far from being at all daunted, that there was a
sparkling Majesty in his countenance, like that of an Angel when he appeared to
their forefathers, vi. Acts 15. They could never devise or fancy any thing
greater to say of them or of their most eminent Doctors, than now they beheld
in this illustrious person. The face of the Patriarch Isaac, they tell us, was
so changed when the holy Spirit rested on him, that a Divine light or splendour
came from his face. And they would have us believe that Phineas his countenance
did burn and flame like a Torch, by the inhabitation of the holy Ghost in him.
Nay, Maimonides himself (to omit the other Authors in which I find these
reports) will have the Prophets to be Angels. So he interprets more than once,
the first and the fourth verses of the second Chapter of the Book of Judges.
Where by the Angel of the Lord he understands a Prophet whom God sent to them,
to bring them to repentance. And expressly says More Nevoch. part 2. cap. 42.
that their wise men have told them, This was Phineas; for at that time when
the Majesty of God dwelt upon him, He was like to an Angel of the Lord. And it
is the opinion of some of them, whose Names are not worth mentioning, that in
the Prophetical visions, the form of a man vanished, and the appearance of an
Angel came in the room thereof, till such time as the Vision ceased. The light
which shone within was so great, that it broke through their bodies, and
externally appeared; if we could believe these Doctors, who would fain adorn
their wise men with that glory, which they really beheld in this man of God S.
Steven. Who was so full of the holy Ghost, and had such glorious illuminations
in his mind, that there was indeed an amazing luster in his face, and he looked
more like an Angel than a man. This emboldened him to speak to that grave
Senate with all the assurance in the world; and to reprove them for resisting
the holy Ghost. Which so cut them to the heart, that it enraged them to the
highest degree of fury, and they looked upon him as if they would eat him up.
But he, still full of the holy Ghost, and nothing fearing what he saw he must
suffer from an exasperated multitude, cast up his eyes above, and fastened them
steadfastly upon the Heavens, from whence comes our help. Where He bade them
all take notice (vii. Acts 54, 55, 56.) that he saw the glory of God and Jesus
shining at his right hand in a far greater glory than they had seen in his
face. That was only a glimpse of the Majesty of Jesus, whom he preached to
them; and now feared not to affirm that he saw in his royal splendor and
greatness, incomparably above all the Angels in Heaven.

And is it not a great deal more reasonable to believe that He indeed saw Jesus
there, than to think that he would obtrude thus boldly a mere imagination upon
them, with the certain loss of his own life? If he had not been sure that he
beheld him whom they crucified, now most highly glorified, a person of his
wisdom and spirit would have been more cautious than to follow him in that
bloody path, to which this assertion led him; when, if he would have held his
tongue, there lay a fairer and smoother way before him. But so visible was the
royal Majesty of our Savior, that he could not but proclaim it aloud, and
speak, as S. Peter said, the things which he had seen: though he knew they
would call it blasphemy, and punish him for it with present death. He was
willing to suffer that, for the honor of his Master, and to testify his love
to him: who told him his Faith was no fancy, as he might see by the glory
wherein he appeared. Which abundantly satisfied him that he was the Son of the
Highest; able to reward all his faithful servants with immortal glory. It is
true, we read of never a word that our Lord spoke to this Saint; but the
splendor of his appearance in such glory and Majesty at God's right hand, was
as significant as any words could be: and bid him be assured of the truth of
what S. John is here proving, that indeed he is the Christ, the anointed of
God; anointed with the oil of gladness above all his fellows; made the Lord of
all things; inferior to none but only him who has put all things in subjection
under his feet.

If any one ask me how he could see the glory of God, and how he knew this to
be Jesus, who appeared at Gods right hand? I Answer to the first enquiry, that
He saw God's glory in the same sense that others are said to have seen God: who
beheld some very bright appearance, an extraordinary light shining before their
eyes, which excelled all that ever they had seen or could imagine, and was the
token of the Divine presence. Thus Moses was afraid to look upon God, iii.
Exodus 6. and the Elders of Israel are said to see the God of Israel, xxiv. 20.
which places Maimonides thinks are to be understood of the Vision of God, with
the eyes of the mind. But the Text is plainly against him, which tells us there
was a visible appearance of some unusual, astonishing brightness. And therefore
he confesses that if any man do conceive those words are to be interpreted of
some created light (as he speaks More Nevoch. Part. 1. cap. 5. and many other
places.
) that is, the visible apparition of a Divine Majesty, or of an Angel, there is
no danger in such an apprehension. And indeed no man can seriously read the
Books of Moses, but he will see plainly they speak of a sensible glory, which
was exceeding dazzling, and sometimes too great for the weak eyes of men to
behold. I have described it before, when I told you it was nothing else but a
flaming light, which shone from that amazing devouring Fire, which appeared in
the cloud to the children of Israel, Thus Abarbanel expounds that place I
mentioned before, xvi. Exodus 7. In the morning, then ye shall see the glory of
the Lord. Which is not to be understood of the providing them bread or flesh in
an extraordinary manner; but of the Fire which appeared to all the people, to
reprove and punish them for their murmurings. And so Lyra says, it was an
unusual refulgent brightness or lightning, representing the Divine power ready
to chastise them for their mutiny against his servants. And it is very common
in the New Testament to cal^ such a great splendor by the name of glory. As
the shining of Moses his face i^ called by S. Paul, 2 Cor. iii. 7. the glory
(...) his countenance. And in the same style he^ speaks of the light of the
Heavenly bodies when he says, 1 Cor. xv. 41. There is on^ glory of the Sun,
another glory of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars; for one Star
differs from another Star in glory: that is, in the brightness and splendor
of its light.

Such a glory it was that now S. Steven beheld, but far more splendid, more
pure and illustrious, than the light of the Sun or any other that has been
mentioned; which was a representation of the presence of the Divine Majesty,
who used in this manner to make men sensible of his transcendent invisible
glory. And there, in the Divine presence he saw our Lord, in the most high and
honorable place, next to God the Father himself. For that is the meaning of his
appearing at the right hand of God, or of that great glory he saw in the
Heavens: the right hand being the principal place belonging to the Heir of the
Crown, when he appears together with the King his Father. And therefore the
Divine writer to the Hebrews says, there never was any Angel seen there. They
only stand or minister before God or before his Throne; but to which of them
did he say at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy
footstool? i. Hebr. 13. This is the prerogative of Christ alone, the great
King, the Heir of all things; whose glory the Psalmist describes in that place
(cx. Psalm. 1.) from whence these words are cited; that is, prophecies of his
Kingly power in the Heavens, as S. Paul clearly expounds this phrase of sitting
at Gods right hand, 1 Cor. xv. 25. For he must reign till he has put all
enemies under his feet. He is a King, and he reigns, and he has a Throne (i.
Hebr. 8.) but when he is compared with God the Father Almighty, the fountain of
all power and authority, and when he appears together with him; to show that he
reigns under him and for him, he is represented as sitting at the right hand of
God, or the right hand of the Throne of God. For so his Kingly power is
expressed in other places, He is set down on the right hand of the Throne of
the Majesty in the Heavens, Hebr. viii. 1. xii. 2. that is, He reigns together
with God the Father in the Celestial glory. For the throne of God signifying in
the Scripture phrase (as the forenamed Maimonides observes) that place where
God's Majesty manifests it self in a visible splendor and glory: the sitting
of our Savior at the right hand of that Throne, or that glory denotes nothing
else, but his being seated in the highest honor that can be given to any one
in the Heavenly places: next in greatness, power and majesty to God himself,
under whom he is the King of Angels, and Men, and all Creatures. There was
nothing of which this holy Martyr was more assured. To whom this Heavenly King
appeared, not in his usual posture of sitting at God's right hand, as one
possessed of his royal power; but standing there, as if he was ministering in
the Heavenly Sanctuary, in the quality of a royal High Priest (for that was the
posture of those that ministered in the Temple, cxxxiv. Psalm. 1.) for the
comfort of all Christian people, and of himself especially: or rather as ready
to come to take vengeance of those implacable enemies, who had killed him and
now persecuted his servants; which was a notable instance of his royal power at
God's right hand. For there the Psalmist says he must reign, till he has
subdued all those that oppose his authority, and trodden them under his feet.

And, as for the second enquiry, how he could know this to be Jesus, whom he
saw in this Heavenly Majesty? It is easily resolved, that He appeared to him
with such a countenance as he had here upon Earth; only more shining and
bright, as being now in the glory of the Father. And so he tells the Jews, I
see the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God. That very person, he
means, who used to call himself the Son of man, whom you crucified and
dishonourably treated, I now see so exalted, that I had rather die as he did,
than not confess him to be the Son of God, as he said he was when he died.

This is the first testimony which was given to this truth by the WORD. Who
bore witness in a most illustrious manner to himself, when he appeared thus (to
a person of the greatest credit) in the Divine glory, and in the highest place
of Celestial dignity; (as the King of Heaven, that is) and risen up from his
Throne; as if he was coming to be avenged of his adversaries, to succor all
his servants, and to welcome this Martyr into glory with himself. So S. Steven
verily thought, for he resigns up his Soul to Jesus, with the same confidence
and almost in the same words, that Jesus gave up his to God the Father. The
last words of our Savior were, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit,
xxiii. Luke 46. And they stoned Steven, calling upon God, and saying, Lord
Jesus receive my spirit, vii. Acts 59. He died with these and the following
devout words in his mouth, crying again with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this
sin to their charge. In which he expressed as much charity to men, as in the
other he did faith in Christ. And openly declared himself a person of such
piety and goodness, such admirable candor and sweetness of spirit, so utterly
void of all rancor and gall, when he had the highest provocations from his
bitter enemies: that as we may be sure he could not be guilty of devising a lie
to the deceiving of others; so we may reasonably believe that God Almighty
would not let such an excellent man be deceived, to the ruin of himself, and
the casting away so precious a life.

II.
But that jealousy and suspicion might have no pretense left, nor any man
justly call in question the truth of this apparition; our Savior was pleased a
second time both to show himself, and also to speak very audibly, unto another
person of great integrity and authority; and that was S. Paul. Whose testimony
concerning this, is the more considerable, because he was a person of
considerable note in the Nation of the Jews, both for his descent and for his
education, and for his zeal in their Religion. iii. Phil. 5.
He was an Hebrew both by his Fathers side and his Mothers; a Scholar of
Gamaliel's, i. Gal. 14.
under whom he made an exceeding great proficiency; xxvi. Acts 5.
and was addicted to the most strict Sect of Religion then among them; whereby
he became full of flaming zeal for the Law, of which he was a rigid observer,
even according to the expositions they had made of it by the traditions of
their Elders. These he held so sacred, that the name of Jesus was odious to
him, because he little regarded them. And he was transported with so bloody a
rage against his disciples, that his intention was to send as many of them as
he could meet withal after S. Steven, to whose death he was consenting, viii.
Acts 1. xxii. 20. that is, He approved the fact of those seditious Zealots, who
were the authors of it; or, as the words may well be rendered out of the Syriack
translation, he was as well pleased with the killing of him as any of the
company. The lenity of his Master was no example for him to follow. He learnt
no meekness in the School of Gamaliel, but suffered himself to be hurried away
with the furious spirit of the multitude, whom he accompanied in that tumult.
For he undertook to secure the garments of those, who stripped themselves to
throw the first stone at that blessed Martyr of Christ Jesus. Nor did his fury
rest here, but he gave his voice against other Saints when the sentence of
death passed on them, xxvi. Acts 10. And not content to make havoc of the poor
Church at Jerusalem, he enlarged his cruel projects and stretches his wrath as
far as Damascus; thither he goes armed with authority from the Senate (xxii.
5.) whose Commissioner he was now, as he had been for some time: which shows he
was a person of no small condition in that Nation. For He tells us himself,
that what he did at Jerusalem was by authority from the chief Priests, xxvi.
10. who gave him letters also to those at Damascus, that they should assist him
in the apprehending all the Christians that were there, ix. 2. xxii. 5. He
brought the Decree of the Senate along with him, which had been made against
them; and lest any should question whether he was deputed to see that order put
in execution, he was ready to satisfy them of that by showing his Commission,
xxvi. 12. In short, he breathed forth nothing but fire and sword, as we speak,
against the worshippers of the Lord Jesus, being exceeding mad against them:
according to the account S. Luke gives of him, viii. Acts 3. ix. 1. and which
he gives of himself, xxii. 4. xxvi. 11.

Now who would expect that such a man as this should himself become a Disciple
of Jesus, much less a preacher of his Religion? A man so noted for his violence
the other way, and whose name was so terrible to Christian people, that Ananias
was afraid to go and deliver a message to him from our Lord, after he was told
something of his conversion? Was there any hopes that he should ever confess
and publish the very same thing for which S. Steven was stoned? And yet so
powerful were the prayers of that holy Martyr (which adds much to the force of
his testimony) that our Lord answered them ere long, by pardoning and
converting this enraged Zealot. To whom he was graciously pleased to appear, as
he had done to that Saint, more than once, as we find recorded in the Sacred
story from his own mouth.

The first time, and the most remarkable was, when he was upon the rode to
Damascus. Then our Lord met him, not far from that City (when he had no such
thing in his thoughts, but was possessed with quite contrary designs) and made
him fall down and worship him, whose Name he so hated, that he would have
forced all Christians to blaspheme him. Read the ix. Acts 3, etc. and there you
will find him, who little regarded what S. Steven said, and perhaps took him
for a frantic fellow when he told them he saw Jesus glorified; surrounded
himself with such a glorious light from Heaven, as left him no power to resist
this truth, which he had so bitterly persecuted. For in that wonderful
brightness, there was a person appeared to him with such a dazzling luster, that
after he had beheld it, he lost his eyes, and could not see by reason of the
glory of that light, xxii. 11. which was the cause I believe that he asked with
no small astonishment, Who art thou Lord? The Angels appeared sometimes in
great glory, but never with such a splendor as to hurt the sight, much less to
take it away; and therefore he now concluded that this person was of an higher
condition, much greater than the Angelical Ministers, whose brightness was
never known to be so amazing. And to give satisfaction to his doubt, our Lord,
the WORD of God, told him in plain terms, with an audible voice, I am Jesus
whom thou persecutest. And wished him not to proceed any further in this course,
which he might easily see would prove destructive to him. For to contend with
him still who was so glorious, what would it be but to wound and ruin himself;
and by seeking to ease himself of one trouble to run upon a greater; just as a
beast does, that kicks against the pricks, which are to quicken it and put it
forward? This voice he alone heard, who was to be instructed by it. The company
that was with him, heard only a confused sound (ix. 7.) and his voice perhaps
when he asked that question; but as they saw no body, so they did not hear the
voice of him that spoke to him, xxii. 9. But the light they all saw, and were
so afraid that there they stopped their journey, and could not, for the present,
stir a foot from that place. For that is the meaning of they stood speechless,
ix. 7. They did not stand on their feet, for they all fell to the ground (as
you read, xxvi. 14.) but they remained fixed in that spot, and could neither
speak a word nor go on a step further. As for Saul himself, he trembled and was
astonished; and began to yield himself presently as a Captive to this Heavenly
King, saying, Lord, what would thou have me to do? To this our Lord made him
again a distinct answer (which shows this was no sudden fancy, but that they
continued for some time in a conference together) and bade him get up, and go
into the City, and there he should be directed by him what to do. Accordingly
our Lord appeared in a Vision to Ananias, who had the charge, it is likely, of
the Church at Damascus, and ordered him to go in his name, and to lay his hands
upon him for the restoring of his sight (ix. 17.) after which he told him, that
he must now go and tell all men what he had seen and what he had heard (xxii.
15.) that is, declare to all the world, that Jesus was the King of glory. And
which is still more wonderful, Saul himself as he lay there praying to the Lord
for mercy, had the like Vision (ix. 12.) wherein he saw a man of this name
coming in to do him this kindness. Who no sooner had executed his commission
and put his hands upon him, but immediately the power of our Lord appeared,
after he himself in person was gone. His eyes were presently opened, though
they were sealed up so fast, as if a crust had grown over them.

And wonderful was the illumination of his understanding, together with the
restoring of his sight. The light which had put out his eyes, made him clearly
see, though he was not told so in express words, that Jesus was the Son of God.
This Heavenly WORD, you may observe, does not in all this story call himself by
that name. But he declaring himself to be Jesus, and Saul seeing this Jesus in
so bright a glory that it exceeded the light of the Sun at midday (as he
confesses to Agrippe, xxvi. 13.) it did more than tell him that he was, as S.
Steven had preached, the Son of God, the King of glory. For He appeared to him
in his glory, and then told him that he whom he beheld thus exceeding glorious,
was that very Jesus, whom he was pursuing as a Blasphemer, for affirming
himself to be that which he now saw him with his own eyes to be.

What could be more convincing than this? especially when he felt himself
filled with the holy Ghost (ix. 17.) merely by the laying on of the hands of
one of Jesus his Disciples? He durst not distrust, much less resist so clear
and evident a demonstration. He saw there was nothing truer, than that Jesus
was the Son of God. All his learning could not furnish him with an argument to
confute or weaken this single proof which our Savior gave him of his Divinity.
But straightway, upon this testimony from the WORD of God himself, without
requiring any further demonstration, He preached Christ in the Synagogues, that
he is the Son of God, ix. 20. Ananias did not Catechize him in this Doctrine,
nor sent him to the Apostles to be instructed; but He was made an Apostle as
well as they, by Jesus Christ himself (i. Gal. 1.) who acquainted him
immediately with his will, for he was not taught it, but by the revelation of
Jesus Christ (ver. 12.) whom he preached, without asking counsel of any body (
ver. 16.) as soon as God was pleased to reveal his Son in him. I believe you
will easily grant that he was as hard as any man living to be persuaded to
receive this revelation, which would force him not only to contradict all that
he had formerly maintained, but to condemn himself as the vilest wretch in the
world. To become a disciple to this faith, and to assert it likewise so
earnestly as he did; what was it but to condemn, together with himself, all his
Masters, the grave Judges of the Nation, from whom he had received a commission
to destroy it? It required great courage as well as honesty to confess a Truth,
which he knew, by himself, would be so furiously opposed. He had been such a
fiery persecutor of all those who believed it, that he had taught his
Countrymen how to deal with him, if he should now become a proselyte to it. He
was a man also of very great parts and learning; and therefore was not like to
be moved by a trivial argument. And a person likewise of as great integrity,
who did not bear a malice against Christians, but was only zealous for the Law;
and therefore would not embrace a new Religion, unless he had learnt better
reasons for it, than those which supported him in the old. Much less would he
have suffered himself hastily to be carried out of his way, unless he had met
with some irresistible arguments, which were able instantly to turn him about,
and incline him to the profession of that truth, which he was then persecuting
with an outrageous violence.

And yet so it was, that this man so resolved in another course, so certainly
undone if he forsook it, of such understanding and uprightness, was in a trice
astonished, and reduced to such a condition, that he could neither eat nor
drink; and in three days space so wrought upon, that straightway, as you have
heard, without any further deliberation or taking more time to study the point,
He not only believed, but undertook to prove, that this person whom he had so
zealously opposed, was indeed the Son of God. Must it not be some mighty
Argument, that could overcome all those reasons and interests too which had
engaged him in the contrary belief? Was it not a very clear demonstration,
which could open such a man's eyes in a moment, and break through such strong
opposition, as lay before his mind to bar its entrance? And yet it was nothing
else but this testimony which the WORD bare to himself, that effected this
wonderful change. Nothing but Jesus appearing in glory, giving him a terrible
rebuke, and striking him blind; which wrought such a strange cure upon him,
that as he himself speaks (i. Gal. 23.) He became a preacher of that faith,
which once he destroyed. And therefore this Witness cannot but be very powerful
to convince every body else, which prevailed over a person so prejudiced and
pre-engaged in an opposite persuasion as Saul was. Who took this Testimony,
which our Lord had given to himself, to be so strong and unanswerable, that
presently after this, when he had further considered of the business and was
increased in strength, He even confounded the Jews that were at Damascus,
proving that this is very Christ, ix. Acts 22. So mightily did he convince
them, that they had no Answer wherewith to encounter his Arguments, but only
the Sword: and therefore consulted ( ver. 23.) to kill him, and take him out of
the way; who as long as he lived they saw would be the greatest witness unto
Jesus. But all these dangers he undervalued, he ran innumerable hazards, made
strange adventures, and endured matchless troubles; that he might give
testimony to Jesus, who had shown himself to him to be the Lord of all. Nay,
though he was told at his first setting out, how great things he must suffer
for his Names sake, ix. 16. he was nothing at all dismayed, nor in the least
discouraged: having seen the bright Majesty of Jesus so clearly, that flames
themselves could not make him deny it, no nor cease to preach it.

So great was the force of this glorious appearance of our Lord to him, whereby
he testified his own power and greatness; that when S. Paul was actually fallen
into the hands of his bloody enemies, and made a prisoner, in order to his
execution; He had nothing of greater note to allege for himself, by which to
justify his preaching Jesus to be the Son of God, than this; that he had seen
that Just one, and heard the voice of his mouth; for no other end but this,
That he should be his witness unto all men, of what he had seen and heard,
xxii. Acts 14, 15. And as this was the best plea he had when he was to make his
defense in that popular tumult, so it was the thing that convinced the Apostles
themselves that he was become a disciple. For they doubted of it at first, when
he came to Jerusalem, and were afraid to associate themselves with him, till
Barnabas told them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken
to him, and how he had preached boldly at Damascus, in the name of Jesus, ix.
27. When he came also to answer for himself before Agrippa, a Prince of great
understanding and well versed in the Jewish Religion, still he stands upon
this; that He who thought himself bound in conscience to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth, whose servants he procured to be
imprisoned, banished, and put to death, was met by this very Jesus in the way
to Damascus (when he was going with Commission to do the same there that he had
done at Jerusalem) saw his exceeding great and incomparable glory; was severely
rebuked by him for his rage against his disciples, and then received a
Commission from him to act in his name, and to preach against the former; all
which was so evident, that he durst not be disobedient to the Heavenly Vision,
but had ever since called upon both Jews and Gentiles to repent and believe in
Jesus, though he had been crucified: for it was the Mind of all the Prophets
and Moses, that their Christ should suffer and then be the first that should
rise from the dead, and show light to the people and to the Gentiles. This is
the substance of his Apology in the xxvi. Acts, from which place we may learn
two things, which are very considerable. First, that when our Lord appeared to
S. Paul, he had a great deal of discourse with him, and did not say so little
as only those words, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, etc. but added those
words which follow, ver. 16, 17, 18. Rise, and stand upon thy feet; for I have
appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a Minister and a Witness both
of these things which thou have seen, and of those in the which I will appear
unto thee; delivering thee from the people and the Gentiles, unto whom now I
send thee, to open their eyes and to turn them from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me. The Divine
writers are wont to be very brief in their Relations, and to mention only the
principal things which were said and done, leaving out the rest, which perhaps
they set down upon some other occasion. And secondly, in these words it is
observable, that he tells him he must be a witness not only of the things which
he had seen (now in the way to Damascus) but of those in which he intended to
appear unto him. Which clearly intimates that there were other apparitions of
the Lord Jesus unto him besides this. Some of them we find recorded in this
History of the Acts, and other parts of the holy Book.

And a second sight which he had of our Lord was at Jerusalem, as he was
praying in the Temple. When he fell into an ecstasie or rapture, as he relates
himself presently after the mention of the former (xxii. Acts 17.) and saw him;
bidding him make haste away from that City, where he was not like to do any
good, for they would not receive his testimony concerning him. This was one of
the times, as some great men have thought, when he was carried up to Heaven, 2
Cor. xii. 2.

And again our Lord appeared to him the night after he had been questioned by
the Council, bidding him be of good cheer, for he should bear witness of him at
Rome, as he had done at Jerusalem, xxiii. 11. And to omit that apparition to
him in a night Vision, xviii. 9. and the revelations which it is like were made
to him in Arabia, presently after his conversion, He was caught up again into
Paradise, and there had (...), Visions, as well as Revelations, of the Lord, 2
Cor. xii. 1. When this was it is uncertain. But there are persons of great
note, who imagine, that when the Church of Antioch laid hands on him (xiii.
Acts 3.) not to ordain him an Apostle, for so he was made by Jesus Christ
himself, but to send him out to exercise his Apostleship toward the Gentiles,
to which he had particularly appointed him; then our Lord vouchsafed to lift
him up into Heaven, and to give him new Revelations. For there could be no time
more fit for it than this, when he was to engage in a dangerous war against the
whole Idolatrous world. Then he was armed with an extraordinary resolution, by
conversation with Angels in the other world. Where he heard things unutterable,
and was confirmed, no doubt, in the belief of the glory of the Lord Jesus, by
whose power he was thus transported; and whom, it is most likely, he then again
saw, shining as the Sun among those stars of light, in that Orb to which he was
carried. But this he speaks of so sparingly himself, that I ought to pass it
over as fast as he does.

The First is the chiefest and greatest evidence of all: which he most depended
on, and whereby he justified himself against all accusers. This was his
warrant; to this he appeals upon all occasions, that He saw Jesus in the way to
Damascus. And he had great reason to stick to it; for he knew that no body
could shame him, by so much as pretending that he lied, and that there was no
such thing as this apparition of Jesus to him. He had his companions in his
journey to be witnesses of the Miraculous glory, which on a sudden surprised
them, as well as him, (xxvi. Acts 15.) They heard then the voice of some body
discoursing with him, though they did not distinctly hear the words. It became
presently notorious every where; for this thing, as he tells Agrippa, ver. 26.
was not done in a corner, but openly, and at noonday, to the astonishment of
diverse persons who attended him. And it left a sensible effect upon his body,
and upon his mind. He could neither see, nor eat, nor drink for three days. In
which space he saw a vision of a man named Ananias coming to him and bidding
him receive his sight. All which proved true; and together with his sight he
received a new spirit, whereby he confounded the Jews at Damascus. For they
could not deny all this, and yet were loath to believe in Jesus. They were
amazed to hear him preached by a man, who they knew was come thither with a
quite contrary intent, ix. 21. They could not but ask, what is the matter?
whence comes this mavelous change? Is not this he that destroyed them which
called on this Name in Jerusalem? And is not that the business for which he
came hither, to bring them bound unto the chief Priests? What ailes him now,
that he thus justifies them and condemns himself? And there is no doubt, but to
answer such Questions he took the opportunity to tell them, what he had seen
and what he had heard; for so Ananias charged him, xxii. 15. He did not keep
this as a secret; it was not carried in privacy, but presently divulged, that
all might inquire, if they pleased, into the circumstances of the fact. Which
was so strange, that as it amazed and confounded them at Damascus; so King
Agrippa' knew not what to say to it, but was almost persuaded to be a
Christian, xxvi. Acts 28.

No man of sense could think that a person of his education and learning would
venture the loss of his ease, of his reputation, of all the preferment he had,
and of all that he might justly hope for from the Sanhedrim, without the least
expectation of any gain, unless of that only which Jesus could give him; if he
had not been fully assured it was no delusion, when he presented himself to him
as the Lord of glory. Much less could any man imagine, that a person of his
virtue and unblameable life under the Law, and of such strange piety and
perfect contempt of all worldly things after his receiving Christianity, would
feign and devise such a story; by which if it were false he could get nothing
in the other world, and if it were true he could get nothing in this. Nothing
but misery, trouble, infamy and reproach, which attended him every where, and
never left him till it had brought him to a shameful death. If you will but
consider what he quitted for Christ's sake, after he had thus appeared to him,
and how the world treated him when he became a preacher of this Gospel (as you
find it described by himself in several Epistles, particularly iii. Philip. 8.
1 Cor. iv. 9, 10, 11, etc. 2 Cor. vi. 4, 5, etc. xi. 23, 24, etc.) you will
soon be satisfied that he was more in his wits, than either to invent this
story, or publish it without strong assurance of its truth. He was as sure that
he saw the Lord Jesus in his glory, and heard the voice of his mouth, as every
body else that knew him was sure, he had been a blasphemer of him and a
persecutor of his servants. And therefore whatsoever it cost him, he would be
obedient to that Heavenly Vision. And having a Ministry from him (as he speaks
in the 2 Cor. iv. 1, 2, 3.) according as he had received mercy (so he accounted
it, a very great favor to become one of his Ministers) he did not faint, nor
discharge his office sluggishly. Nor did he think of making up his losses by
this new profession of preaching the Gospel, but abhorred such a dishonest
thought, and utterly renounced all such base and shameful arts, though never so
secretly managed, and covered over with never such specious pretenses. He did
not walk in craftiness, nor appear other than he really was. Much less would he
to please any men, handle the word of God deceitfully; either by concealing any
thing that was true, or by mixing any false stories of his own inventing. No,
by plain truth he commended himself to every man's conscience, as in the
presence of that God, who is the avenger of all fraud and imposture. And
therefore he justly concludes, that if any man did not receive these things,
nor think them evident enough, it was because he deserved to perish, for the
love he bore to some naughty affection or other, which would not let him submit
to Jesus. For it was him the Apostles preached ( ver. 5.) not themselves; they
did not do their own business, but his only, whom they proclaimed to be the
Lord, and themselves no more but his servants; nay, the servants of all
Christian people for his sake.

But I must no longer follow the story of this great man, who became so strong
in the Lord and in the power of his might, after He had from Heaven appeared
and spoken to him; that as nothing could daunt him, so nothing could hinder the
sucecess of his labors. He became the most eminent servant of the Lord Jesus,
and prevailed so mightily against all the opposition which the Devil or men
raised to frustrate his endeavors, that he gives thanks to God, in the second
Chapter of that Epistle, ver. 14. Who always caused him to triumph in Christ,
and made manifest the odor of his knowledge by him in every place. All his
travels and long journeys proved in the issue, as if they had been but the
carrying of him about in a triumphal Chariot, to make him a glorious spectacle
in all those places (as the Syriack translates it) where, in spite of all that
the most powerful cruelty and rage could do, he was still victorious; and
brought diverse Souls into a cheerful subjection to his Master Christ Jesus.

III.
Who was pleased last of all, but more frequently than to any other, to show
himself, after he went to Heaven, to this very Apostle, whose words I am
expounding, his beloved Disciple S. John. By whom he comforts and encourages
all other Christians to continue steadfast in their Religion, and to take their
share with him, in tribulation and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ.
Who many ways declared to him that he was the Son of God, the King of glory,
able to reward his patient servants: and moreover sent Letters by him to
several Churches of the Saints; testifying the very same things, which He made
him see and hear, in several visions. They are recorded in that Book which
tells us in the very first words of it, that it is the Revelation of Jesus
Christ, which he sent and signified by the Ministry of his Angel to his
servant John. Who had already born record (so the word (...) is to be rendered
ver. 2.) of the WORD of God, and of the testimony of Jesus, and of all things
that he saw; Had declared, that is, in his Gospel Jesus to be the WORD of God;
and made known that which he testified to be Gods will concerning men; together
with all the evidences, by Miracles and other ways, which he had seen of the
truth of that, which Jesus testified. There could not be a fitter person than
he, who perhaps also was the only Apostle now remaining in the world, to hold
communication with this WORD of God, and receive new revelations from Jesus. He
being at this time likewise banished and confined to the Isle which is called
Patmos, ver. 9. for the cause now named, that is, for the Word of God, and for
the testimony of Jesus Christ.

In this lonesome place, separated from the rest of the Earth, our Lord opened
Heaven to him, and showed him the glory which he had there. For he fell into a
rapture on the Lords day ( ver. 10.) and heard one speak behind him with a
voice as loud as a trumpet, saying, I am before and after all things, that is,
God blessed for ever; Write what thou see in a Book, and send it to the seven
Churches which are in Asia, whose names are there expressed, ver. 11. Whereupon
he turned about to see whence this voice came, and then he beheld in the midst
of seven golden Candlesticks, representing those Churches, a very glorious
person, appearing in the most royal majesty and power. He did not ask him, as
S. Paul did, who he was; for he had been long acquainted heretofore with that
countenance, and knew him perfectly well to be our blessed Savior. Who, by his
very habit wherein he appeared, declared himself to be, as he had said, the
Lord of all; who had no superior, nor any second, in that Kingdom which God
the Father had given him, but disposed all things according to the sole
pleasure of his will. For he beheld him, clothed with a garment down to the
foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle, etc. ver. 13, 14, 15, 16.
He saw, that is, as Irenaeus truly expresses it, L. 4. cap. 37.
Sacerdotalem and gloriosum regni ejus adventum, him appear in his Priestly and
glorious Kingdom. For a long Robe and a golden Girdle, belonged both to Kings,
and to the High Priest in the Jewish Nation. And all the rest of the
description, it were easy to show, is a plain representation of a person
shining in the glory of God the Father; and invested with such an irresistible
power in the Heavens, as might justy make all his Friends rejoice, who
acknowledged him to be the Son of God most high, and all his Enemies quake and
tremble, who opposed his sovereign Authority. In short, so glorious was the
sight, that S. John himself was not able to bear it, but when he saw him, fell
at his feet as dead, ver. 17. till the WORD (as Irenaeus speaks in the same
place) on whose breast he had reposed himself at his last Supper, revived and
comforted him with these gracious words; Fear not, I am the first and the last:
I am he that lives and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen; and
have the keys of Hell and of Death. As much as to say, Thou wast not deceived
when thou thoughtest thou saw the Son of man appear to thee. It is I indeed,
therefore be not so afraid, though now thou beholdest me in such Heavenly
Majesty and Divine glory; for thou ought rather to rejoice to think that I
am the eternal God. I whom thou knew when I lived upon Earth, and whom thou
saw shamefully put to death, am now alive, as thou see also, never to die
any more; and am entrusted with a power to rescue you from death, and raise you
out of your graves.

It would be too long, if I should tell you all that he says in his Letters to
those Churches, to assert his title to the Name of the [Son of God] which he
expressly takes to himself in one of them (ii. Rev. 18.) and to declare his
royal power which he exercises in all the world, especially in his Church, the
house of the living God; where he has such an absolute authority (expressed by
having the keys of the house of David, etc. iii. 7.) that none can contradict
him, either by preserving any man in the Divine favor, if he reject him; or by
excluding any man from it, if he receive him. It may suffice to observe these
two things. First, that there is not one of those Letters but it begins with
some such description of our Savior's sovereign Majesty, as this now
mentioned. For the character he had given of himself in the first Chapter, is
again repeated, by parts, in the following messages to the Churches. Where he
sometimes calls himself, He that walks in the midst of the seven golden
candlesticks, ii. 1. that is, inspects and governs them. Sometime the first and
the last, which was dead and is alive, ver. 8. that is, the Lord God, who can
raise him from the dead, who parts with his life for me. And, to name no more,
he calls himself, ver. 12. He that has the sharp sword with two edges, to cut
in pieces either them or their enemies, according as they deserved of him. And
indeed it being the office of a King (which is the second thing to be observed)
or a supreme Governor, to punish offenders, and to reward virtuous persons; he
constantly assumes both these powers to himself, in every one of these seven
Letters: telling them what evil should befall them from his hand, if they did
not amend; and what blessings he would bestow upon them, if they did overcome.
Which is a plain declaration of his Regal power and authority, which he now
has at the right hand of the Throne of God.

There S. John saw him in a second Vision, as Irenaeus calls it, v. Rev. 6.
where he appears in such power with God, that none has the like. For there was
a majesty represented to the Apostle, sitting on a Throne, with a Book in his
right hand (ver. 1.) which none could open, or read, or so much as look into.
And then behold, this Lamb of God, who had been slain, comes and appears in the
midst of the Throne; being the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, as one of the Elders
calls him, ver. 5. that royal person whom God promised to send to rule over
them. He takes the Book out of the right hand of him that sat on the Throne,
ver. 7. which signifies that he is next to God the Father of all, at whose
right hand he stood, in power and glory. As appears also by his being seated in
his Throne (for the thrones of the Eastern Kings, to which these expressions
allude, were wide, like one of our Couches, in which more than one may sit) and
by his having the principal Angels, the seven spirits of God at his command, to
employ where he pleased. Who, together with the rest of the Heavenly host and
with the Christian Church, make their acclamations to him ( ver. 11, 12.) as
worthy of the most supreme power and dignity, which they express in as many
Names of praise, as there are principal Spirits of God; when they say, Worthy
is the Lamb that was slain to receive 1. power, and 2. riches, and 3. wisdom,
and 4. strength, and 5. honor, and 6. glory, and 7. blessing. And then
immediately he hears every Creature joining him in their Doxology, together
with God the Father, saying, ver. 13. Blessing, and honor, and glory, and
power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and
ever.

But the more fully to represent his Divine power, you may observe that he
appears in another Vision to him, in the very same state and majesty, wherein
God was wont to make himself present, in the times of old. Then you read that
the Lord made the clouds his chariot, and walked upon the wings of the wind,
ciii. Psalm 3. that is, came to them by the ministry of Angels, who appeared
in bright and shining clouds, to do his will with great expedition every where.
For so it is expounded in the xviii. Psalm 10. where instead of clouds it is
said, He rode upon a Cherub and did fly, yea, he did fly upon the wings of
the wind. That is, there was a token of his presence by the majestic
appearance of Angels, who were ready to be employed by him, and immediately to
execute his commands. For to ride upon any thing, as Maimonides observes More
Nevoch. Part. 1. cap. 70.
, is, in the Holy Language, to rule, to govern, to have an absolute power over
it, and dispose of it as one pleases. And therefore to ride upon a Cherub, or
to make the clouds his chariot (which are the very same, because the Angels
appeared in glorious clouds) is to send those Heavenly Ministers whither he
thinks good, to perform his pleasure. Whence it is, I suppose, that the
Psalmist says elsewhere (lxviii. 34.) his strength is in the clouds, because he
is powerfully present by them in all places. For as Andreas Caesariensis has
truly observed, (...), etc.
in his Commentaries upon the Revelation, a cloud, in the Sacred writings, is
ever a Minister about Divine businesses, and perpetually employed in them;
because they are above us, and are very swift, as the Angels are in their
motions, and are both dark and bright; a fit emblem of the glory of the Divine
Majesty which is inscrutable by us.

Now just in such a glorious Majesty and mighty power did S. John behold our
blessed Savior, making the clouds, that is, the Angels his chariot, in which
he sat as a Lord, to whom they were to do service. So he tells us in xiv. Rev.
14. And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat, like
unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden Crown, and in his hand a sharp
sickle. Where by cloud, the forementioned writer understands, (...), some
Angelical power (of which this white, that is, bright cloud, was a
representation) ministering to our Savior. For S. John saw him upon this cloud;
and sitting there, as if it were the Throne or Royal Chariot of this Prince.
Who sat there with a Crown on his head, denoting his Royal authority; and that
of Gold, to show, by what is most precious among us, (...), the splendor and
greatness of his Majesty; and with a sickle in his hand, to signify that he
has such a power, as to be able to cut down Kingdoms and States, with as much
ease as we mow a field of corn. All these three last expressions set forth the
highest dignity and most royal power; and therefore so does his sitting upon a
cloud, or being carried by Angels, as Kings were anciently and still are in the
Eastern Countries by their servants. Which kind of speech, and other such like
phrases in the holy Language (as riding upon the wings of Angels, denoted by
the clouds and wind) signify the exercise of his Kingly power by their
Ministry. Who are ready to fly any whither, to convey his orders, and execute
them throughout the world. Where he being present by them, as a King is by his
several Ministers in every part of his Dominions, he is said to sit upon them,
as if, whither-soever they go, they carried him. Thus the ancient Books speak
of God the Creator and Governor of all; and thus our Savior teaches S. John
to speak of him: which is a sign that he is the Son of God, who sends forth the
Angels to minister for them especially, who shall be heirs of salvation.

And therefore in another Vision, which is all I need mention, xix. Rev. 11,
12, etc. He saw him again coming out of Heaven, with the Royal ensigns of his
victorious power over those who had opposed his authority. For, behold a white
horse, which was proper for a conqueror, and one sitting upon him, whose name
was called the WORD of God. Who was clothed, he tells us, with a vesture dipped
in blood; that is, with a purple garment, such as Kings use to wear; and his
eyes sparkled, or rather flamed like fire, to denote how terrible he was to his
Enemies; and there were on his head many Crowns, because he had already
conquered several Kingdoms and Provinces and was now going to subdue more:
being attonded with all the armies in Heaven, who waited upon him to minister
to him in this war, till, as he was of right, he was actually acknowledged, by
humble subjection to him, to be KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.

And what greater argument can there be of the power of our Lord, and of the
truth of these Visions (whereby the WORD of God, who has the lineaments of
future things in his mind, as Irenaeus speaks, represented how God would
hereafter dispose of the affairs of the world) than his possessing himself of a
Kingdom, and persuading so great a part of mankind to submit to him, though a
King invisible, merely by the preaching of such men as S. John? The event has
proved, it was no delusion when he heard those great voices in Heaven saying,
xi. 15. The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. Which was accomplished also
with very great speed, as he saw represented by an Angel which appeared flying
in the midst of Heaven, xiv. 6. Having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto
them that dwell on the Earth. That motion of flying seems to signify the haste
which the great Ministers of Christ made (who are compared in this book to
Angels) to publish his Gospel to the world. Which had mighty success, because
it came with authority from Heaven, as is represented by the Angels flying
(...), in the midst of the air, between Heaven and Earth, to denote something
he had in hand, which was decreed above, and to be done here below. The
greatest powers on Earth indeed set themselves against it, and made war with
the Lamb, xvii. 14. that is, persecuted Christianity: But he foretells his
conquests, even over these Kingdoms who were such furious enemies, as to seek
to destroy his Religion. For which he gives only these two reasons; because God
had made him Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and because those who followed
him were such choice persons, that their patient constant perseverance in his
service, to which he had called them, helped to overcome his and their Enemies,
and to bring them in subjection to him.

I can think of nothing that can be objected against what has been said, but
two things, which deserve briefly to be considered. One of them concerns this
last particular now handled, and the other seems to cross all that has been
delivered in this Chapter. Against what has now been alleged from the
Revelations, it may be objected, that this Book of Visions was doubted of among
some of the ancient Christians. To which the Answer is very obvious, That there
was a particular reason why this Book did not always go along with the rest
into every bodies hands, and by that means, being not so generally known, was
afterward questioned; because the making of it as public as the Christian
doctrine, might have too much incensed the power of the Roman Empire, whose
downfall is here so plainly predicted. Yet it was not kept so private, but that
it is cited very early both as a Divine Book, and as the writing of S. John the
Apostle, by those who deserve to be believed. Justin Martyr had that opinion of
it, and so had Irenaeus, as I have already said, and Theophilus Antiochenus,
and Origin; especially S. Cyprian, who, I have observed, produces testimonies
out of no book of the New Testament so often as this. From whence he encourages
Christians to follow their Master and all that worthy company who had hazarded
their lives for him. It being the peculiar glory, says he De Exhort. Martyr.
, of our time, that whereas ancient examples might be numbered, now there is
such an exuberant abundance of virtue and faith, that Christian Martyrs cannot.
So the Revelation witnesses, I beheld, and lo a great multitude which no man
could number, of all nations, and kindred, and people, and tongues stood before
the Throne, and before the Lamb with white robes and palms in their hands, vii.
9. And these, he was told, are they which came out of great tribulation, and
have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. I shall
not produce the words of any of the rest, nor of diverse others, who without any
manner of doubting pronounce this to be the Revelation of the WORD of God to
his servant John.

But pass to the other thing, which may be alleged to the prejudice of the
whole foregoing discourse. For I produce nothing, some may say, but the
testimony which one gives of himself, which all confess to be of no validity.
This WORD of God himself says so, as this very Apostle has recorded, v. John
31. If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true. And yet what is all
that S. Steven saw, or that he spoke to S. Paul and S. John, but his witness of
himself?

I answer in his own words also, which you read in another place of that
Gospel, viii. 14. where the Pharisees objecting to him his own concession (
ver. 13.) that a man's testimony to himself is nothing worth; he seems to
revoke, but in truth only explains it, by telling them in terms quite contrary,
though I bear record of my self, my record is true. The former words are not so
to be understood, as if what a man says of himself were always false, or not to
be regarded when he has a concurrent testimony from others; no, it may be
true, though it will persuade no body else to believe it without other
evidence. That Is all our Savior means in the Fifth Chapter, if he had alone
born witness to himself, and there had been no other testimony given him, it
had not been true, that is, not a valid, unexceptionable testimony, by which he
might demand credit from them. So the word true is used, viii. John 17. in the
sense of the Law, which required two or three witnesses for the establishing or
settling any thing in question. They had no reason to believe he was Gods Son,
but might still have disputed it, if he had been the only person that said so,
and could have brought no other to witness for him. And yet notwithstanding He
tells them here, that even in this case his testimony of himself is true, as
truth is opposed to falsehood; though it wanted that truth which was necessary
to make it a legal testimony. That is, though it could not have passed in Law,
nor stopped the mouth of gainsayers, because it was a single testimony, and the
Law required more than one; yet it would have had nothing of a lie in it, but
his words would have been perfectly true, when he affirmed himself to be the
Son of God.

But (...) was not his case, He alone did not bea^ witness to himself, but
there were others beside him, who bare witness of him, and said the same thing
that he did (as he shows, v. John 32, 33, 36, etc.) and said it, before he
assumed this name to himself. And therefore his testimony, which single would
have had no strength, being joined to the other is of great force, and ought to
be regarded. He did not desire to be received merely because he said he was the
Son of God (though he ought not to be accounted a liar for saying so alone) no,
he referred them to other proof of that truth. But when they had heard and
considered them, then there was reason they should hear what he affirmed
concerning himself: and not think the worse of him, because he spoke those
words, which were no other than the very words of the Father, whereby he bare
witness to him. So he tells them in the viii. John 17, 18. It is written in
your Law, that the testimony of two men is true. I am one that bear witness of
my self, and the Father that sent me bears witness of me. That is, you have
no reason to disparage my testimony of my self, because I do but repeat the
very same thing which the Father has said before me. For though alone (as I
have confessed heretofore) my testimony of my self is worth nothing, and cannot
challenge belief; yet added unto so high a testimony as his, it ought to be
duly regarded and accepted.

But besides this, I must add another consideration of great moment. Which is,
that the Testimony of the WORD concerning himself now that he is in the Heavens
is of great validity, even singly considered; though it had no such authority
alone, when he was upon the Earth. For during his stay here on Earth, it could
not appear by his bare saying so, that he was the Son of God, the King of
Israel; because he was in a poor, mean and low condition, altogether unlike a
King: And therefore if the Father and the Spirit had not testified so much,
none could have believed on him. But when he was in the Heavens, then what he
said of himself carried great authority and power with it; because he could not
say those words to any one, but he must appear as a King in glory. There were
things as well as words to speak for him. At the same time that he bare witness
of himself, they to whom he spoke must needs see the truth of his Testimony, by
the royal state and majesty wherein they beheld him.

If the question should be, whether a person be alive; his own appearing in
Court would be the best testimony that could be given of it. If whether such a
one be a King, his sitting upon his Throne with his Crown on his head, in his
royal Palace, and his Ministers round about him, would be the surest evidence
that could be desired to put it out of doubt. In this case therefore where the
question is, whether Jesus be the Son of God or no; there cannot be expected a
better resolution of it, than his own witness to himself, by appearing upon the
Throne of his Glory. There several persons of unblemished credit beheld him,
and had the confidence to venture their lives upon the certain knowledge they
had that they were not deceived. From thence he spoke to them, and directed
them to speak and carry his messages to others, that they might believe on the
Name of the Son of God. And let it but be remembered (which I noted at the
beginning) that we are now examining those witnesses which speak from Heaven,
and not those which speak on the Earth; and then you will soon discern that
these testimonies of the WORD, though concerning himself, ought to be received
with great reverence, and to be judged very full and powerful to prove Jesus to
be the Son of God. Especially, since besides his own word for it, we have also
the word of the Father, who several times called him his Son, and that before
he took this honor to himself.

A PRAYER.
LET all mankind therefore honor thee, O blessed Jesus, even as they honor
the Father! Be thou adored every where upon Earth, with the same reverence and
love, wherewith all the Angels in Heaven worship thee! whom they and we
acknowledge to be the LORD; the WORD of God; the Wisdom of the Father; the
bright morning Star; the Light of the World; the Prince of Life; the Heir of
all things; the KING OF KINGS, AND THE LORD OF LORDS; God blessed for ever.

Thou art the King of glory, O Christ. Thou art the everlasting Son of the
Father. The Beginner and the Finisher of our Faith; the Judge of the World; the
Author of Eternal Salvation unto all them that obey thee. O how happy are they
that know thee, and steadfastly believe in thee, and sincerely love thee, and
heartily obey thee, and have a good hope that thou will bless them, and employ
thy power for their promotion to that glory wherein thou reignest! I rejoice to
hear thee say, that thou who wast dead art alive for evermore, Amen: and have
the keys of Hell and of Death. I thank thee for appearing so often, to assure
our Souls, that thou sit at the right hand of God, and have all power in
Heaven and in Earth. Great is the consolation which thou have given us, by the
sight of that Glory, wherein thy first Martyr beheld thee, ready to succor all
thy faithful servants. Mavelous was thy work, O Lord, for which all thy
Church will for ever praise thee, in calling S. Paul to be an Apostle,
separated unto the Gospel of God. Adored be thy glorious Majesty, which
appeared to him for this purpose, to make him a Minister and a Witness of what
he saw and heard, that he might go and open the eyes of the Gentiles, to turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; that they
might receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are
sanctified by faith that is in thee. O how full of comfort is that Revelation
which thou have made of thy self to thy servant John! Who received the
brightest discoveries of thy glory in Heaven, when he was in the most desolate
condition upon Earth! who beheld thy care over thy Church, and thy conquests
over thine enemies: thy Priestly and thy Royal power, to the perpetual joy of
those that love thee, and the terror of all those that oppose thee.

O blessed Jesus, far be it from any of us in the least to contradict thy will:
who art so highly advanced far above all principality and power, and every name
that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come. May
every Christian Soul be so sensibly affected with the belief of thy Glory, as
to prostrate it self before thee, and say with the same spirit that thy blessed
Apostle S. Paul did when thou appearedst unto him, Lord, what will thou have me
to do? May that ardent love burn in every one of our breasts, toward thee and
toward one another, which was in thy beloved Disciple, who bare record of
thee, and testified to us these things! And may none of us prove so false and
unkind, as to leave our first love; but our work, and charity, and service, and
faith, and patience may be ever commended by thee, and the last be more than
the first!

Then shall we be able with a cheerful countenance to look up unto thee, and to
think of thy majesty and glory with exultation and triumph, and not with terror
and amazement of spirit. We will joy in thy strength, O Lord, and in thy
salvation how greatly shall we rejoice! We will rejoice even in the midst of
tribulation; and though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, we
will fear no evil: but steadfastly looking up unto Heaven, call upon thee, O
Lord Jesus, and beseech thee to receive our Spirit. Into thy hands be they
recommended both now and ever, with most earnest desires and hope, that thou will help thy servants, whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood, and
make them to be numbered with thy Saints in glory everlasting. Amen.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Testimony of the HOLY GHOST.
WE have heard the WORD speak enough in his own behalf; and I do not think it
needful to hear that Witness any further. Let us attend now to the Testimony of
the third person in the holy Trinity, and hear what the HOLY GHOST says; who
we shall find, upon due examination, agrees perfectly in the same thing, and
declares that Jesus is the Son of God. Witness that glorious appearance of the
Divine Spirit upon him when he was baptized, and the great gifts and endowments
thereof, wherewith ever after that he was filled himself and filled others. For
here we may note three things, as we did in the opening of the testimony of the
other two Witnesses.

I.
The first is that when the Spirit of God descended upon him, immediately after
his Baptism, and in an illustrious manner remained on him (as S. John Baptist
testifies it did, i. John 32, 33.) then the Holy Ghost bare witness of him,
that he was the Son of God. In our reflections upon which, we are to consider
distinctly first how it descended, and then that it remained and abode upon him.

And for the better understanding of both these we must know, that when the
Jews would express any visible appearance of the Majesty and glory of God, they
call it the SCHEKINAH, that is, the Habitation or dwelling; because God showed
himself thereby to be extraordinarily present, and that he did, as it were,
dwell in that place, to afford those, to whom he so manifested himself, his
gracious help, comfort, or instruction. This is the name they give even to that
Presence of God which was in the most holy place [the Glory of the Lord which
appeared upon the Cherubims] because He dwelt there, and took up his rest among
them, by this token of his presence with them. So He himself had spoken, xxv.
Exodus 8. Let them make me a Sanctuary, that I may DWELL among them. That is,
the Glory of the Lord, which ABODE upon mount Sinai (xxiv. 16.) came and took
up its residence there in the Sanctuary. From these two places, they gave it
the name of dwelling or abode. And tell us, that from the day that this
Schekinah, as they speak, or Divine presence dwelling among them, rested on
mount Sinai at the giving of the Law; it never departed from Israel, till the
destruction of the house of the first Sanctuary by the King of Babylon: after
that the Divinity or this glorious token of the Divine presence did not dwell
among them. They are the words of R. Bechai upon Genesis xlv.

But that which had been so long absent, returned now in a far more glorious
manner than ever: not to dwell in an house of stone; but in the Temple of our
Saviors body, as he calls, ii. John 21. For when Jesus was baptized, Lo, the
Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a
Dove, and lighting upon him, iii. Matthew. 16. Every word of this verse is very
observable. For the opening of the Heavens in the prophetical writings (as
Grotius has observed upon xix. Revel. 11.) still precedes some great Vision.
And that which he with John Baptist now saw, was the Spirit of God; that is,
such a glorious appearance of the Divine majesty, as I before mentioned. For
the Rabbis often call the Ruach Hakkodesh, or the HOLY GHOST by the name of
Schekinah, or the Divine presence, gloriously appearing among them. So Elias
expressly tells us in his Tisbi Vocab. (...)
, and gives this reason for it, because it rested or dwelt upon the Prophets,
and was a great token (I may add) of God's presence with them. Whence it is,
that where the Hebrew Text (as he goes on) says, The spirit of Jacob revived,
xlv. Genesis 27. R. Solomon expounds it thus, the Schekinah, or the HOLY GHOST
rested on him; which was departed, and, as it were, extinct before, because of
the grief and sorrow wherein he had been drowned. For the Holy Ghost, say they,
rests not upon the melancholy, but only on those who are of a cheerful spirit.
Thus when Hannah said to Eli, who fancied she was drunk, No, my Lord, I am a
woman of a sorrowful spirit; the Talmud expounds it in this manner, Thou art
not to govern in this case, the Schekinah and the Holy Ghost is not upon thee,
as appears by this, that thou have judged me guilty when I am innocent.

It is all one then in their Language (as I observed also before, in the
conclusion of the second Chapter) to say that the Divine Majesty, or that the
Holy Ghost is upon any person. And therefore I doubt not but there was a
glorious appearance of the Majesty of God at our Saviors Baptism; some great
unusual brightness, signifying the Divine presence and the Spirit of God coming
to dwell in him. It is not indeed mentioned in express words, that there was
such a Schekinah or Majestical appearance of the Glory of the Lord; but it must
be understood to be meant by the (...), Spirit of God. According to the dialect
of that Nation, who call the Holy Ghost, as I said, by the name of the Divine
Majesty or Presence; and so might call that Majesty, by the name of the Holy
Ghost or spirit of God. And Justin Martyr says expressly, in his disputation
with the Jew, that at our Saviors Baptism, (...), A fire was lighted in
Jordan. That is, as I understand it, such a Divine glory appeared as there was
among the ancient Israelites, which had, I told you, the resemblance of a very
bright fire. Which so good a man would not have had the boldness to affirm, if
it had not been the constant tradition which passed among them; or rather the
constant sense they put upon this place. Just as when the Apostles were
baptized with the Holy Ghost, a fiery substance gathered it self about their
heads, in token of a Divine presence among them; so when our Lord himself was
baptized with water, there was the like but far more glorious appearance: which
spreading it self from his head round about, made the River out of which he was
newly come, look as if it were on a flame, as a sign that he should baptize,
not with water, but with the Holy Ghost and with fire. And so Grotius has
observed, that in the Gospel of the Nazarens, there were these words, (...),
straightway a great light shone round about the place: which the Syrian
Churches also acknowledge in their Liturgy. All which make it apparent, that
Holy men thus understood the descent of the Holy Ghost, as I have explained it.
And indeed S. Luke tells us, iii. 22. that it descended, (...), in a bodily
form or appearance. There was some visible matter broke out of the Heavens,
which being the place of light and glory, we can expound to be nothing else but
some very splendid body, a bright shining Light, formed by the Spirit of God,
which came down from above, just as a Dove with wings spread is observed to do,
and lighted upon our Saviors head.

These three last phrases are remarkable. For when the Evangelists say it came
down, they speak in the constant style of the holy language concerning the
appearance of the Majesty of God, xix. Exodus 11, 20. Of whom, as Maimonides
adds, the Scripture speaks in the same manner, when it describes his bestowing
any gifts, or vouchlasing any special token of his favor upon men. For we Mors
Novoch. Part. 1. Cap. 10.
being in a low condition in respect of him, who is the most high, not in
respect of place, but of his essence, majesty and power; whenever He is
pleased to give wisdom to any one, or to pour down the gift of prophecy upon
him, that abode of the spirit of prophecy, or the habitation of the majesty and
presence of God in any place is called his COMING DOWN; and the taking away of
prophecy, or the recession of the Divine majesty, is called his GOING UP: For
which he cites xi. Numb. 17. xxxv. Genesis 13. In this language the Holy writers
of the New Testament here speak: who knew very well that the Divine Spirit is
every where, and does not move from place to place; but say it came down,
because there was an outward visible appearance of a great glory, which indeed
descended from above, and declared him, on whom such a majesty dwelt, to be
filled with the gifts of wisdom and prophecy, and all other powers of the Holy
Ghost. And in the same manner they express the unexpected communication of
Divine gifts to the Gentiles, on whom the Holy Ghost fell or came down, as they
heard the word, x. Acts 45. xi. 15. That is, there was a sensible token of the
Divine presence among them, though no visible majesty descended; for they heard
them speak with tongues and magnify God.

But here, there were both all the gifts of the Holy Ghost bestowed, and also
such a visible glorious Majesty, as there was at the giving of the Law: which
not only came down, but light upon our Savior, as that glory did on the top of
mount Sinai, xix. Exodus 18, 20. This was a thing, as you shall hear, which was
never known before, that the glory of the Lord should come and rest upon any
person. It could denote him to be no less than the Holy one of God: From whom,
as from Gods most holy place, he would hereafter communicate all his blessings
to men.

And the more fully to express this, it is very observable, that the glory
which now appeared came down as a Dove does: which is the very manner wherein
R. Solomon describes the descent of the Divine majesty in former times. The
Throne of God (says he, upon those words, i. Genesis 2. The Spirit of God moved,
etc.) stood in the air, and hovered over the face of the waters, by the Spirit
of his mouth who is most blessed, and by his Word, just AS A DOVE stretches her
wings over her Nest. For it is not certain whether this glorious appearance had
the form of a Dove, or only descended in the same manner as a Dove does, when
it came upon our Savior, and encircled his head.

But that there was such a glorious Majesty appeared and lighted on him, ought
not to seem incredible to any man that believes the Holy Books of the Old
Testament; as Origin Lib. 1.
shows against Celsus, who foolishly brings in a Jew speaking against this
apparition. If he had made an Epicuraean, says He, deride this report, there
had been some congruity in it: but it is ridiculous to pin such words upon a
Jew, who believes things altogether as strange, nay, far more wonderful. To
pass by what we read that God said to Adam, Noah, Abraham and others, what does
he think concerning Ezekiel? who says that the Heavens were opened, and he saw
Visions of God, i. 1. and ver. 28. That this was the appearance of the likeness
of the glory of the Lord. And the same Isaiah reports concerning himself, I saw
the Lord sitting upon a Throne, etc. vi. 1. Which of these are more to be
credited; Ezekiel who says the Heavens were opened, etc. and Isaiah, who writes
that he saw the Lord, etc. or Jesus, who says that the Heavens were opened to
him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon
him? This is enough to stop the mouth of any Jew, especially since the power of
Jesus (as Origin proceeds) not only then when he was on earth far excelled
theirs: but still remains now that he is in Heaven, for the conversion and
betterment of those, who by him believe in God.

And as for others, He tells Celsus, that all those who admit Providence,
confess that God has sometimes forewarned men in their sleep, of things which
much concerned their safety. And therefore it is no such strange thing, if that
power which figures the mind in a dream, should impress the same or the like
form upon it, when a man is awake: and represent things as sensibly to him, as
if he saw them with his eyes and heard them with his ears. And why that should
not be as really seen, if God please, which is represented to a man in his
imagination; no body can give any reason.

As for that which Celsus objects, that the Gospel never tells us, our Savior
was wont to mention this and appeal to it, in his preaching to the people; He
tells him that he did not mind how unseemly it was for our Savior to divulge
himself what was seen and heard at Jordan, who forbad his Disciples to publish
that which they beheld and heard on the holy Mount. There was a fit time for
the open proclaiming of both, by others, not by himself. For the manners of our
Savior were far from that (...), vain ostentation and much talk of himself,
which such a man as Celsus might be guilty of. He chose by his works, rather
than by his words, to tell them that he was the Christ. Which made the Jews
say, How long do thou hold us in suspense? If thou be the Christ, tell us
plainly, x. John 24. So he did, but it was by that which was more convincing
than his testimony of himself could then be. I told you and ye believed not:
the works that I do in my Fathers name, they bear witness of me, ver. 25. That
one work which he had wrought just before, was so miraculous, that the like had
not been heard of since the world began, ix. 32. For he had opened the eyes of
a man who was born blind; as they themselves could not deny; for the man's
Parents testified that he could never see till now; and he affirmed it was
Jesus who had given him his sight. If they had not been blinder than He, this
might have opened their eyes to see who our Savior was without any further
telling. For what could He say of himself more than this Miracle spoke: which
others reported, not He? It told them loudly enough, would they have heard,
that he had the power of God in him; one of whose prerogatives it is (cxlvi.
Psalm. 8.) to open the eyes of the blind. And John Baptist also had told them
plainly, that he saw the Spirit descending from Heaven, like a Dove, and it
abode upon him, i. 32. Here was an unexceptionable witness of the truth of this
story, which John presently published. And they had reason to believe him,
because he that authorized him to administer that Baptism, which they received,
gave him this for a sign whereby he should know the Christ when he saw him;
Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, the same
is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bare record, that
this is the Son of God, ver. 33, 34.

He could be no less, on whom such a Divine Glory, not only descended, but also
remained and took up its abode with him. That Is the last thing to be
considered, and the chiefest of all. He had not a mere glance of this visible
Majesty, which did not make a transient appearance: but he saw it remaining on
him. It staid for some time there, as if it intended to make him its habitation
and dwelling place. And so it did; for as He saw the visible Divine majesty or
glory remaining on him then; so the thing signified by it continued always; and
made all see, if they would attend, that he was the Sanctuary or most holy
Place, in which God was, and had taken up his residence for ever. The body of
Jesus, as I said before, is now become the Temple of God; not made by man, but
by God himself in the Virgins womb. There God manifested himself perpetually by
sensible effects, as I shall show you presently; declaring Jesus to be his Son,
in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily.

After this visible Majesty disappeared, the presence of God within him was
very apparent. For he came away from Jordan, says S. Luke, full of the Holy
Ghost, iv. 1. And having been tempted a while in the wilderness, he returned
from thence, in the power of the Spirit into Galilee, ver. 14. There he taught
in his own City, and opened the Book at that very place of Isaiah, where he
said, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me: which Scripture was that day fulfilled
in their ears, ver. 18, 21. And at Cana, in that Country he began to work
miracles, and manifested forth his glory, ii. John 11. That is showed indeed
that the Divine Majesty spoken of before, remained in him. Of which glory they
did not see so little as a flash or two, but they beheld his glory, the glory
as of the only begotten of the Father, i. 14. He cast about every where such
rays of glory and majesty as declared him to be no less person than God's only
begotten Son: and these they beheld, and were constant eyewitnesses of, to the
end of his life. For he went about doing good, and healing all that were
oppressed of the Devil; for God was with him, x. Acts 38. This was all his
business, to bestow benefits upon mankind, and to relieve those who were
otherways helpless, but only by a Divine power. As was notorious in his
frequent dispossession of Devils, and opening the eyes of him who was blind
from his birth; and after that, raising Lazarus from the dead, in which great
work they saw the glory of God, xi. John 40. Who did not give the Spirit by
measure to him; that is, with such restriction as he himself gave it to his
Apostles at the first: But the Father loves the Son, and has given all things
into his hands, as the Baptist speaks, iii. Joh. 34, 35. It pleased the Father,
that in him should all fullness dwell, i. Coloss. 19. So that none could have
any thing of the Spirit, but from his hands, and he could communicate what he
pleased. Which is a sign that he was the place, where the Divine majesty and
the Holy Spirit now dwelt, and had taken up its residence among men; who must
all repair to him, if they would receive the Holy Ghost, or any blessing from
above.

What greater argument could there be, that he was the Son of God, than this,
that he had all things now put into his hands, to do what he pleased on Earth:
and received the Holy Ghost in such a visible Majesty, as a pledge that he
should shortly have all power in Heaven too, at the right hand of God? It was
fit that this glorious testimony of the Holy Ghost to him should be accompanied
with the voice of God, which came out of that or the like cloud, saying, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. So we shall have still farther
reasons to acknowledge him, if we do but make these following Reflections upon
what has been here discoursed.

One is, that here was not so little as the appearance of an Angel to him, by
whom God declared his will to the Prophets: but a far more illustrious
manifestation of the Divine Glory, which came down upon him and declared him
more than a Prophet. Maimonides doubts not to say More Nevoch. Part. 3. cap. 45.
that all Prophecy was by the mediation of Angels, xvi. Genesis 9. xxii. 15. Moses
himself began to be a Prophet by this means, iii. Exodus 2. The Angel of the
Lord appeared to him, in a flame of fire in the Bush. For which cause, he
thinks, God afterward appointed two Cherubims to cover the Ark, that the people
might be bred up in the belief of Angels. And God is said to dwell between
them, and to ride upon them; because all Prophecy was carried by them from God
to men. But here is something far beyond this way of communication between God
and Men. For not an Angel appeared or spoke unto him: But that Divine Glory
which dwelt between the Cherubims, descends upon him and makes him its resting
place; and God himself speaks to him at the same time out of that Glory,
calling him his Son, and bidding all hear him. This was a manifest declaration
of his high and singular prerogative; and a sign that no less than the fullness
of the Godhead dwelt in him: So that he knew, as I said before, the mind of
God, not by Visions and Dreams, or by mediation of Angels, but by a more
intimate familiarity with God, dwelling and residing in him.

For you may observe further (which is another thing very remarkable) that
though there had been formerly an appearance of a Schekinah, of the Divine
presence, that is, or glory of God, when the gifts of the Holy Ghost were
imparted to some persons: Yet we never read that this Schekinah came down upon
any man, much less that it remained on him, but upon Jesus only. When the LXX.
Elders were to receive a portion of Moses his Spirit, God ordered them to be
brought unto the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and says, he would come down
and talk with Moses there, and take of the Spirit which was upon him, and put
it upon them, xi. Numb. 16, 17. Accordingly you read ( ver. 24.) that as they
stood round about the Tabernacle, the Lord came down in a cloud ( ver. 25.)
that is, in such a manner as now the Holy Ghost descended at our Lord's
Baptism: But He came not down upon them, who were about the Tabernacle; but
rather (as in the next story, xii. 5. and at other times) stood in the door of
the Tabernacle; from whence he spoke to Moses and took of the Spirit which was
on him, and gave it to the seventy Elders. Whereas here the Holy Ghost came
down in a visible glory, and pitched upon Jesus himself: who was the Tabernacle
now, where God chose to dwell. For this Schekinah, as you have heard, or Divine
majesty, not only lighted on him, but rested there and remained in him: as if
God had told him who saw it both descend and abide on him; Here will I dwell
for ever, for therein do I delight. This demonstrated him to be more than any
ever was; not merely a great Prophet, but the very Son of God. Never was there
such a Crown prepared for any man's head, but his. Never before did the hand of
Heaven put such a Diadem of Glory upon any person, as this which encircled,
and, as I may say, was bound about our Savior. This can be accounted nothing
less than the testimony of the HOLY GHOST to him; that he was the Holy one of
God, the anointed from above, the King of God's people, and the heir of all
things.

Thus S. Peter you know expresses the honor which was now done him, when he
tells Cornelius and his company, x. Acts 38. that God ANOINTED him with the
Holy Ghost, and with power. The HOLY GHOST came down as an holy oil from the
Heavenly Sanctuary, which being poured on him, in such a glorious Majesty, gave
him authority to be called the Son of God, and made him his King. So John
Baptist acknowledged him, you remember, as soon as he beheld this strange
sight, and bare record of it unto others, that this person (thus anointed) was
the Son of God, i. John 34. He was now invested with a royal power (for that is
the meaning of his being ANOINTED) and we ought, I shall show you, to look upon
this as a solemn inauguration of him in his Kingdom: to which he had now a
title given him, together with some part of a Kingly Authority. And if there be
any truth in the Traditions of the Hebrews concerning their own Ceremonies,
there was something remarkable in it that this ANOINTING him with the holy oil
from above, was immediately after he came up out of the waters of Jordan. For
Maimonides and the Doctors in the Talmud tell us, that they never anointed a
King of the house of David, but at the side of a Fountain, or of a River of
water. Which was the reason that David commanded his servants, to bring his son
Solomon down to GIHON, 1 Kings i. 33. and there anoint him King over Israel.
For this GIHON was a little River, as R. Solomon there notes, or the head of a
River nigh Jerusalem, which discharged it self into the brook Kidron, and in
the Chaldee Paraphrase is called by the newer name of Siloah. It was made very
famous afterward by that memorable work of Hezekiah (2 Chronicles. xxxii. 30.) who
to take away the advantage any Enemy might make of it in a siege, stopped up the
course of its water, and brought it by Channels underground into the City of
David. At this place without the walls of Jerusalem, not in the City, Zadok and
Nathan anointed King Solomon. That is, one of them poured out the oil, and the
other anointed his head; drawing a circle with the oil upon it. For so they all
say, that Kings were anointed in the form of a Crown, to denote the royal
dignity. Which if it be true, and that they made choice of such a place to show
(as they will have it) the perpetuity of their Kingdom; because Rivers run
always, though the Cities which stand by them decay and may be demolished: then
it is very observable that our Lord was ANOINTED or Crowned with the Holy Ghost
by the River JORDAN, rather than in any other place, to denote him indeed to be
the King of Israel, who should sit upon the throne of his Father David, as the
Angel said, for ever and ever.

But this I mention only by the way. The chief thing to be noted is, that now
he began to reign, and entered upon his Kingdom, called the Kingdom of God, and
the Kingdom of Heaven: which John Baptist told them was at hand. For this
descent of the HOLY GHOST in such a visible majesty did not merely give him a
title to the Divine Kingdom which was to be erected by him in the world; and
assured him that he was God's Christ, or ANOINTED, that is, his King; and
endued him with such royal qualities, as fitted him for that office: But it
made him a King by conferring several branches of the Regal power on him, and
by giving him authority to exercise them in the world. It is true indeed, he
did not actually take possession of his Kingdom, nor exercise his royal power
completely, and the time of his inthroning was deferred, till he had
accomplished the will of God other ways, and by the suffering of death was
crowned with glory and honor in the Heavens. But that he did not act only as a
Prophet all his lifetime, but likewise took upon him the person of a King (or
acted as a Royal Prophet) doing many things which only the royal Authority
could do, is a most manifest Truth in the Holy story.

Which cannot be better explained than by the parallel case of his Father
David, who was the exact type and figure of him. He was anointed by Samuel some
years before he sat upon the throne of the Lord. But as that Unction was the
designation of him to the royal dignity, and a pawn or pledge of the possession
of it in due time: so ever after he achieved very great things which spoke him
to be the person designed by God for his Kingdom (as it is called, I told you,
2 Chronicles. ix. 8.) and he also received some portion of it, before he enjoyed it
all entirely, 2 Samuel ii. 4.9. v. 3. Just thus did our blessed Savior, after he
was ANOINTED with the Holy Ghost, give several proofs that he was a King (which
is the meaning, you have heard, of the word CHRIST) and had received some of
the power belonging to that high office. For first he cast out Devils and cured
all diseases, at any time, when he pleased, only with his powerful word, and
for nothing. Which were Acts of such royal bounty, that he had reason to say,
xi. Luke 20. If I by the finger of God cast out Devils, no doubt the KINGDOM of
God is come upon you. And secondly, over and above this, he forgave men's sins,
and remitted their offenses, by releasing many from the punishment of them (v.
Luke 20.) which every one knows is a power wherewith only Kings and Sovereign
Princes are invested. And thirdly, He raised a man from the dead, and released
him even from the prison of the grave. Which certainly was the act of a King;
and of that King who had power over all flesh. So Martha her self understood
it, when she makes it all one, to raise the dead, and to be that King whom God
promised to send them. For when our Savior says to her, I am the resurrection
and the life, etc. believe thou this? Her answer follows in these terms, Yea,
Lord, I believe that thou art the CHRIST the Son of God which should come into
the world, xi. John 27. And lastly, the very preaching the mind of God, and
publishing the Gospel of the Kingdom, with such authority as he did, was the
part of a King. For so he interprets the word Kingdom, when he stood before
Pilate, xviii. John 37. Where you may learn, that all this is not the mere
collection of reason, from the observations we make as we read the Holy story;
but that which our Lord himself affirms in express words, when he was examined
by Pilate upon this very point. For our Lord seeming to grant that he had a
Kingdom, though not of this world, but Heavenly, ver. 36. the Governor asks
him again, Art thou a KING then? To which he answers him roundly, Thou say
that I am a KING, i.e. yes, I am; it is as thou say. So the rest of the
Evangelists report his Answer; Thou say it, xxvii. Matthew. 11. xv. Mark 2.
xxiii. Luke 3. which is as much, in their Language, as to say, it is so; thou
have said right, I am a King. This is that GOOD CONFESSION which he witnessed
before Pontius Pilate, which the Apostle propounds to Timothy's imitation, 1 Timothy vi. 13. He now openly owned, with the danger of his life, that, as mean as
he appeared at present, he was appointed by God to be his Vicegerent, the King
of the world: which he had manifested by several acts of Kingly power ever
since he was anointed with the Holy Ghost.

And he had said the same before, when he was brought to answer for himself in
the chief Council of the Jews. Where the High Priest asked him, and said unto
him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed? And Jesus said, I am, xiv.
Mark 61, 62. Which words [ I am] are the plain interpretation of the other
phrases in the rest of the Evangelists, Thou have said, xxvi. Matthew. 64. and,
ye say that I am, xxii. Luke 70. where you read, ver. 71. that hearing this
confession, they forbear to produce any more witnesses, and condemned him out
of his own mouth. That is, they passed the sentence of death upon him, as a
counterfeit (so they pretended) of that royal Prophet, whom they expected to
come into the world. Under this character they delivered him to Pilate, hoping
that he would likewise condemn him for Treason against Caesar: whose authority
they would have him believe our Savior subverted, by saying, He himself was
CHRIST a King, xxiii. Luke 2. So the whole multitude of his Disciples had a
little before proclaimed him (though not such a King as would do Caesar any
harm) when they met him at the foot of the Mount of Olives, and with great joy
praised God for all the mighty works they had seen, saying, Blessed be the KING
that comes in the name of the Lord: peace in Heaven, and glory in the highest;
that is, let Heaven prosper his Kingdom, till it be made most glorious, xix.
Luke 38.

There needs no more be said to show, that he was made a King, by this Unction
of the Holy Ghost; though the full possession of his Kingdom and exercise of
his whole royal power he did not attain, till he was advanced to his Throne of
glory in the Heavens; when he received from the Father the promise of the Holy
Ghost to bestow upon others (ii. Acts 33.) and poured it down as an holy Oil on
their heads, to create them Ministers in his Kingdom.

That was a further witness to our Savior, as I should now proceed to show
you; but that it may be fit, before I part with this, to take notice, that this
testimony which the HOLY GHOST now gave to him, when it anointed him at his
Baptism, was so remarkable, that Mahomet has not forgot to leave a remembrance
of it in his Alcoran. Where he brings in God speaking after this manner; Vid.
Seld. de Synedr. Lib. 2. C. 4. n. 4.
We have already sent a Book (i. e. the Law) to Moses, and afterward we sent
the Prophets; and to Jesus the Son of Mary we have sent most known (or eminent)
virtues, and we gave him a TESTIMONY, and strengthened him with the HOLY GHOST.
In which words, a great Paraphrast of theirs upon the Alcoran, by known virtues
or powers given to our Savior, understands the gift of working miracles; as
opening the eyes of the blind, cleansing lepers and raising the dead. Though by
the Holy Ghost, they generally understand no more than the Angel Gabriel, who
for the manifestation of him (as that Paraphrast speaks) was sent a-long with
him, as his companion, whithersoever he went. Which notion, I imagine, they
drew out of the Jewish writers, who say that such glorious apparitions, as that
at Christ's baptism, were made by the ministry of Angels, who were the Chariot
of God, in which he was said to come down to men.

But whatsoever Mahomets meaning was, when he says God strengthened him with
the Holy Ghost, it is an open acknowledgment of that which the Divine writers
have recorded; which was so famous and notorious, that Infidels could not deny
it. Nay, some of that false Prophets followers have said expressly, that the
Holy Ghost is no Creature, Vid. Ib. page 127.
but has a singular production proper to it self. For it is not a spirit after
the manner of other spirits, because it is the spirit of God. The spirit of a
Man is a Creature, but the spirit of God is not. It was more than an Angelical
presence then that was in our Savior: of whose birth indeed the Angel Gabriel
brought the news to his Mother, but he did not pretend that she should conceive
by his power; no, he says expressly, The HOLY GHOST shall come upon thee, and
the power of the highest shall overshaddow thee. And therefore at his
new birth, as I may call it, to the office of a King, it was the very same
power of the highest, which in a visible manner then overshaddowed him and
remained on him; to testify that he was as the Angel said, the Son of God. To
conclude this; the Angelical Salutation to the blessed Virgin, is after this
manner recited in the Alcoran, in the next Chapter to that before named. O
Mary, God sends thee a good Messenger, by his WORD which is out of himself. His
Name is Messiah, or Jesus Christ the Son of Mary, powerful in this present
World, and in the World to come. Where the forenamed Paraphrast says, he was
powerful in the present World by Prophecy, and in the World to come, by
Intercession, and Celestial preparation. He should have added also, what he
said before, that he was powerful here by that which is properly called power,
the healing Diseases, opening blind Men's eyes, and such like works of wonders:
the Divine Majesty resting on him and abiding in him, in so glorious a manner,
that he might properly be called the Temple of God.

For whatsoever demonstrations there were of Gods presence in the Tabernacle of
Moses, or in the Temple of Solomon (which were alike filled with the glory of
the Lord, xl. Exodus 34, 35. 2 Chronicles. v. 13, 14.) the very same tokens there
were of his presence in our Savior. Nay, it is easy to show that he
manifested himself, in all his glorious Attributes, more in our Saviors
Person, than ever he did in either of those places. And it will be such an
evident demonstration of the truth I am asserting, and give such light to this
testimony of the Holy Ghost, who appeared in that excellent Majesty which
descended on him; that I think it will be worth my pains to make good the
Parallel in some instances.

I. And first you may observe that from the holy place in the Tabernacle, God
declared his mind and will; and made known to his People what he would have
done. There God told Moses, he would meet and commune with him, of all things
which he would give him in commandment to the Children of Israel, xxv. Exodus
22. And we are told the manner of it, vii. Number. 89. When he was gone into the
Tabernacle, he heard the voice of one speaking to him from off the Mercy seat,
that was upon the Ark, from between the two Cherubims. From thence God gave out
to Moses his (...) (as the Apostle calls them, iii. Romans 2.) Oracles, or such
words of direction and command, as were necessary for the good Government and
preservation of his People: whose Laws, Statutes and Judgments, came from the
holy Oracle in the Sanctuary of God. This was a mavelous favor of Heaven to
them; though nothing comparable to the manifestation of the wisdom and counsel
and will of God by our blessed Savior. Who not only revealed his Mind more
clearly and abundantly; thereby showing he is the Temple of God: but told us
such things as never came from the former holy place; things which eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither did they enter into the heart of man to conceive.
He was the (...), or WORD of GOD, in this sense as well as any other; because
he acquaints us with Gods mind, and declares to all Mankind his sacred will;
and, as from an holy Oracle, utters things secret from the foundation of the
World. For the Word was made Flesh and dwelt among us, full of grace and truth,
i. Joh. 14. The word full relates to (...) the WORD, in the beginning of the
Verse (the other part of the Verse being inserted between in a Parenthesis) and
carries this sense in it, that Jesus being fully acquainted with all the
gracious counsels of God concerning Men, has declared them to us, and made us
also acquainted with them. He was so full of truth that he calls himself (...)
the truth it self, xiv. Joh. 6. No man has seen God at any time; the only
begotten Son, he has declared him, i. 18. That is, he has made God visible to
us: he as an (...), expounder or interpreter of another mind, has opened to
us all his secrets concerning our Salvation; and thereby declared that he is no
less than the Wisdom of God. When he appeared in the World, then Wisdom built
her self an house, as Solomon speaks, ix. Prove. 1. Which words Orat. 3. contra
Arrian.
Athanasius not unfitly accommodates to our Lord Christ, Whose body is the
house of Wisdom. And a most holy house, the dwelling place of God; from whence
he has revealed himself not to so few as one Nation, but to all the World:
whom, if they would open their eyes, he has illuminated with his Wisdom.

R. Bechai I remember will have the Ark from whence Moses heard God speaking to
him, to be called in their Language by the name of (...), from (...); as much
as to say, because of the light which was there. Which he will have to be the
Law (preserved in the Ark) which was the Light of Israel. And just thus writes
S. John concerning this WORD of God, 1.4. In him was life, and the life was the
light of men. That was the true light, which lights every man that comes
into the World, v. 9. For so Jesus proclaimed himself, saying, viii. 12. I am
the LIGHT of the World. And such a Light he was, that all the wisdom which was
discovered before from the Sanctuary of God; was but Clouds and darkness, in
compare with that which was made manifest by our Savior. The best knowledge
they had was covered and wrapped up in types and figures, till God appeared in
Jesus, and rent those clouds in pieces, by the brightness of his beams. They
had but such a confused apprehension of things in former times, that S. Paul
compares this discovery of God in Christ, to the breaking forth of light, out
of the rude Chaos, in the beginning of the world, 2 Corinthians. iv. 6. For God who
commanded light to shine out of darkness (i. Genesis 2, 3.) has shined in our
hearts (the hearts of the Apostles) to give the light of the knowledge of the
GLORY OF GOD, in the face of Jesus Christ. Some flashes of which light and
majesty of God in him, came from his face; not long after he entered into the
World. When he was but a Child, they wondered at his wisdom; and were
astonished at his understanding and answers, ii. Luke 47. But when he was grown
up and the Holy Ghost came down from Heaven upon him, like the Glory of the
Lord which filled the Tabernacle and Temple; then his Wisdom appeared the more
illustriously. And was the more amazing; because they knew he was not trained
up in the Schools of Learning, nor had any better breeding than a Carpenter's
shop could give him. For so his Countrymen say, in S. Mark, vi. 2, 3. Is not
this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary? How comes he by these things? and what
wisdom is this which is given unto him? They were astonished at his Doctrine,
and as S. Luke tells us, iv. 22. Wondered at the gracious words which proceeded
out of his mouth. For besides the Divinity of the matter which he spoke, and
the mighty works which accompanied it; there was a certain majesty in the
manner of its delivery. For he taught as one having authority, vii. Matthew. 29.
That is, as one who had power to enact and ordain new Laws (and those much
superior to the old) and not only to explain those which were already written.
He plainly also discovered a power to reward the faithful and to punish the
disobedient; which was so astonishing, that in the judgment even of those who
were sent to apprehend him, Never man spoke like unto him, vii. Joh. 46. He
opened to them the Kingdom of Heaven; he revealed to them Immortal Life; he
gave them Manna, of which if a Man did eat, he assured them he should never
dye: and he promised (which is the thing they chiefly refer to in that speech)
that Whosoever believed in him, out of his belly should flow rivers of living
water; which he spoke concerning the spirit, which they that believed on him
should receive, v. 38, 39. When this promise was fulfilled, then that which
Moses did but wish for, was actually done, All the Lords people became
Prophets. He made the gifts of Prophecy, and wisdom, and knowledge, as common
as ordinary discourse was before. Which showed that indeed God dwelt in him;
else he could not have had all this wisdom, much less communicated so much to
others.

II. But it will not be fit to prosecute these things too largely; therefore
let us pass to the consideration of the mighty power of God manifested from the
place where he was said to dwell; which was an evidence that he was there. And
this you shall see appeared no less in our Savior, as a token that God dwelt
in him, and that he was become his Temple. All their help you know of old is
said to come from the Sanctuary, where God inhabitated, and he is said to
strengthen them out of Sion, xx. Psalm. 2. Thence the Ark, upon the Cover of
which the Divine Glory sat, is called The Ark of his strength, cxxxii. Psalm.
8. Nay, it is often called simply by the name of his strength, Psalm. lxix. 61.
He delivered his STRENGTH into captivity, and his Glory into the Enemies hand.
And Psalm. cv. 4. Seek the Lord and his STRENGTH; that is, the Lord before the
Ark of his presence, from whence their help and succor came. For whether this
went, God was said to go along with them to deliver them. As the Philistines
themselves had learnt; who hearing the Israelites had brought the Ark into the
Field, began to be afraid and said, GOD is come into the Camp. Woe be to us: for
there has not been such a thing heretofore, 1 Samuel iv. 7, 8. That is, we
fought with Men hitherto, now with God. And this is the meaning of those words,
lxxx. Psalm. 2. Before Ephraim, Benjamin and Manasseh, stir up thy STRENGTH, and
come and save us. Those three Tribes marching immediately after the Ark (for
their quarter was on the West of the Tabernacle, in which part was the most
holy place, and the Ark in it, ii. Numb. 17, 18, etc.) it is as much as if he
had said, make thy self sensibly present now to thy People; manifest thy favor
toward them from thy Mercy seat; show that thou art among us, and give us a
sign and token of thy presence and power, by overcoming and treading down our
enemies.

Now, as then he gave proof that he dwelt there, by those acts of power and
might: so he made it manifest by all the wonderful things which Jesus did, that
he was the Sanctuary wherein he dwelt among men. From him there were such
emanations of power, as never flowed from the Ark it self. He stirred up his
strength indeed (that I may borrow the ancient Language) when Jesus appeared,
and came and saved them in a diviner manner. Whenever he healed any desperate
Disease, it was an act of Salvation and deliverance; which told them there was
a gracious presence of God among them. When he cast out a Devil; it was the
vanquishing of a dreadful Enemy. And when he threw out a whole Legion, it was a
glorious victory over a more powerful Army, than ever the Israelites by the
STRENGTH of God among them, had overcome. To say nothing of his commanding the
Winds and the boisterous Waves, which as readily obeyed him; as the red Sea
fled when Judah was Gods Sanctuary, cxiv. Psalm. 2. (the Divine presence not
having settled it self then among them in any certain place) and Jordan was
driven back before the Ark of his strength. By these acts it plainly appeared
that all things were under his Authority; not only Men and other Creatures here
below; but also Angels, Principalities and Powers: over whom he as easily
triumphed, as the Israelites had heretofore done, by the power of God among
them, over the Philistines, or such like adversaries. Nay, he gave his Apostles
such a power over them, that they were ready to triumph too much in these
conquests. He is fain to repress the joy wherewith they were transported; and
to bid them not rejoice so much that the Devils were made subject to them, as
that they themselves were become the subjects of his Kingdom, and their Names
written in Heaven, x. Luke 20. And so eminent was this manifestation of the
Divine power in him, that he did but speak a word, and any thing was done that
he required. In so much that the People were amazed, to hear him only say to a
Devil, Come out, and instantly he left the Man and hurt him not. What a word is
this? for with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they
come out, iv. Luke 37. And upon another occasion of the like nature, you read
the same again, that They were all amazed at the mighty power of God, ix. 43.
And acknowledged with just admiration at such another sight, that, It was never
so seen in Israel, ix. Matthew. 33. Among all the mavelous works of former
times, even those done by Moses himself, when the Divine Glory visibly appeared
on several occasions to them, there never was any thing like to that which our
Savior now wrought; so quickly, without so much as the pains of a bare touch,
by his Word only, and in all sorts of Diseases, none excepted. For at his first
entrance upon his office, after he was anointed with the Holy Ghost, he healed
all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease, throughout the whole Region
of Galilee, and the adjoining Countries, iv. Matthew. 23, 24, 25.

III. Nor was the kindness and good will of God to them more plainly manifested
from the Tabernacle and Temple, than it is to us more abundantly declared in
Jesus Christ. The Ark, the place of God's presence, is called the TESTIMONY,
xvi. Exodus 34. for this reason as well as others; because it was a token of
God's great love to them, and care over them; testifying that he dwelt among
them. And out of SION, where the House of his Glory, and the Ark of his
Presence was, he is said, to bless his people, cxxxiv. Psalm. 3. and to give
them the blessing of life, cxxxiii. 4. which may be more truly said of Jesus
Christ, from whom now the LORD has commanded the blessing, even life for
evermore, iii. Act. 26. xi. Joh. 25, 26. In him he showed himself most
propitious to Mankind, and set him forth as his (...), or mercy seat; iii. Romans
25. from whence he will dispense his Divine favors toward us. We need not
doubt of it, for he is the (...), or TESTIMONY also, in the most proper
seasons, of the greatest love and kindness that ever was, 1 Timothy ii. 6. This he
testified indeed most of all by his Death and giving himself a ransom for us
(which the Apostle is there speaking of, and which Polycarp calls in his
Epistle to the Philippians, (...), the testimony of the Cross) But it was
apparent likewise by all the actions of his life. Which testified how full, he
was, of GRACE, as well as of Truth: for he went about about doing good, x. Act.
38. The very name that Philo gives the Tabernacle, which he calls L. 3. de vita
Mosis.
(...), exactly belongs to him; who was a moveable Temple, a walking mercy
seat, an Holy place, which went about; and carried God's blessings to all that
drew nigh unto him. All the Power he had, was used, not to the harm of any man
living; but to the benefit, relief and comfort, of every one that came to him.
Whom did he ever refuse, that entreated his help? What suitor did he turn away,
that came to beg his charitable assistance? He never excused himself, either
from the multitude of business, or the distance of the place, or the greatness
of the thing they asked, or the many courtesies he had done to them already, or
upon any other account whatsoever; but willingly went to do them service: or,
which is more, sent his Divine influences afar off, to testify his omnipresent
power, for the rescuing of such, as were at the point of death. And as for his
Doctrine, you remember it was so sweetly persuasive, that all the People
wondered at the words of grace, which proceeded out of his mouth, iv. Luke 22.
So full of mercy it was, that he published a Jubilee (as you there read, v.
18.) to the miserable World. So rich in love, that S. John could do no less
than say, 1. iv. 9. That in this was manifested the love of God toward us,
because that God sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we might live
through him.

VI. And as the Sanctuary was a place separate from all others for this
purpose, that God might dwell in it; and from thence send them the tokens of
his powerful love: even so was Jesus also separated after a special manner, to
be the Tabernacle of GOD among Men. The place where the Divine Glory made its
residence was called the Most Holy. And the Hill on which it stood is called
the Mountain of his HOLINESS, xlviii. Psalm. 1. And the Ark which was the
peculiar seat of God in the most holy place, is called the Throne of his
HOLINESS, xlvii. 8. and the HOLY Ark, 2 Chronicles. xxxv. 3. Nay, it is called by
the Name of HOLINESS, iv. Number. 20. as all the Hebrews interpret the place: and
with great reason, for that which in one place, 1 King. viii. 8. is called the
HOLINESS, is in another, where the same thing is described, 2 Chronicles. v. 9.
called the ARK.

The ground of all which was, that these were separated by Gods special command
for his uses and service alone. And the Tabernacle was built by peculiar
directions which he himself gave, and by a Divine art and skill, wherewith the
workmen were inspired, and no other. And just thus was the Temple of our
Savior's Body likewise set apart and separated from all common flesh, to be
the dwelling place of God. Man had no hand in the making of it; but it was
formed in the Womb of a pure Virgin by the power of the Holy Ghost. Upon which
score, the Angel calls him before he was conceived, (...), i. Luke 35. that
HOLY thing, we render it (but it is the very Name of the Temple) which had not
an original like other Men, being made by God alone. Nor did the good Angels
only acknowledge this, but the Evil also call him the HOLY one of God, i. Mark
24. For he was again separated from all other by a voice from Heaven, and by
the anointing of the Holy Ghost, and by many other things not now to be
mentioned, which declared him to be the MOST HOLY or Holy of Holies, spoken of
by Daniel the Prophet, ix. 24. which Abenezra expounds to be meant of Christ.
And the unspotted Holiness that was both in his Doctrine and in his life (as
you shall hear afterward) and the innocence and purity likewise of his
followers and attendants, were no small Testimony added to the rest, that God
was in him. For he did no sin, as S. Peter speaks, neither was guile found in
his mouth. And all they that came to him ( v. 4, 5.) as unto a living stone, or
Temple, rejected indeed of men, but chosen of God and precious, (...), even
they themselves became living stones, a spiritual house, or Temple, an holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus
Christ. But it would be too long to note all that the holy Scriptures speak of
this. Therefore,

V. Let us briefly observe how the Omniscience of God which appeared in our
Savior declared that He dwelt in him, as the punctual prediction of many
things formerly declared his presence at the Tabernacle. There Moses you know
made his enquiries upon all occasions. And from thence in after Ages God gave
them answers concerning things unknown; when the High Priest stood before the
most holy place, with the Urim and Thummim on his breast. And therefore that
the World might see God had changed his Seat, and now dwelt here, in his Holy
Child Jesus, He declared things secret; and not only foretold a number of
things, both concerning himself and others, but manifested that he knew even
the thoughts and purposes of Men's hearts, ii. Joh. 23, 24. And understood what
was done at a distance from him, i. Joh. 47, 48. Which was so demonstrative a
proof to the true Israelite of the presence of God in him; that immediately he
cries out, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel.

But the manner of his knowing what was in man and all other things, was the
most admirable. For whereas Moses was fain still to repair to one place, and
inquire at the Mercy seat, before he could tell the mind of God: And could not
so much as resolve a difficult case about the observation of a Law, till he
went to hear what the Lord would command concerning the persons who were in
doubt, ix. Numb. 8. Our Lord had no need at all to go any whither to make such
enquiries; but in every place, even in Samaria, knew the greatest secrets, iv.
Joh. 18, 19. For he himself was the Tabernacle of God. He was the Tent which
God had pitched among Men: separated unto him, as the Tabernacle and Temple
were, by the visible descent of the Divine Glory upon him, and by its residing
in him. So that wheresoever he was, he had an Oracle continually within
himself: and without any addresses to the most Holy place, or any other; knew
all things, and revealed the mind of God to Men. And all this was so
conspicuous, that it was far better known than the presence of the Lord upon
the Ark. For that was confined to one place, whereas Jesus went about doing
good. Which may be the meaning of that famous Prophecy, iii. Jer. 16, 17. Where
he says, they should not make mention of the Ark any more; that is, worship God
before that, as the only place; But Jerusalem should be the THRONE OF THE LORD;
to which all Nations should be gathered: that is, in every part of the City
(and Country too) he would appear as gloriously, as he had done formerly in the
most holy place of the Temple, which could be at no other time, but when Jesus
appeared among them, and sent (by his Apostles) the Law out of Zion, and the
Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, to all Nations. ii. Isa. 3, 4. The THRONE OF
THE LORD, I have told you already, is in their Language, as Maimonides teaches
us, Every place which God separates for the manifestation of his Divine glory.
So the Heaven is called his Throne, lxvi. Isa. 1. And by that name Jeremiah
calls their Sanctuary, xvii. Jer. 12. A glorious high Throne from the
beginning, is the place of our Sanctuary. And so I told you the Ark is called;
because that was the peculiar place in the Sanctuary where he resided. But at
last you see all Jerusalem (by which we may understand the whole Nation) was to
become the THRONE of the LORD. As it did when Jesus appeared (who in person was
sent to that Nation alone) in whom the Divine glory shone illustriously in all
places, wheresoever he came. They beheld the Wisdom, the Power, the Love of
God in him; not only in the Temple, where he often appeared, but in every part of
the holy City. In the streets, nay in the high ways, in the fields, in the
wilderness, upon the sea, there was a most glorious appearance of God; such as
never was when the Ark alone was the THRONE of the LORD.

VI. Which puts me in mind, and then I shall end this; that the Unity of God is
as much, nay more, discovered in our blessed Savior, as it was at the
Tabernacle or Temple in former times. As there was but one place where. God put
his Name among the Children of Israel, and they were all to go to the very same
Oracle; whereby they were preserved in the belief and worship of one God: So
now God has manifested that this is his ONLY begotten Son; and that there is
no name given under Heaven whereby we can be saved, but only His; and that we
must seek to no other Mediator, but this One; in whom now God appears in such a
glory, as he never did any where else. And this is also to keep us in the
belief that God is one: which may hence also appear by this manifestation of
God in the flesh. For whereas we call God by several attributes, the most holy,
the most wise, the most powerful, and the like; yet we see all these were in
one person Christ Jesus. Which may well instruct us, that they all together are
but One God; and that it is one eternal Majesty, who is so holy, wise, powerful
and good.

But, as I said, this was better made known by our Savior, than by the Divine
Majesty residing at the Temple. For during all the time that the Holy Oracle of
God stood at Jerusalem: there were also Oracles, which pretended gods
maintained among the Gentiles. This upheld the Opinion concerning a multitude
of gods: And all that Moses or the Prophets could do, did not destroy this
belief in the World; no, not root it out of Israel; till God appeared in our
Lord and Savior. Then these other Oracles grew mute; and it was held
ridiculous to believe any more Gods than One. The Devils lost all their power,
(...), after the coming of our Savior among Men. They are the words of
Eusebius, who produces a sworn enemy of Christianity to avouch what he
delivers, Porphyry by name, who makes this ingenuous confession, Lib. V.
Praepar. Cap. 1.
that (...) etc. ever since JESUS was honored, none ever perceived any public
help and succor from the Gods. Aesculapius and the rest of the Gods have
withdrawn themselves from men, and do not converse with them. From whence
Eusebius argues very rationally on this manner. How come you to know, those
whom you worship, to be gods? Why did not Aesculapius and the rest of his
Companions overthrow the power of Jesus, and make it of none effect? If he be a
mortal Man, as you say (nay, perhaps you call him a jugler and a deceiver) and
they indeed be Saviors and gods; What is the matter that they flee before him,
and turn their backs of one that is so inconsiderable? Why do they yield up all
the World to his power; and abandon all their subjects, in this shameful
manner? If you have any sense, you must conclude, that he is stronger than
they; and that what he speaks is true. For though he be but one, and as, one
would suppose, alone; yet He has driven away a vast number of gods, and made
them leave the World. He has abolished their worship and service, and exposed
them to such contempt; that as they appear no longer gods, so they can do just
nothing. They are not able so much as to show themselves, as they were wont, to
their followers: But plainly discover that they were Demons, not Gods.

But on the contrary the worship of this JESUS, and that ONE GOD, who, he
says, sent him into the World, is every day more and more propagated; and
takes deeper root in the minds of all People. One would have thought that these
gods, should have bestirred themselves at his coming, more than ever. They
should have made combinations, and joined all their forces against him. Their
Oracles which were so famous, should now, above all other times, have been
frequented; and spoken most loudly, so that all the World might hear them,
against this person, who came to destroy that Religion, and take away all that
reverence which was paid them. Or if one Oracle had been dumb upon any
particular cause; yet all of them together, one would think, should not have
lost their voice and their credit, in this fashion. These gods should have had
more care of their reputation, and authority; than to let this single person,
whom they pretended also to be so mean, to prevail thus mightily against them.
For as Plutarch tells us, in those very places where there was in times past,
(...), a great glory of the Divinity; there was nothing to do in his days, but
all was vanished. A sign that indeed God was more in our Savior, than he ever
had been in any other person or place; and that he was no where else; and that
he would be worshipped only in that way, which he taught and prescribed. For
they saw his GLORY, the GLORY as OF THE ONLY BEGOTTEN Son, (i. Joh. 14.) who
had those marks of a Divine Majesty residing in him, that none ever had; and
from whom we may expect all that the wisdom, power, and love of God can do for
us.

What should we do then, but after such evident proofs that God is in him; fall
down, and with the most humble and joyful reverence worship him, who, as it
there follows, is full of grace and truth? Because he is full of TRUTH we ought
to resign and submit our selves to his government; and because he is full of
GRACE we should always rejoice to think that we are under his care, and we
should put our trust under the shadow of his wings. And that he is so full of
both, that we may with great satisfaction commit our selves to his guidance,
confide and rejoice in him; will appear still more evidently by the next
Testimony which he received from the HOLY GHOST.

II.
Which was upon the day of Pentecost, ten days after he left this world; When
it gave a more public testimony to him, than it had done at his Baptism, that
he was the Son of God, exalted to sit on the right hand of the Majesty on high.
For his Apostles being then assembled together in one place, on a sudden there
came such a mighty inspiration from him, who a little before he parted with
them, breathed on them and said, Receive the Holy Ghost; that the sound of it
was like that of a violent blast of wind, when it is a coming. Which was
anciently a token of a Divine presence approaching (iii. Genesis 8.) and now was a
sign that by the power of this spirit, they should carry all before them. For
it filled all the house where they were sitting, as they did all the World,
e're long, by their preaching. And immediately a glimpse of that Divine Majesty
or Glory appeared on them, which came down upon our Savior at his Baptism, and
ever after dwelt in him; Who now sent the Apostles just as the Father had sent
him. For a bright flame was seen upon their Heads, and they were baptized with
the Holy Ghost and with fire.

So S. Luke reports, ii. Act. 3, 4. That there appeared unto them cloven
tongues, like as of fire; and it SAT upon each of them: a sign that this power
should abide with them always, and accompany them every where; though this
visible flame vanished. The effect of which was notorious to all, even as it
was apparent that Jesus was full of the Holy Ghost, though none but John
Baptist saw it coming down upon him: For they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, and began to speak with tongues: Of which all Jerusalem (as it there
follows) yea men of all Nations were witnesses; who heard them speak in their
own tongues, the wonderful works of God, verse. 11. They proclaimed, that is, to
all the People, whom the report of this strange news had brought together, what
wonders God had wrought by Jesus, and what he had now done for him; having
raised him from the dead, verse. 24. and exalted him by his right hand, verse.
33. and made him, both LORD and CHRIST, verse. 36. That is, He was, now they
might see if they would not shut their eyes, inthroned by God in the Heavens,
and completely invested with that royal power, of which he had received some
portion before; being now made LORD of all things, and the KING of God's
People. Of which, we, say the Apostles, v. 32. are his Witnesses (who saw him
after he rose again, and beheld him ascend into Heaven) and so is the Holy
Ghost, which he sent from thence, as they all now saw and heard in diverse
sensible effects, which testified that he was at the right hand of God.

And here it will be fit to observe three things,

First, That the HOLY GHOST was his WITNESS, (as the Apostles you see call Him)
as the coming of it, was the fulfilling of what he had predicted and promised,
a little before his going away from them. At the very mention of that word,
they were very disconsolate; and sorrow filled their heart. Whereupon he chears
them up with this assurance that he would not leave them comfortless, like so
many fatherless Children, but pray the Father, and he would give them another
Comforter, who should abide with them for ever; and never go away from them, as
he was about to do, xiv. Joh. 16. This he tells them was the spirit of truth,
verse. 17. whom the Father would send in his Name, verse. 26. where he repeats
this over again, and tells them what the Holy Ghost would do for them. And
therefore charges them not to be troubled or afraid, but rather rejoice to hear
him say he was going to the Father, who was Greater than he; and therefore
would give him power, when he went to him, to do more for them, than he could
do now, verse. 28. And then he adds the reason why he said all this, verse. 29.
Now I have told you before it come to pass; that when it is come to pass, you
might believe. That is, be confirmed in the belief of all that I have said, and
fully persuaded I have not boasted of a power and authority, which does not
belong to me. They might well be confident of it themselves, and bid all the
House of Israel know assuredly that God had made the same. Jesus whom they
crucified, both Lord and Christ; when they saw this come to pass, which he had
foretold and promised so often: Before his Death, xv. Joh. 26, 27. xvi. 7.
After his Resurrection, xxiv. Luke 49. Just before his Ascension, i. Act. 4.8.
Where he bids them not stir from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the
Father, which they had heard of him, and which would give them Power to be his
Witnesses every where.

It was an evident argument, when they received it, of these two Divine
Properties in Him; Foreknowledge, and Omnipotence. They had reason to believe
there was a Divine Majesty in him, when he was with them on Earth; and to trust
to all he had said either of himself, or them, or those that should believe on
his Name; and to look upon Him now as the King of Glory, with all power in
Heaven and Earth. For how could he have taken the boldness to foretell and
promise such a thing as this from God the Father, what hope had he to make it
good; if he had not been sure that the Father and He were one; (as he speaks
verse. 20. of that xiv. Joh.) and that what He said was by his Authority, who
would justify his word? Nothing could have been more vain, or done him greater
discredit after all the glory he had got, than to give this as a sign of his
truth; if he himself had not been sure that God had given all things into his
hand, and that he came out from God, and was going unto God, as it is xiii.
Joh. 3. And what greater argument could there be, that he did not assume a
Dignity or Title, which he had no right unto; than the verifying his word in so
hard and difficult a case as this, even then when his Enemies thought he could
do nothing, because he was dead and buried? This must needs make the Apostles
as sure as he was; (for his confident belief could not work belief in them) and
therefore He did fulfill his promise; and endued them with such power from on
high, that in a moment He brought all things which he had taught them to their
remembrance; enabled them to speak with all manner of Tongues, to make a Man
whole with speaking a word, nay to raise the Dead, and to give the Holy Ghost
likewise to others who believed their word.

How came He by this power, if indeed He was not the Lord of all? Why did nor
his Word dye with Himself and fall to the ground, if he usurped upon the
prerogative of God, and laid claim to a glory which was none of his? How could
it come into any Man's mind, let me ask again, to promise such a thing as this;
if he did not know what he could do? And could any man do such a thing, if he
were not more than a man; even the King of infinite power at the right hand of
God? So the Apostles could not but conclude when they felt the effects of his
royal power in their own hearts; and when they could make others feel them, by
innumerable benefits which they bestowed, both on their Souls and Bodies. To be
able to do such things on Earth as he had done, showed plainly what He was: but
to be able to make others do more wonderful things, when He had left the World;
was still a more convincing Argument, that all things were put in subjection
under his Feet. Nothing now was more evident to them than this great Truth;
whatsoever distrust of it they might have before. With this mighty Inspiration
all their doubts were blown away, like the Dust before the Wind. This fire
which appeared on their Heads, purged their Souls quite from all the relics
of Infidelity; if there were any remaining. They could do nothing now but speak
the praises of Jesus, and proclaim Him with these Tongues to all the world to
be the Lord; with a zeal as hot as fire.

The People indeed, it may be said, did not hear him foretell this glorious
day, and make any such promise of the Holy Ghost, and therefore how could it
convince them? I answer, it is confessed that He did not speak of this so
plainly to them, as He did to the Apostles; and therefore I have not alleged
it all this time for that purpose: but only to show that they to whom he so
often gave hopes of the coming of the Holy Ghost upon them, had reason to rely
upon its Testimony when it came; even upon this account, that it was the
performance of his gracious promise to them. There are many proofs which we
produce, seem to carry less force in them than really they have; when careless
minds stretch them too far, to prove more than was intended. The Jews were to
be convinced by it upon another score, not by the fulfilling of his particular
promises to the Apostles; which could work no further upon the People, than
they believed their testimony who came with such power from Jesus to them. But
I must add also, that our Savior had said something of this to all the people
at a public Feast, vii. John 38, 39. And when he was arraigned he openly
declared to the High Priest and the whole Senate, that they should presently
receive sensible tokens of his Majesty, which now they so affronted. For when
they adjured him to tell them whether he was the Christ the Son of God, xxvi.
Matthew. 63. though he knew they would neither believe him, if he told them, nor
give him a good reason, if he argued with them, why they did not believe (xxii.
Luke 67, 68.) yet he told them in express terms, that he was, ver. 64. And then
adds these remarkable words; Nevertheless, I say unto you ( i. e. though now
you do not believe what I have told you, yet mind what I say) hereafter (from
this moment, (...), xxii. Luke 69. or very few days hence) you shall see the
Son of man sitting on the right hand of power. Which can refer to nothing but
the mission of the Holy Ghost, which presently ensued, and was a certain
argument that he was at God's right hand, ii. Acts 33. When this came they
could not but see, unless they would be wilfully blind, that he was possessed
of the Kingdom, he had so much spoken of. It was an irrefragable testimony that
he was the Son of the Blessed, and could the less be gain said, because he told
them beforehand they should see what they would not then believe. That is,
have a manifest demonstration of his glorious Majesty in the Heavens. Which if
it would not move them, nothing remained but to see him, after another fashion,
coming in the clouds of Heaven, as it there follows. To destroy, that is, such
incredulous wretches, who killed their King, and persisted so obstinately in
their rebellion, that they resisted the Holy Ghost, whom he sent to convince
them of their crime, and convert them to his obedience. So it is interpreted,
xxii. Luke 27, 31.

II. For the power of it was so great, that setting aside this consideration,
if he had said nothing at all to them or his Apostles of his sending the Holy
Ghost; yet its coming in this manner, was an evident testimony both to them and
all others, that he made a just claim to be their King. He could not else have
scattered such royal gifts so bountifully among them, as the manner of Emperors
was in their Triumphs, and of Kings at their Coronation. This showed that
indeed he had the power, which the Jews denied him. It vindicated his rights,
which they would have taken from him. It made it appear, he was what he
pretended; and that not He, but they were the guilty persons; who had condemned
him, for saying, he was the Son of God. This was the very end of its coming, as
our Savior also told his Apostles a little before his death, xvi. John 7, 8,
9. where He says, that if he went away he would send the PARACLETE, that is,
his Advocate unto them; whose office it should be, to convince the World of
Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment. Of this place I shall be able, I hope,
to give a full account hereafter, together with all those that relate to the
Holy Ghost; and therefore I shall say no more of it now than this: That the end
of the PARACLETE'S coming was to plead the Cause of our Savior; to maintain
his innocence; and to prove against all accusers, that though he was condemned
by men, yet he was acquitted by God, and had said nothing but the truth.

For observe but the crime whereof he was accused, and for which he was
sentenced by the Jews, and you will soon see that nothing could clear him so
much as this. The great thing they laid to his charge, as you have heard
already, was that he affirmed, when they adjured him to speak his thought, that
he was the Christ the Son of the Blessed. This was the blasphemy, which they
pretended wounded their hearts with grief when they heard it, and for which
they adjudged him to be worthy of death. Now what could demonstrate the
vileness of this calumny, and prove him not guilty, more than such a power
possessing his followers even after he was dead, as they saw in himself when he
was alive? Nay, a far greater, which declared, as they truly said, that he was
Lord of all? x. Acts 36. He could not have done such things, as they beheld
were wrought at the invoking of his Name, if he were not truly the Son of God.
The Apostles might have called long enough upon him, before they had made a man
lame from his Mother's womb, walk up and down and leap and praise God; if he
whom they crucified, were not exalted by God's right hand, to be a Prince and a
Savior. And it had been the vainest thing of all, for the Apostles to go and
preach up the authority of a dead man, and who was ignominiously crucified, as
a great Malefactor; if they had not known that the Holy Ghost from him was
ready at hand in every place and time, to be his ADVOCATE, and take his part
against all gainsayers.

This Heavenly Witness never failed to appear when there was need of him, to
justify our Savior, and to set all things right in the opinion of the World;
by reversing their false judgment, and by establishing and verifying the
sentence he had passed on himself; when he said that he was the Son of God. The
Tables were now turned by the appearance of this PARACLETE, who pleaded so
strongly and convincingly, that many who had before accounted him an evil doer,
were now forced to alter their mind and confess him to be a righteous person.
They who had reviled him, now gave him worship and honor. They that cried
Crucify him, said as the Centurion, when they heard the HOLY GHOST speak on
his behalf, Sure this was the Son of God. And all those who were so hardy as to
resist the Holy Ghost (vii. Acts 51.) were fain to oppose it with rage and
throwing stones; for in any other manner they were not able to resist the
wisdom and the spirit, whereby S. Steven (a man full of the Holy Ghost) spoke
to them and reasoned with them, vi. Acts 9, 10.

So great a testimony was this of the HOLY GHOST to Jesus, that the Apostles
were not fit to be his Witnesses, till they had received it, xxiv. Luke 48. i.
Acts 8. But after it came upon them and joined its testimony with theirs, then
they defended his cause so successfully, that a great company of the Priests,
the greatest enemies to it, yielded themselves and became obedient to the
faith, vi. Acts 7. Then if any one asked, how dare you contradict the sentence
of the High Court, to which all men are bound upon pain of death to submit
(xvii. Deuteronomy. 9, 12.) what can you say to justify this presumption, in
maintaining his Righteousness, whom the Grand Council of the Nation has
condemned to suffer death? They could soon make this reply, Let the HOLY GHOST
answer you; hear what he says to you: If He do not speak enough for us and for
Jesus to satisfy you, then we refuse not to die; you may deal with us as the
despisers of God and his Law. And so mightily were they astonished and
perplexed by the pleadings of the HOLY GHOST, that the Sanhedrim (the Supreme
Court of Judicature among them) knew not what to say to the Apostles, nor what
to do with them. They only clapped them in prison for preaching Jesus (iv. Acts
3.) and threatened farther severity if they did not desist ( ver. 21.) but they
durst not proceed to pass the sentence of death upon them, according as the Law
directed; the people glorifying God so heartily for what they saw them do by
the power of the Holy Ghost. Nay, so much were some of this great Council
staggered, that according to the persuasion of Gamaliel, a great Master among
them, they let the Apostles go free, after a second imprisonment, lest perhaps
they should be found fighters against God, ver. 39. If this be an humane
project, says that wise man, do not trouble your selves about it; for it will
come to naught, as the vain attempts of others have done, who at the first drew
much people after them. But if these men prove to be authorized by God, and he
will have it so; who can overthrow it? We had best take heed how we proceed in
a business, wherein we may chance to have God against us. It is better in my
judgment to be quiet, and see what the issue will be, lest in stead of
contending with men, we be found to oppose God Almighty himself.

III. And the issue was this (which is the last thing) that by the power of
this Advocate alone, and no other, our Lord Jesus actually obtained a Kingdom
in spite of all the opposition that could be made against him. This was the
greatest testimony of the Holy Ghost to him, which effectually proved him to be
a King, by winning him a Kingdom; and persuading men to submit unto him, though
he was invisible, and not like to reward their services in this World at all,
but only in another. It proclaimed him all abroad in the World to be the Lord
of life and glory, and by the mere preaching of the Gospel with the Holy Ghost
sent down from Heaven (as S. Peter speaks, 1 i. 12.) the Nations were subdued
to him and acknowledged him for their Sovereign.

The High Priest and Council of Jerusalem, as it there follows in v. Acts 40.
desiring to discourage the Apostles in this preaching, ordered them to be
beaten, and then commanded them to speak no more in the name of Jesus, for fear
of a worse punishment that might follow. Alas! vain men, that thought to choke
this Truth, and bury this report concerning Jesus. Did they think it was in
their power to murder his Name, as they had done Him? and by such means as
these prevent his Faith from spreading it self any further? They were mightily
mistaken in the courage of these Twelve men, who rejoiced that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name: and as unlearned and ignorant as
they found them (iv. Acts 13.) not only persuaded many in that Country to
believe Jesus to be the Lord, but carried the fame of him to all Nations. For
they received another kind of Mandate from him, which they were resolved to
obey; nothing doubting but the power of the Holy Ghost would go along with them
to prosper their attempt. The Jewish Rulers said, Speak not at all, nor teach
in the name of Jesus, iv. Acts 18. But Jesus their Master had said, Go ye into
all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature, xvi. Mark 15. Or as it
is in S. Matthew xxviii. 19, 20. Go ye and teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. They durst not therefore
but go, especially when the power of the Holy Ghost came down upon them on
purpose, that they might be able to speak in his name, and win him subjects in
all the world, by proving that he was perfectly Lord and Christ. And so you
read in S. Luke xxiv. 47.48, 49. It behoved Christ to die and rise again, that
repentance and forgiveness of sins should be preached in his name among all
Nations. And ye are witnesses of these things. And behold I send you the
promise of my Father: but tarry ye at Jerusalem (that is, before you go about
this business) until ye be endued with power from on high.

Now here do but consider with me, these three things. First, the vastness of
this design; Secondly, the poorness of the means; and thirdly, the weakness and
ineptitude of the Instruments which were to be employed by him: and you will
soon see what service the Holy Ghost did him; without whose power he would
never have attempted such things, or never have achieved them. They are all in
that place now mentioned, xxviii. Matthew. 19. Go and teach all Nations, etc. See
here what a compass he takes for his Kingdom, no less than all the World.
Wherein he intends to settle new Laws, and advance a government proper to
himself, established upon a Doctrine not at all taking with flesh and blood.
Who is there that ever went about any such thing, or had such a thought in his
mind? not only to conquer, but to change the Religion of all the world, and
abolish those Laws and Customs which had stood for so many Ages? What Arms or
Ammunition did he provide them withal for this purpose? With what forces did he
send them? Or by what means did he hope to win Kings and Princes to resign
their Crowns to him, and submit themselves to his Orders?

Behold, here a new wonder, which is the second thing I now named: He bid them
go and PREACH. How could any one fancy he should overcome Nations with his
breath? Could he take words to have such force in them, as to persuade whole
Countries that never saw him to become his subjects? What strange Orators must
these be, who could draw men of such different languages, natures and
inclinations, in all the world after them? Where were they bred to learn such
powerful Rhetoric, as should charm the hearts of all that heard them? From
what School did they come, or by whom were they instructed in the art of
catching Souls? Alas! they were very illiterate and ignorant men, Fishermen and
such like rustic people, whom Christ called to be Fishers for Souls, and sent
to draw hearts to him. And I remember, Plato in his Phaedrus, when he would
express a block, a rude and unbred fellow, says he was (...), bred up among
Mariners. Very unlikely Instruments these were for his purpose; if he had been
to take counsel of Philosophers, and intended to teach men by no stronger
arguments than theirs. They were the most unfit men that could be chosen to be
his Ambassadors; if he had not been another kind of Lord and Master, and they
had not gone with other kind of instructions, than the world had known before.

And that is the third wonder, enough to astonish any considering man, that
they who, as Eusebius notes, could scarce speak their own language well, but
were mocked for Galileans, whose dialect was the most broad and ungentile of all
the Nation; that these, I say, should go to speak to all the Nations of the
World, with hope to persuade them. Alas! they were not fit to be Masters to so
much as one single person, much less to teach a Country School; how then could
they undertake to teach the whole World? What King, what Lawgiver, what
Philosopher, either Greek or Barbarian, as the same Eusebius proceeds Lib. 3.
demonstr. Evang.
, ever dreamt of any such design as this? They held their labor well bestowed,
if they could establish their Doctrine and Laws in one City, or perhaps in one
Country; but never thought themselves able to spread them any further. Whereas
Jesus (...), meditating nothing that was common to mortal men, nothing that was
merely humane; says confidently to these contemptible men whom he had chosen to
be his Emissaries; Go, now that I bid you, and teach all Nations.

But suppose the Disciples should have said to him, as well they might; Though
we are ready to do any thing for thy sake, yet how shall we accomplish this?
How for example shall we speak to the Romans, of whose language we are
ignorant? Or how shall we teach the Egyptians, and the Indians, and the
Scythians; who have but one tongue which we learnt of our Mothers, and that but
a rude one neither? We shall stand dumb before them and say nothing. They will
take us for a company of fools, and we shall look like mere statues and images
of men. Or if we could speak their languages, what hope have we to prevail with
them? Who will be persuaded by such as we, to forsake the Religion of their
Country, and to embrace thine who art a stranger to them? Truly this had been
but a rational question; if our Savior had not taken care to prevent it, by
adding those words to his Mandate; Lo, I am with you always to the end of the
world. He had said a little before, ver. 18. All power in Heaven and Earth is
given to me. Go therefore and teach all Nations; advance my authority, and
spread my Kingdom; and do not doubt but you shall effect the business; for I
who have all power will be with you. And so he was, by the power of the Holy
Ghost who was his Advocate; for he gave them, presently after, the gift of
tongues; he accompanied them every where, if they did but mention his Name,
with signs and miracles; yea the very shadow of some of them did more than all
the power of Medicines. This was a very great demonstration of his supreme
dominion over all Creatures. Nothing could be more effectual to induce men to
obey him, to whom they saw every thing else was subject. Without this they
could never have moved men to believe that he was the Lord; but this gave it
sufficient credit.

For suppose they had stood up in the places of popular concourse, and said, We
come to preach to you in the name of Jesus, and require you to submit your
selves to him, whom God has made the Lord of all. He was born of the seed of
David, a great King in Israel, did many wonders in that Nation, though he was
hated and rejected by them, and delivered to Pontius Pilate; by whom he was
crucified; but God raised him out of his grave, and we saw him go to Heaven,
where he is inthroned in the most glorious Majesty, and reigns over all Angels,
as well as mankind. Cast away therefore your ancient Gods, who are his
subjects. Forsake presently all your superstitious Rites and Ceremonies.
Believe on this person; submit to his government, and obey his commands. Though
you get nothing in this world by it, but perhaps may lose all you have; he will
reward you for it in his Pleavenly Kingdom. What force do you think there would
have been in such a speech, to persuade the Nations far distant from Jerusalem,
to fall down before him as their Sovereign? Would they not have smiled and
said, What do these bablers mean to bring us these strange stories from a
foreign land? Why should we acknowledge him to be our King, whom his own
Countrymen would not suffer to reign over them? Shall we become the subjects
of one whom we never saw, nor heard of until now? and venture the loss of all
our liberties, and perchance of our lives, for one whom they confess to be
crucified and dead? What likelihood is there, that he should rise again from
the dead, who could not keep himself, when he was alive, from being put to
death?

Truly, says Eusebius, when I consider the mere doctrine they were to preach,
I cannot see how they could hope to draw the people to their belief. But then
when I consider how they did prevail every where, at Rome, at Alexandria, at
Antioch, in all other places; I must have recourse to a Divine power, which
succeeded this Doctrine. Jesus plainly declared by putting them upon the
attempt, that he was confident he had all power to get himself a Kingdom by
this preaching. And by the issue it appeared that it was no presumption
wherewith he was possessed, instead of a well grounded confidence. They
preached, as he bad them; but it was not with such Rhetoric, as is in use
among us: not with the enticing words of man's wisdom, with eloquent
expressions, enchanting language, or mere plausible arguments; but in the
demonstration of the Spirit, and of power, 1 Cor. ii. 4. The HOLY GHOST from
Heaven presently appeared wheresoever they preached, to justify their words,
and to testify, by many miraculous operations, that Jesus was no less than
they affirmed. This evident demonstration persuaded men's minds. This was such a
power, that the people were ready to take them for Gods; and imagined that
Mercury and Jupiter were come down from Heaven to them: and thereupon prepared
public sacrifices, to be offered in their honor, xiv. Acts 13. Natural reason
told them that such things could not be done by mortal nature; but they must be
concluded to be the works of some God, though no body told them that they were.
And therefore this was all they had to do, for their own satisfaction, to
enquire by what power and authority the Apostles did these wonders, since they
themselves confessed that they were but men. And here now they took occasion to
let them know, that it was Jesus who did these Miracles. Him they preached; and
him they hereby proved to be the Lords ANOINTED; who by this power would
prevail, notwithstanding the fierce opposition that was made against his
authority.

For, as you read in a devout address which the whole company of believers made
to God, the Rulers were gathered together, and the Kings of the Earth stood up
against the Lord and against his Christ. At their first entrance upon this
work, there were mighty endeavors to overthrow it; just as there had been
against his holy child Jesus, whom he had ANOINTED, that is, promoted to a
greater glory than he had on Earth. And therefore they desire God to go along
with them, and stretch forth his hand to heal; and that signs and wonders might
be done by the name of his holy child Jesus; for the propagating of this
Religion, which it was not in their own power to advance, iv. Acts 26, 27, 30.
Now this was a further testimony of the power and glory of Jesus, that when a
solemn address was made to God, and they represented to him their design; they
were so far from receiving any discountenance from him, that he encouraged and
promoted this undertaking. For the place where they prayed was shaken, by a
powerful inspiration which came upon them all, as it had done upon the
Apostles: And they were ALL filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spoke the word
of God with boldness, ver. 31.

III.
And this leads me to the last Testimony which the HOLY GHOST gave to him, by
descending upon other persons as well as upon the Apostles; though not in such
a visible form as it did on the day of Pentecost. The place indeed was SHAKEN
where these believers were assembled, by the like mighty wind I suppose as
filled the house where the Apostles received the Holy Ghost, ii. Acts 2. But
there were no fiery tongues now appeared, as there did then: Nor do we
afterward read of any such sensible sign of an invisible power coming upon
them, as this shaking of the place was, when the Holy Ghost first descended
upon the body of the Church. But whenever the Apostles laid their hands upon
any person who believed in Jesus and was baptized; presently the Holy Ghost
fell down upon them, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied, viii. Acts 15,
17. xix. 6. This laying on of their hands, was ever after the only external
sign of the Divine power (for that is the meaning of stretching out the hand, in
the place just before named, iv. Acts 30.) wherewith they should be endued at
the request of the Apostles. Which was a plain demonstration of the royal
Majesty and munificence of Jesus, whose Servants and Ministers these were: and
hereby the HOLY GHOST bare record to him, that he was the Son of God.

So this very Apostle teaches us in the second Chapter of this Epistle, where
he tells them to whom he writes, that he need not be very solicitous to
prescribe them Antidotes against those Antichristian doctrines, which then
began to poison the Church: because they had an Unction from the holy One, and
knew all things, 1 John ii. 20. The HOLY GHOST, that is, was their security
from infection; which is here called the UNCTION or anointing, 1. because by
the coming down of this upon our Savior, He was made the CHRIST or anointed of
God, x. Acts 38. And 2. the Apostles when they received it were made the
principal Officers in his Kingdom, and endued with such a power to remit sins
and unloose men from the punishment of them as he had, xx. Joh. 22, 23. And 3.
all others to whom they imparted this gift were openly declared the children of
God, and if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ,
viii. Romans 16, 17. This UNCTION made them all Kings and Priests unto God, and
they reigned with him on Earth, v. Rev. 10. Enjoyed, that is, many royal
privileges and liberties at present, for which they were bound perpetually to
praise him; beside the right it gave them to an Heavenly Kingdom, where they
should sit down with him in his Throne, as He was in the Throne of his Father,
iii. Rev. 21. For the Thrones of the Eastern Princes were wide and large, as I
told you before, where others might sit down by them, if they pleased to admit
any to that high honor, which this King of Kings promises to grant to his
faithful followers.

No wonder then that they who were designed to so great glory, were also made
partaker of the Earnest of it, as this Unction by the Holy Spirit is called, 2
Cor. i. 22. After God had filled the Apostles and other Apostolical men with
the Holy Ghost, who were ready to guide and direct all Christian people while
they lived: There were great numbers also in the Body of the Church, who
received so many of its gifts from the HOLY one (that is, God, 2 Cor. i. 21.)
that it enabled them to discern truth from falsehood; and discover all those
cheats and impostures which some went about to put upon them, under the name of
Christian Doctrine. A very great Doctor the Holy Ghost was, when they were
anointed with it; for thereby they KNEW ALL THINGS: that is, their whole
Religion, in which it made them so perfect, that those pretenders to new
Revelations could teach them nothing which they knew not already. For it taught
them that Jesus from whom it came, was the Son of God, and had revealed all
God's will plainly and fully to them. So S. John tells them in the following
verses, 21, 22. I have not written unto you, because ye know not the truth; but
because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth. Who is a liar, but he that
denies that Jesus is the Christ? etc. That is, I do not speak of this, because
you are ignorant of Christianity, but because you are well acquainted with it;
and thereby able to judge when any body contradicts it, and to reject all those
as liars, who deny Jesus to be anointed by God, the Lord of all. I know you are
well principled in this truth by the UNCTION which he has given you from the
Father: All that I desire is (as he adds, ver. 24.) that you would suffer that
Truth which you have heard from the beginning, to abide in you. And indeed it
was very unreasonable to start from that which had ever been acknowledged since
the Holy Ghost first descended on Jesus himself; and which the same UNCTION
still testified, whenever the Apostles, who preached Jesus, did but lay their
hands on any bodies head, and pray to Jesus that he would bestow it on them.
They could not be seduced if they did but attend, as he says, ver. 26, 27. to
this anointing which they had received, and which was yet among them. There was
no need of any other teacher, but this to instruct them. Which gave such an
evident demonstration of the power and glory of the Lord Jesus, and was so far
from being a lie or deceiving them, that if they did but do it as it taught
them, they must needs abide in him.

This you see was accounted and that justly, an infallible witness to him. He
could never have sent such an UNCTION, nor would the Holy Ghost have ever come
in his Name, if he had not been the King of Heaven. They that received this had
an invincible proof of his glory and majesty within themselves. They could not
doubt of it any more than they could of what they felt. Which proved likewise
so convincing to others, that it made unbelievers fall down on their faces and
worship God; and report that God was in them of a truth, 1 Cor. xiv. 25. For by
this the Divine Majesty did in a proper sense DWELL among Christian people, and
walk with them, as it did among the ancient Israelites, 2 Cor. vi. 16. This was
a glorious Divine Presence in the Church, whereby God and our Savior made
their ABODE with them, xiv. John 23. and they became the HABITATION of God (or
his Dwelling place) through the Spirit, ii. Ephesians. 22.

Which so constantly bare witness to him, that no man who had this Spirit could
possibly deny him; but every one that spoke by the Holy Ghost acknowledged
Jesus to be the LORD, 1 Cor. xii. 3. And they were no small number, who were
made partakers of it. For S. Peter promises it at the very first descent of it,
to all that would repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus: at which word
three thousand Souls were added to them, ii. Acts 38, 41. And afterward a vast
company more, as you may read in the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Where
some were endued with one power of the Holy Ghost, some with another (Chap.
xii.) but in every thing they were enriched by him, so that they came behind in
NO GIFT, Chap. i. 5, 7. Wherein our Lord far excelled Moses who could not give
his Spirit unto others, much less unto the Gentiles: whereas Jesus sent great
abundance of his Spirit, as you see upon his Disciples, and gave even to the
Gentiles the like gift as he did unto them, xi. Acts 17. For as S. Peter was
preaching to Cornelius and his friends, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which
heard the word, to the great astonishment of the Jewish Christians, who wondered
to hear them speak with tongues, and magnify God, x. Acts 44, 45, 46. But they
should have considered that now he began to fulfill completely that prophecy of
Joel (mentioned ii. Acts 17.) which promised that God would pour out of his
Spirit upon ALL flesh. Now the enclosures were first broken down, and that
Divine Presence which had hitherto been confined to one Nation, appeared in a
most amazing luster to the rest of the World. In so much that in a little time
great multitudes of all nations, and kindred, and people, and tongues joined
their hearts and voices with the Heavenly Quire, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, is
the Lord of Hosts: the whole Earth is full of his GLORY. Thus Esaias heard the
Angels sing, vi. 3. when he beheld our Saviors glory and spoke of him, xii.
John 39. And the Church of Christ from the beginning has taken these words
from their mouths, and made them their own; (iv. Rev. 8.) when they actually
saw this GLORY OF THE LORD filling the Earth, with its most holy Presence. For
our Lord did not cease to pour out more and more of his Spirit on all flesh,
even after the Apostles were dead: But as Justin Martyr tells the Jew, in his
time (which was above an hundred years after this) (...) Dial. cum Tryph.
, etc. One might have seen among Christians both women and men, who had gifts
from the Spirit of God. And so one might in the days of Origin Lib. 1. contr.
Cells.
(who lived as many years after that) who to convince Celsus, that it was no
Fable which was reported of the descent of the Holy Ghost on our Savior,
affirms that (...), etc. There were still remaining among them some footsteps
of that Holy Spirit, which was seen in the form of a Dove. For they
dispossessed Devils, performed many cures, and foresaw some things, according
to the will and pleasure of the WORD, concerning what was to come. Nay, it were
easy to show that this Heavenly power descended still much lower, and did not
quite leave the World in these Ages: and that it did not work in some obscure
corners only, but in the most noted places in the World. For the same Justin
says in his first Apology, that there were many healed by the Name of Jesus
Christ in the City of Rome; whom no other person could heal. So that look how
many Souls there were full of the Holy Ghost, so many lasting Witnesses there
were to our Savior of his power and glory in every place.

But intending hereafter to treat of all these gifts of the Holy Ghost alone by
themselves; I shay say no more of them now: having sufficiently shown, how they
were his Testimony to our Savior. It is possible, I confess, that there may be
another thing included in the name of the HOLY GHOST; and that is the old
Prophets, who received gifts from Heaven, whereby they sometimes spoke of the
Messiah. So the HOLY GHOST is said in the x. Hebr. 15. to be a witness of the
perfection of our Saviors oblation; and for a proof of it the testimony of the
Prophet Jeremiah is alleged, whose words are called the witness of the Holy
Ghost. From whence I might take occasion to show that all the predictions of
the Prophets do so exactly agree to Jesus, and are so perfectly fulfilled in
him, that we must needs grant him (if we receive this testimony of the Holy
Ghost, and take them to have been inspired thereby) to be the Son of God, the
King of Israel, who they had long put that Nation in hope, should come and
reign over them. But this would be a work of too great length, and my intention
is not to swell this Treatise into an huge Volume; which makes me only mention
this notion, that you may consider with your selves, as you have occasion, what
a resemblance there is between Jesus and that person whom the Prophets describe
unto us. For this will prove a great confirmation of your faith in him; there
being no doubt in the minds of the bitterest enemies of our Savior, but that
those Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

I have done now with these witnesses, who speak unto us from Heaven; and who
are one, you see, in their testimony, as well as in their nature. They all
agree in this, that Jesus is the Son of God. There is not the least difference
between them; no doubtfulness in their testimony; no backwardness to give it;
no obscurity that should make it difficult for us to understand it: But with
one mouth (as we say) they unanimously, plainly, readily and clearly pronounce
him to be such a Divine person, that if we should not hear him, and obey him,
and depend upon him, I know not what we shall be able to say to so many
Witnesses, who will be ready to appear against us; whose testimony without any
cause was slighted by us. Look how many voices have been heard from Heaven; how
many witnesses have openly appeared in his behalf: so many Divine reasons you
are to conceive your self to be provided withal, for every word that Jesus
has spoken. Which you are therefore to take for infallible, and to keep, as
the Apostle speaks (1 Timothy vi: 14.) without spot and unrebukeable, until his
second appearing. Listen to those words of grace which come out of his mouth.
Abandon those sins which he requires you to forsake; and betake your selves to
the practice of those virtues which he so strictly injoyns: For the FATHER, the
WORD, and the HOLY GHOST declare that this is the Will of Heaven; And what is
there in this world so considerable as to persuade the contrary? If he be not
the Son of God, if he do not prove it by undeniable arguments, then do as you
list: But if he be, then you are bound to yield him the humblest subjection,
and it will be a strange stupidity to dispute the matter with him. There can be
no color for your refusal, should you deny to be governed by him, who comes
with such Authority; that the fullness of the Godhead, as you have heard, dwells
in him bodily.

O what an honor has God Almighty hereby done our nature! how highly has he
advanced and dignified it, by this strange and unexpected favor, which he has
conferred on it, in making it his Holy place! Consider but what I have now
said, of the Testimony of the HOLY GHOST to Jesus; which was an illustrious
token likewise of Gods wonderful love to us. Is it nothing that God should be
manifested in our flesh; that he should DWELL in us, and make his abode with
us, and that we should become the habitation of God through the Spirit? Look
upon the Temple of old, and see how it glittered with Gold; how it was adorned
with Cherubims and Seraphims, which were an emblem of the Angelical attendance
in that place; but especially how it shined with the Glory of the Lord, which
appeared upon the mercy-seat: And then reflect how precious, how dear mankind
are to Almighty God, into whose Nature this Glory is translated; whom he has
beautified with greater excellencies, and made more splendid by a more intimate
conjunction with it. Could any man then, after he had considered this, profane
that Nature which God has so sanctified and separated to himself? Could he
find in his heart to prostitute himself to any of those base and filthy
actions; that are below the dignity of humane nature nakedly considered,
without such a presence of God in it? None can submit sure to the government of
any fleshly lust, but he must first forget that he is a man, created after the
Image of God. And there is none can continue in this unworthy slavery, but he
must lay aside these thoughts also; that the WORD was made flesh, and the Image
of the invisible God has taken up his abode in our Nature. By this he has
called us to the greatest sanctity. He remembers us what excellent Creatures we
are, and how Glorious he is desirous to make us. And who is there that need
despair of recovering himself by the grace of God, though he be sunk never so
much below himself; now that God is come on purpose to lift him up? He has
sent Salvation to us, by one that is mighty to save. He has revealed himself
so graciously, and made such discoveries of his Love and Power and Glory to all
mankind, that they may confidently hope, if they will not cast away all care of
themselves, to be restored to the image and likeness of God again.

But this Discourse will come in more seasonably, when we have joined the
strength of the other three Witnesses to these, and heard them all together,
some from Heaven, others from Earth, proclaiming this in our ears; Behold the
Son of God: Jesus is your Lord; for he is the Lord of all things. And we shall
be the more ready for a surrender to him, when we see withal, how much we are
beholden to God Almighty for his mavelous, inconceiveable love, in calling us
so many ways, by so many arguments, to Repentance, Faith, Obedience and
Everlasting Salvation. That which I have now explained, deserves to be
remembered with the most affectionate acknowledgments, and we shall be better
disposed to hearken to the rest, if we give him hearty thanks for what we
understand already, and say;

A PRAYER.
ADored be thy inestimable love, O thou Holy Spirit of Grace and Truth, the
mighty Power of God; who have given such gifts unto men, even to the rebellious
also; that the LORD God might DWELL among them. Blessed be thy Goodness, who
did anoint our Lord with that oil of gladness, which has run down to the
meannest of his subjects. Great and wonderful was that Heavenly Power and Love,
which appeared in such visible Majesty upon him, and filled him with the Holy
Ghest; so that he went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of
the Devil. And much more mavelous was that Almighty Goodness, which promoted
him to the throne of Glory in the Heavens, that he might fill all things.

Praised be that astonishing Love, which first filled the Apostles minds with
such Heavenly light, and inflamed their wills with such fervent heat, that they
boldly preached the Gospel to all the world. For ever magnified be that
diffusive Grace, which afterward spread it self in such variety of gifts;
wrought by one and the self same Spirit, dividing to every man severally, as he
pleased. Let the whole Church be giving continual thanks to thee, O Lord, for
stretching forth thy hand in such signs and wonders, to glorify thy holy child
Jesus; for giving by the Spirit, to some a gift of wisdom, to others a gift of
healing, to others diverse kind of tongues, to others prophecy; and for making
some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers; that
every knee might bow to Jesus, and every tongue confess that he is the Lord.

I confess him with all my Soul; I honor him as my Dearest Lord. I see thy
Glory, O blessed Jesus, by the light of the Holy Ghost, which has shone so often
from Heaven upon us. I see the Power thou have at Gods right hand. I see the
royal bounty of thy love. Now I know that thou know all things; and believe
that thou art the faithful and the true, whose words shall never fail. O how
much ought I and every Christian Soul, to rejoice in the consolations of the
Holy Ghost! which has brought us new assurances from Heaven, that our Savior
lives, and reigns, and sits inthroned at the right hand of God, in incomparable
majesty and glory. Inspire all our minds and hearts, O thou quickening Spirit,
inspire them, O Lord and Giver of Life, with such ardent love and devotion
toward him, that we may hope to reign with him, and then shall we rejoice
beforehand in this hope, with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Do not wholly absent they self from us, O thou Guide and Comforter of our
Souls (though we have not been so grateful to thee, nor followed thy directions
and counsels as we ought) but still let thy gracious presence fill every part
of the Christian Church. Though we have not that UNCTION from above, which
endued them heretofore with the gifts of tongues, and prophecy, and healing,
and working of miracles: Yet pour down every where, much of the spirit of
knowledge, and love, and devotion, and purity, and fortitude, and undaunted
resolution, and fervent Zeal; which may be ever glorifying the great God and
our Savior Christ Jesus. O thou who did open the eyes of the blind, and
loose the tongue of the dumb, enlighten our minds to see more of those wonders,
which may inflame our love, and encourage our hope; and open our lips, that our
mouths may show forth thy Praise. Still let there be hearts full of Faith in
the blessed Jesus; full of love to all mankind; full of ardent desire to see
his Kingdom come; full of wisdom to open the mysteries of Salvation, to
instruct men in the truth as it is in Jesus, and to convince them mightily, and
persuade them to be obedient to it. That so by the same Heavenly power whereby
the Faith of Christ was planted in the world, it may be graciously preserved
and promoted: and we may see it go forward and advance more and more, till
every Nation now on Earth speak in their own tongues the wonderful works of God.

Let all the people praise thee, O God; Let all the people praise thee. Kindle
in them such devout affections, as may offer up continually the sacrifice of
praise to thee. Let them praise thee with pure minds, and upright hearts, and
unspotted lives: and in perfect unity and godly love say every where,

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Witnesses on Earth, and first of the WATER.
HAVING given a brief account of the Testimony of the first Three Witnesses,
and finding much satisfaction in their perfect agreement; we have the greater
encouragement to go to the other Three, who are also nearer to us than the
former, and take that evidence which they are willing to afford us, for our
further confirmation in this belief that Jesus is the Son of God. These three,
you read in the eighth Verse, are such as bear witness on EARTH; whereby we may
be the better acquainted with them, and they are the more undeniable, and
furthest off from all question or exception. For should any be so bold as to
dispute that there might be no such voices from Heaven, such apparitions of
Jesus, such a descent of the Holy Ghost (as it is possible there may be such
conceited fools, who think themselves wise by doubting of all things) yet that
there were such Witnesses as the WATER, the BLOOD, and the SPIRIT, no man can
be so obstinate as to deny; they were so visible to all sorts of men
whatsoever, that would but open their eyes to behold them.

In the sixth verse (of which the eighth is but a repetition) after the Apostle
had said, that the only Conqueror is he who believes Jesus to be the Son of
God; He adds, This is he that came by WATER and BLOOD, even Jesus Christ; not
by Water only, but by Blood also: and it is the SPIRIT that bears witness,
etc. Where that phrase [HE CAME] is to be diligently observed; which in the
style of the New Testament writers, signifies as much as that, He manifested
himself to be the Messiah or Christ; He made it appear that he was sent of God.
For thus the Messiah is described in that question which John Baptists
Disciples put to our Savior, xi. Matthew. 3. Art thou (...), he that COMES?
that is, as Grotius well expounds it, he that is prophesied of by Jacob our
Father, under the phrase of COMING, xlix. Genesis 10. And so He is said to be the
light which COMING into the World enlightneth every man, i. John 9. And John
Baptist tells them, He that COMES after me, is preferred before me, ver. 15.
He was preferred to be their King, as the multitude cried out, saying, Hosanna
to the Son of David, blessed be he that COMES in the Name of the Lord, xxi.
Matthew. 9. There is the true explication of the phrase: He was sent by a special
commission, such as never any man had from God the Father; he appeared with his
authority, and acted in his name. And as before he appeared in his Majesty, he
was called, He that COMES; so afterward the Apostle here calls him, He that
CAME. The person, that is, whom God had promised from the beginning of the
world to send into it; His SHILO, that is, his Seed (as De Dieu has
excellently expounded that word) the Seed of Judah, and the Son of God. Who in
this fullness of time was to receive Commission from God, and take upon him the
Government of the World.

Now this person, says S. John, CAME (that is, appeared to be sent of God as
his Son, his only begotten) by Water and by Blood. Which is as much as to say,
that it was manifest he came from God and not of himself by these two
Witnesses; to which the SPIRIT also adds its testimony, as it here follows [and
the SPIRIT bears witness] which is such a certain evidence, that they who rely
on this, together with the former, can never be deceived by it; because the
Spirit is the TRUTH. As therefore God SENT him, so he CAME; and by these three
Witnesses proved that he was the Person, who, God promised, should come, and
was now sent: whose testimony let us prepare our selves to hear, and examine
diligently, that the faith of Christ may still be rooted deeper in our hearts.
And let us hear them, if you please, in that order wherein they stand in the
sixth Verse (the place where we first meet with them) receiving first the
testimony of the WATER, then of the BLOOD, and then of the SPIRIT.

Of the WATER.
And by WATER sure can be meant nothing else but either Purity and innocence;
or else Baptism, which we use as a sign and a means of those. We may consider
it in both senses, and not be in any danger to wander from the scope of the
Apostle, or do any wrong to the argument in hand, but receive most satisfactory
evidence from both, that Jesus is the Son of God.

I.
First then let us take it in the notion of PURITY; which we use the help of
Water to procure in bodily defilements. And therefore when the Prophet would
express the intention of God to purify his people from moral filthiness, he
says he will pour clean WATER upon them, xxxvi. Ezekiel. 25. and in other places
he calls upon them to WASH themselves; when he would have them amend their
ways, and lead new and holy lives. And when we speak of the PURITY of Jesus,
wherewith he CAME, that is, demonstrated himself to be the Christ; we must
consider that there is a double Sanctity or holiness, for which He was eminent
above all other persons, which may both be denoted by WATER. The one is of his
DOCTRINE wherewith Christ is said to cleanse his Church, for which he died, v.
Ephesians. 26. He gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it; having cleansed
it with the Washing of WATER by the Word. Where the Word (the preaching of the
Gospel) is either the explanation of washing with Water, or else denotes that
Christian Instruction which succeeds Baptism; to which, by our being washed
with Water in the Name of Christ, we are bound to attend, as the great
instrument of our purification. The other is holiness of LIFE and conversation;
which the same word WATER is used to express in the Epistle to the Hebrews, x.
22. where the Apostle exhorts all those who believed there was such a royal
High Priest as Jesus, set over the family of God, to worship him with integrity
of heart and sincere affection to him; nothing doubting of the truth of his
promises, and having their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and their
bodies washed with pure WATER. Now by a short view of the perfect spotlesness
of Jesus in both these, in regard of his Doctrine, and in regard of his Life;
we shall be able from thence strongly to draw this conclusion, that he must
needs be the Son of God.

I. First for the PURITY of his DOCTRINE; it is such, that it not only teaches
no evil at all, but teaches all manner of Goodness; and severely prohibits
every vice. There is not the least sin to which the Holy Jesus gives any
countenance; no, he declares the wrath of God from Heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; whom he fully instructs likewise and
encourages in every piece of true piety and virtue. So perfectly Holy is his
Word, that if we did entertain it, the power of it would thoroughly wash us from
all uncleanness, and not leave the least speck of dirt in our hearts. For he
intends by that (as the Apostle tells the Ephesians in the words following
those now named, ver. 27.) to present to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without
blemish. Whatsoever belongs either to our knowledge of God, or to our Duty in
every respect, condition and relation, His Doctrine completely comprehends it.

He has first of all so clearly revealed to us the ONE GOD Creator of Heaven
and Earth, that none could do it more expressly, or with greater reverence to
his Majesty. Whatsoever Moses has written against Idolatry, S. John here from
Jesus (in the conclusion of his Epistle) has summed it up in a few words,
Little children, keep your selves from IDOLS. In this the Jews could not accuse
him, nor durst let such a word fall from their mouths, that he was a false
Prophet, because he endeavored to draw their hearts after other Gods (which
was the great mark of an Impostor, xiii. Deuteronomy.) No, he tells them that this is
Eternal Life, to know the only true God (which words are spoken in opposition
to all others) and Jesus Christ whom he had sent. But in this they might have
seen that his design was far more noble and glorious than that of Moses, who
contented himself to preserve that one Nation from the infection of Idolatry:
whereas our Lord Jesus plainly declared his intention was by his Apostles to
turn all Nations from Idols, to serve the living and true God. There was never
any man that appeared so great a lover of God as he was. Never any man that
undertook to set on foot such a design, for the advancement of the universal
knowledge of him. All the Divine Attributes and Perfections also, He has
revealed so perspicuously, that there never was such a manifestation made of
them to the World, as we see in Him. From whom we learn how Just, how Good, how
Wise, how Faithful, and how Powerful, the Blessed and only Potentate is, who
only has immortality, whom no man has seen or can see.

And if we would know our Duty, either toward God in actions of Piety, or
toward Men in actions of Righteousness, or toward our selves in actions of
sobriety, we can learn it no where so easily, and completely, as if we go to
him, and to those who have delivered it to us with great care and plainness
from his mouth.

As for the Actions of PIETY, He teaches us inwardly to Honor God, v. Joh. 23.
that is, to have an high esteem of him as our Lord, and as our chiefest Good:
to Love him also, and that with all our heart, and all our Soul, and all our
mind, and all our strength, xii. Mark 30. And to Fear him, seeing he can cast
both Body and Soul into Hell; which makes him again and again bid us be sure to
Fear him, xii. Luke 4, 5. To confide likewise and Trust in him, the living God,
1 Timothy iv. 10. To Hope in his mercy, 1 Pet. i. 21. And to rejoice evermore, 1 Thessalonians. v. 16.

And as we are thus to worship him in our Minds, so we are taught by his
Religion externally to adore him and fall down before him, iv. Matthew. 10. iv.
Rev. 10. to pray to him both for our selves and others, 1 Timothy ii. 1, 8. and to
be incessant in our Prayers (or to perform this holy duty very often) xviii. Luke
1. 1 Thessalonians. v. 17. and to offer up by him the sacrifice of Praise to God
continually, xiii. Heb. 15. And in every thing to give thanks, which is the
will of God concerning us in Christ Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. v. 18. and especially to
show the Lords death, that is, publish it with thanks and praise, till he come,
to judge the World, 1 Cor. xi. 26.

The manner also of addressing our selves to God he has taught us so fully,
that nothing can be added to it. For he tells us, The Father will be worshipped
in Spirit and in Truth, iv. John 23. And that we must lift up holy hands, 1 Timothy ii. 8. And that when we pray we must forgive others, xi. Mark 25. and ask
in Faith, xxi. Matthew. 22. and avoid vain babbling; and not affect much speaking,
nor desire to be seen of men, and to join Fasting and Alms, with our Prayers
and Devotions to God, Matthew. vi. It is impossible to conceive any thing more
Divine than these Instructions.

To which he adds as rare Precepts for Actions of RIGHTEOUSNESS: concerning
which he has given us such an absolutely perfect Rule, that it comprehends the
measures of CHARITY too. No wit of man can think of any thing more holy than
that, LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THY SELF; or that, WHATSOEVER YE WOULD THAT MEN
SHOULD DO TO YOU, DO YE EVEN SO TO THEM. This is a rule that reaches all men;
and compendiously, yet completely, tells them how they should behave themselves
toward each other. If a man were a Magistrate, or a Parent, or stood in any
other superiority over his Neighbors, he would desire honor and obedience
from them; that therefore, says our Savior, let him give to those who are in
Authority. If a man be our equal, we desire, if not his friendship, yet his
fidelity in word and deed; that very thing let us be sure to render him and all
others in the same equality with us. If we be placed below others, we desire
the favor, the help, the relief, and counsel of our Betters; all these Jesus
here teaches us to afford, with the same cheerfulness that we would expect them
in their case, to those who are in want of our kind assistance.

Nay, he has told us in particular what our duty is in these matters, by the
mouths of his holy Apostles; that no man may think to excuse himself by his
ignorance and inability to apply a general Rule to every action of his life. I
shall not name all the places where you may find such words as these that
follow, but only tell you, He would have us so far from doing evil to any man,
that he requires us owe him nothing, but only love. And this debt we must be
always paying, and think our selves debtors to all men; not only to treat them
civilly, and give them good words, but to love them in deed and in truth. Which
Love must teach us as to be meek and gentle toward all men; to put away all
bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking; not to
circumvent or go beyond our Brother in any matter; not to lie to our neighbor;
nor defame him; much less do him any hurt in his body or goods: So to relieve
his poverty; to help forward his joy; to comfort him in his sorrow; to cover
his defects; to make a fair interpretation of his actions; to let our judgment
of him incline to the more favorable side; to mind what is lovely or grateful
to others, and what things are of good report; to study things that make for
peace; to compose and reconcile differences; to beg pardon of those whom we
have offended, and make them satisfaction; and if any have offended us, readily
to forgive their fault; to forbear revenge when it is in our power to requite
an injury; to do good for evil; to bless those that curse us; to overcome men's
hatred with benefits; to pray to God for those who use us despitefully; and to
be longsuffering, when it is fit to punish any man for his crime. And as for
those who are truly pious, we are taught to do them good above all other men;
to live with them in unity and godly love; to sympathize with them in their
several conditions; rejoicing with those that do rejoice, and weeping with
those that weep.

Nor has he failed to tell us by his holy Apostles, with what kindness and
indulgent affection Husbands should treat their Wives; and how they again
should so affectionately observe their Husbands, that they may together make up
a lively Image of that Dearest Love, which is between Christ and his Church.
And he has instructed us all how to behave our selves toward Magistrates,
Bishops, Presbyters, Masters and Parents; whom he has also taught how to bring
up their children, to use their servants, to feed and govern their flocks, and
to rule their people committed to their charge: so that no man can say he goes
without that Lesson, which is proper for his condition.

And then if we proceed to those things which we call SOBRIETY, his Doctrine is
so holy and pure, that it requires the greatest Moderation in all things. It
favors nothing that relishes of Covetousness, or Ambition, or Voluptuousness,
or any other violent and inordinate passion whatsoever. But quite contrary,
commands us not to labor, with too much eagerness and solicitude, for the meat
that perishes; to lay up our treasures in Heaven; to be humble and lowly, like
little children; to be temperate in all things; to be watchful and vigilant,
lest we be overtaken with surfeiting and drunkenness or the cares of this life;
to be chaste and pure in heart; to mortify our members that are on the Earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, and evil concupiscence; to
abstain from lasciviousness, foolish talking, wanton and unseemly jesting; to
cut off our right hand and pluck out our right eye, if it prove an offense to
us; to take just measures of our selves, as well as others; to be content with
our portion; to do those things which are venerable, grave and beseeming our
condition and employment: which if it be not according to our desires, not to
repine or be dejected at it; if it be, not to be transported with vain joy,
much less with pride and contempt of our neighbors.

And after all these and such like incomparable Lessons, He teaches us to
suffer any thing for well doing; to bear all worldly troubles valiantly and
with a magnanimous heart; to despise reproaches; nay, to rejoice when our names
are cast out as evil, for his name sake; in patience to possess our Souls; and
not to be weary in well doing, nor faint in our minds; but to endure
chastening; to persevere and suffer with long patience; to stand fast in the
faith; to quit our selves like men, and to be strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might.

To all which duties he urges us likewise, by the purest, the most spiritual,
the noblest and most Divine Arguments. He does not press us with such low and
poor motives as the hope of Riches (though he promise us things convenient) or
of Greatness, or of Fame and Glory; either while we live or when we are dead:
but propounds his own example to us, and the example of all the Saints that are
gone before us; and quickens us with the hope of Immortality when we depart
this life; and assures us at present of the friendly protection of Angels, and
of the joys of the Holy Ghost: which none of those shall fail to receive, who
are not enticed nor affrighted from their duty; but resolutely hold out in
their Christian warfare, and overcome.

And if any man say, that several Philosophers taught excellent things, and
gave Rules of a virtuous life; and yet it does not prove the best of them to be
so great, as these Witnesses are brought to demonstrate our Savior was: The
Answer is, that none of them delivered such a complete Rule of holy living as
our Lord has done; none of them touched the heart with such powerful reasons
and Divine motives; nor did any of them write without some mixture of folly; or
themselves exactly perform that which they taught others. Besides, that none of
them ever had the confidence to pretend to that quality, wherein our Savior
came; which you shall see presently is of great force to prove such an Holy
Person as he was, to be indeed what he pretended; the Son of God.

II. But first let us a little consider the second sort of PURITY, that of the
Life; in which our Lord Jesus far out-stript all others. He did not only preach
after that manner I have now related; but so he lived, and became a complete
pattern of that which he taught. He was a LIVING LAW, as Lactantius calls him
Lib. 4. Instit. C. 25
, to all his Disciples; whom he taught by Himself, and not merely by his
Lectures of Piety. Other Teachers had conceived in their minds and painted in
their Orations a virtue that was no where to be seen; for they were not able
(as the same Author elsewhere speaks) to confirm by present Examples, that
which they asserted in their Doctrine. Their Auditors might still say, that no
body could live according to their prescriptions, because no body ever did.
Behold, therefore our Savior comes to do, and not only to preach, the will of
God. And so holy, pure and free from all blame were all the Actions of his
life; that his greatest Enemies could lay nothing to his charge, but only
certain words: and those, such as contained most perfect truth, as he proved by
his actions and many other ways.

He was the Lamb of God without spot, and without blemish, as S. Peter speaks,
1 Pet. i. 19. He offered himself by the eternal Spirit without spot unto God,
ix. Hebr. 14. His whole life was such a fair example of that Piety, Humility,
Charity, Gentleness, Forgiveness, Peaceableness, Patience, and all other
virtues which he taught; that God restored him to life again, after they had
crucified him and put him to death, because there was no fault in him. He was
frequent in Prayer to God; and sometimes continued therein a whole night
together. Upon all occasions he gave him thanks. He loved his Glory and the
Good of mankind, more than his life. He went about doing good. And he taught
his Family to be as kind and tenderhearted as himself. He was meek and lowly
in heart. When he was abused, He was dumb as a Lamb before the shearers, so
opened he not his mouth. He was full of respect toward Magistrates and
Governors; very sweet and affable toward the poorest people; exceeding kind
and compassionate toward his envenomed enemies; and perfectly contented in the
lowest condition. When Foxes had holes, and Birds had nests, but He not where
to lay his head; none could be found more cheerful, thankful, and well pleased
than he was. And as for his Fortitude, Courage, Constancy, Resignation, and all
other suffering virtues; there never was any thing comparable to them. For he
endured the Cross, and despised the shame, and contentedly took the
contradiction of sinners, saying, Father, not my will, but thy will be done.

To all which you must add, that he was thus pure and undefiled, thus perfectly
pious, just and good, in an Age that was levened with the doctrine of the
Pharisees; who by their Traditions had made void the Law of God. Then he was
complete in all manner of God-like qualities; when the strictest Sect of
Religious people were utterly void even of common honesty. In those days he did
all things that God required; when it was counted the greatest sanctity to do
little but what men prescribed. When virtue was despised, when Faith and
Judgment and the Love of God were hated, when there was nothing but the very
dregs of Abraham's Piety remaining among his Children; then Jesus testified to
them that their deeds were evil; then this light shined in that darkness; and
this Son of God entered upon a more than Herculean labor, of cleansing the
Temple and the People, that were fuller of filth than the Augaean Stable.

And it is moreover to be considered, that though he opposed those idle
traditions of theirs, which evacuated the Laws of God; yet he neglected none of
the Ceremonial ordinances of Moses, but therein fulfilled all righteousness. No
body could accuse him for the breach of any Commandment, that had a Divine
stamp upon it. When they quarrelled with him for healing on the Sabbath day; He
soon stopped their mouths by showing them that they themselves would not deny
such a charity to an Ox or an Ass upon that day; if it were in danger of
perishing, or stood in need to be led away to watering. Nor was this so great a
labor in him, as it was for them to pull a beast out of a pit; for he did but
speak a word, and the cure was done, without any further pains. They did but
discover therefore, in these exceptions, their own rancorous malice and base
hypocrisy; who scrupled such charitable actions as these on the Sabbath day,
but made no bones, as we say, at any time to undo even a poor widow; whose
house their Conscience was wide enough to swallow. By his sharp but necessary
reproof of such crimes, he incurred their hatred. Which could not dishearten
him in his duty; but still he continued his free admonitions and reprehensions,
though he knew it might cost him the loss of his life. The doing of Gods will
was a great deal dearer to him than that. For this end he came into the world,
as he told Pilate, that he might bear witness to the Truth. And therefore it
was his meat, his great delight, to do the will of him that sent him, and to
finish his work.

To conclude this; so free from all spot was the Holy Jesus, that the Devils
malice could not tell what fault to charge upon him. But, as Eusebius Lib. 3.
demonstr. Evang.
recites from the Heathen Oracles, was forced to acknowledge him to be (...)
(and as he says a little after) (...). That is, a most Religious person, and
made immortal after death; an inhabitant of the celestial Orbs. Porphyry
himself, a great factor for the old Paganish worship, but one that had tasted
of Christianity, and knew what was in it, durst not (as he there notes) say any
thing to his disparagement: but from his own beloved Oracles, though he
regarded not the holy Scriptures, was constrained to give the forementioned
testimony of him. All that he was able to say in detraction from his honor,
was this, that Christians did foolishly to worship him: Though he granted him
to be carried to Heaven, (...), as Pious men are wont to be; and therefore
advises his own Scholars not to blaspheme ( i. e. speak evil of) Jesus, but
only to pity the ignorance of his followers.

It was very cautiously spoken, and moved no doubt the pity of Christian people
toward one that thought himself so knowing. For whatsoever he unskilfully
determined, we are able to make it appear, that we do well to worship and
honor him, even as we honor the Father of all: since his life is confessed by
his Enemies to be perfectly pure and unspotted; and his Doctrine teaches men
nothing, but to do as he did. This conclusion we shall easily draw from the
premises, if they be but diligently considered. And

1. First of all, it seems to me incredible, that any one but he that was in
the very bosom of God (that is, knew his mind most intimately, as I have said
before;) should be able to declare his will so fully, and to give such a Divine
Rule of holiness as Jesus has done, even by the mouth of those who were
skilled in nothing, but how to mend a Net, or catch Fish, or some such poor
artifice, till he inspired them. All the words that he spoke himself, both for
the matter and manner of them, do not sound like the words of a Man, but of a
God. Never man spoke like this man, say they, that did not go to be instructed
by him, but to apprehend him, vii. John 46. The report of others did not make
him so great, as they found him, when they came to see and hear him themselves.
Bad men are commonly more odious to us when we enter into conversation with
them, than they were whilst we remained strangers, and had nothing to do with
them. Nay, persons of known worth are sometimes more magnified by same, than
they appear when we approach nearer them. But Jesus was every where admired and
glorified; and never more, than when men grew the most familiar with him. None
could despise, though they might hate him, unless it was when he thought good
to say nothing, and to work no miracles; which made Herod and his men of war
set him at naught. When he opened his mouth, they that did not believe on him,
wondered, as you have heard, at the gracious words which thence proceeded.

For beside that his Discourses were incomparably beyond the common pitch of
wise men, his delivery of them was altogether Divine; for he spoke with
authority, and was a Prophet, as the Disciples going to Emaus relate to
himself, Mighty in deed and word before God, and all the people, xxiv. 19. And
such were those poor ignorant men, whom he chose to be his Apostles. Who not
only convinced gainsayers with the strength of Divine Arguments, but also
delivered Instructions for good Manners, with such exactness and such plainness
of speech; so familiarly, and so agreeably to the noblest inclinations of
humane nature: that it is manifest they understood it better than the greatest
Philosopher of them all. None of them ever described the several duties of
mankind, and urged them with such proper arguments, in so few words, and yet so
clearly and fully as these illiterate men did. Nor was there ever a set of men
so affectionately desirous of the good of others as these men were: who were
willing to impart unto them not only the Gospel of God, but their own Souls
also; because they were dear unto them. So S. Paul writes to the Thessalonians
(1 ii. 8.) every one of whom he exhorted, and comforted, and charged, as a
Father does his children, ver. 11. But he never used any flattering words
toward them; nor spoke as pleasing men, but God, who tries the hearts; nor
carried on any design of covetousness, or winning of glory to himself; nor
would be, in the least, burdensome to them; but was gentle among them, even as a
nurse cherishes her own children, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7.

Show me the man that ever spoke with such wisdom and judgment, as they did;
and with so much tenderness of heart. None but their Master ever preached or
wrote with so Divine a Spirit: which John the Baptist describes in such words
(with which I shall content my self) as prove the excellence of his Person,
from the excellence of his Doctrine, which he delivered unto men. They are in
the iii. John 31. where he says, He that COMES from above, is above all: He
that is of the Earth, is Earthly, and speaks of the Earth: He that COMES
from Heaven, is above all. That is, He who appears from Heaven with such a
Divine Authority, who delivers the mind of God in so rare a manner, that one
may see he has been with God, must needs excel all other persons in dignity;
Moses and the Prophets, and me also, who am of an Earthly extraction, born like
other men; and can speak only like a man, poor and low things in comparison
with those, which that Heavenly teacher delivers: who, I must needs again
confess, is far superior to me, because he is not a mere man, but comes from
Heaven; and so is above all Prophets whatsoever, who had more of the Earth than
of Heaven in them; that is, knew none of those secret counsels of God
concerning man's everlasting bliss, nor could direct us in so short, but plain
and sure a way to it as he has done. And then it follows, ver. 32, 33. And
what he has seen and heard, that he testifies, etc. He that has received his
testimony, has set to his seal that God is true. For he whom God has sent,
speaks the words of God. That is, he speaks such things, that a man may
easily see he is the only begotten of the Father, who is in his bosom, and
knows his very mind; having as certain an understanding of Heavenly things, as
we have of what we see and hear. And therefore whosoever believes him, does no
more but assent to God; whose words he speaks, by a particular commission he
received from him to act in his Name.

It is very observable that just after the mention of these Witnesses, 1 John
v. 10. S. John adds, that He who believes not this record which God gives of
his Son, has made him a liar: as on the other side John the Baptist here says,
That he who does receive his testimony (i. e. believes) solemnly acknowledges
God to be true. From whence I conclude, that what is said in this Epistle has
a relation to that which is writ in the Gospel: which I take to be no more than
this. That the Divineness of Jesus his Doctrine; the purity and Heavenly strain
of his discourses; his preaching as if he had heard and seen the Father, and
knew the state of things above; his speaking the Words of God (not as another,
like the Prophets before him, but as his own) was a great testimony to him that
he was sent of God, in that quality that he pretended: So that they who
received him did but rely upon the Truth of God, and give up their faith to
him; who hereby, as well as other ways, persuaded them that this was his Son.

2. But then that which I mainly insist upon is this second consideration. That
his pure, most holy Doctrine and Life was a great argument of his Divinity;
because this was part of his Doctrine, that he was the Son of God. For who can
think that a person of his virtue, who taught men both by word and deed such
reverence to God and such justice and charity to men, could be guilty of
putting such an open affront upon the one, and such an abuse upon the other, as
to challenge this title and propound himself to be received in this quality, if
he had not a just and undoubted right to it? He that came with so much sanctity
and holiness, in all his other words, and all his other actions, one cannot but
conclude was as holy and free from sin in this as much as in any thing else;
that he said he was the Christ, and persuaded the people to believe he was the
Son of the blessed.

This is certain, He affirmed himself to be the Christ, the Son of God, first
to his Disciples: And that both before his sufferings, xvi. Matthew. 16, 17. ix.
Mark 41. and also after his resurrection, xxiv. Luke 46. And then to others
also, who were as yet none of them, as (1.) to the woman of Samaria, iv. John
26. Then (2.) to the blind man whose eyes he opened, ix. John 35, 36, 37. And
lastly, he asserted it when he was brought before his Judges (as you have heard
already) and this very matter was brought in question; yea, when they adjured
him by the true God, and as he bare any respect to him, to tell them the very
truth in this thing. Now who is there that would not infer from hence, that all
the rest of his Doctrine being so opposite to all lying and every other vice,
and his whole life giving such a proof of his perfect virtue, that they had
nothing to ground a charge upon against him, but merely this profession of his
own, wherein, if he had pleased, he might have been silent; it is not in the
least credible that a person of his integrity should after so long speaking
truth, now at the last be guilty of speaking a lie? And (2.) a lie of such a
dangerous consequence as this, by which, if it were one, he and a world of
Souls must be undone? Yea, (3.) that he should tell it so often to so many
persons? And that (4.) before the Magistrates, who are Gods in this world? And
that (5.) when they were desirous and very importunate to know the truth? Yea,
(6.) before God himself, by whose name he was solemnly adjured to speak nothing
but the truth? How is it possible that such a man as he should be so void of
all fear of God, as to offend him in so high a manner? There are none sure
whose unstandings are sound, or whose consciences are not cracked, who can so
much as fancy, much less persuade themselves to believe, that a person whose
innocence was so great, that all the false witnesses they could find, men who
cared not for their own lives, could not be masters of his; should now, in such
a serious manner, when he was going out of the world, put such an horrid cheat
upon it, and with the loss of his life too upon a shameful gibbet, as to say
that he came from God, if he had no warrant for it. All sober men must rather
confidently believe that He who arrived, as I have often said, at such an
height of blameless purity in all other points whatsoever, was as free from
blame in this also; and said nothing but the very Truth, when He so solemnly
and so frequently, before God and before men, in his lifetime and at his
death, professed that he was the Son of God.

And if any man still object, that his uprightness indeed was so great that
without all doubt he would not invent such a tale as this, and affirm what he
did not believe; but yet he might be mistaken and believe that which was not
true: He may answer himself from his own concessions. For if he consider how
free our Savior was from all ambitious desires, how modestly he refused to be
advanced, how void he was of covetousness and all other worldly appetites,
which may blind a man's reason and abuse his understanding; and likewise how
admirably he discourses, how rational and convincing, how sublime and heavenly
all his Sermons are; He will soon be satisfied, that it is not credible a
person of his wisdom should be ruled by mere fancy; or of his goodness, be
carried into a vain dream by any sensual affections, which had no place in him.

This is the first acception of the word WATER, which you see clears our Lord
from all imputation of fraud, and washes off all aspersions that might be cast
upon him of imposture. For there is not the least spot or blemish appears in
the whole course of his Life, to render him suspected of any guile, much less
of so great a deceit as this, to feign himself the Son of God. Nay, his
Doctrine is so Divine, so much beyond the strain of the wisest men that ever
spoke, that it demonstrates he was as little obnoxious to be deluded himself,
as he was inclined and disposed to delude others.

II.
Let us now proceed to see what testimony may be drawn from this WATER in
behalf of our Lord; if we take it in the other sense, for BAPTISM, in which we
make a profession of PURITY. And there is a twofold BAPTISM by which our Lord
may be said to COME; that is, to appear a Person sent of God, as his only
begotten Son: The first is the Baptism of John; the second is his own Baptism.

I. As for the Baptism of John, it may be said that our Savior CAME by or with
this WATER; both because John when he baptized men with Water, preached that He
was coming, iii. Matthew. 11. i. John 30. and because He brought this Baptism
along with him, or rather sent it a little before him, as a testimony of him,
which would prepare his way, and dispose their hearts to receive him as the
Christ of God. For it is manifest that it was intendded as a proof of this,
from those words of our Savior himself, by which he stopped the mouths of the
Pharisees, and took away all matter of cavil from them, when he asserted his
supreme Authority both over them and over their Temple, xxi. Matthew. 23, 24, 25,
26. There you read that our Savior having come in Triumph to Jerusalem (ver.
8, 9.) and there received Hosanna's from old and young, and been saluted as the
Son of David, that is, their KING (who the Prophet had said, ver. 5. should
come unto them, meek and sitting upon the Foal of an Ass,) and he having cast
the buyers and sellers out of the Temple ( ver. 12.) and prohibited them to
carry so much as a vessel through it (as S. Mark tells us, xi. 16.) and being
now teaching the people there, the Chief Priests and the Elders came to him,
and examined him by what Authority he did these things, and who gave him this
Authority. That is, they bid him produce his Commission, if he had any, and
show them from whom he was SENT and CAME to take this Office, not only of a
Teacher, but of a Reformer, and that of the Temple it self: and likewise who
warranted him to ride in such pomp to Jerusalem, as the Son of David, the Lord
of that Country.

The Answer of our Savior to this question is, that they might soon be
resolved, if they would but satisfy him in another question, concerning
another person, who was come also in an unusual manner among them: And that
was, whether John had a Commission from God to baptize, or came of himself, by
the allowance of men only. Answer me but this question, says he, and I will
tell you by what authority I do these things. Consider of it, and tell me what
you think; whence was John's Baptism? from Heaven, or of Men? That is, who gave
him his power to preach, to reprove, to call men to repentance, to receive
confession of sins, and to do all other things belonging to his Ministry, which
Baptism accompanied, and constantly waited upon? Did God bid him go? or was it
from a motion of his own?

While they consulted for an Answer to this question of our Saviors, they
clearly saw their own answered. And they were not so dull, but that they could
easily discern our Lord would irrefragably prove his Divine Authority, and make
them confess he was the Messiah; unless they would adventure to say that, which
all the Country would decry not only as a falsity, but an egregious calumny.
For if they had affirmed that John entered upon the Office of Baptizing and
Teaching the people out of his own private will and inclination, or by
commission from some men; in this opinion they knew they should be singular,
because all the people held him to be a Prophet. That is, it was the sense of
the whole Nation then (and so it was afterward, as appears by Josephus) that
the Baptist was a Divine Man, inspired by God, and sent of him to do what he
did: which would have made them the public scorn and hatred, if without a
reason able to confute all the Country, they should have denied it. But then if
they should grant this and say, He was sent of God (which was the only thing
they could say with safety, if they would affirm either) they saw themselves in
as ill or worse a case another way: being as much afraid of what Jesus would
say, if this were confessed, as they were of what the people would say, if it
were contradicted. For as the people would have cried shame on them, if they
had disparaged John's ministry, so if they allowed it to be from Heaven, then
they knew Jesus would unanswerably prove his Commission to be from Heaven too:
and tell them that John, whom they took for a Divine Man, should acquaint them
with his authority, and from whom he had it; for he bare witness, in express
words, that he was the Christ, the Son of God. They thought it a safer course
therefore to leave this question undetermined, and to say they could not tell
whence his Baptism was, than by resolving it either way, to give with their own
mouths so great an advantage to him, whom they questioned and opposed.

But by saying nothing, they plainly confessed, that if they had gone on to
dispute with him, He would have had the better of them: and have made it appear
from John Baptists testimony, that He had an authority far greater than that
which they must have acknowledged in him. For though our Savior thought good,
for brevity-sake, to propound this argument to them by way of question, and so
let them reason it out within themselves; yet it was as forcible, they plainly
felt, as if he had pleaded with them in this manner. My Authority, which you
call in question, is every evident. I have it from Heaven, and not from Men; as
I prove by this argument. If the Baptism of John be from Heaven, then from
thence I come; now you cannot deny, if you will speak out, that his Baptism is
from thence; and therefore I make the conclusion, that my Authority is Divine.
The consequence was as clear as the Sun, that if John was sent by God, then so
was Jesus in that quality wherein he appeared; because John (as you shall see)
gave this testimony to him, which could not be questioned after they had
granted him to be a Prophet. The only thing that could be denied in this
Argument was, that John's Baptism was from Heaven; or that God authorized him
to say and do what he did. But this they durst not oppose, because then to rid
themselves of one Enemy, they should bring the whole Nation, as we say, about
their ears: who did not take John for a counterfeit, but thought, that he was a
Prophet INDEED, xi. Mark 32. Nay, they themselves never adventured to call John
before their Council; much less advised how they might put him to death, as
they did our Savior. But on the contrary, many of the Pharisees and the
Sadducees came to his Baptism, iii. Matthew. 7. They were as inclinable to
reverence him as the people. For God who had spoken heretofore to that Nation
so long by Prophets, whom they thought themselves bound to believe, had plainly
manifested him to be one. Nay, he was not a common Prophet, but one of an
extraordinary rank: The Prophet of the Highest, his Father calls him; and more
than a Prophet in the language of our Savior, as you shall hear presently.

What should they do then? which way should they turn themselves, now that they
durst not deny the Proposition, upon which this consequence evidently depended,
that Jesus was the Christ? Their only resuge was silence: For though thereby
they acknowledged him too hard for them, and suffered his Divine authority to
stand supported by this unanswered Argument; yet they had rather part so, and
shamefully break off the disputation which they themselves had begun, than let
him go away with their express confession and testimony, that, if the Prophet
of the Highest might be believed, he was their Christ. It was no disadvantage
to our Savior, but to their own cause, that they answered, they could not tell
whence John's Baptism was: For hereby it appeared He had so much to say for
himself, that if they would say any thing in this matter, and not obstinately
hold their peace, they must say as He did, that He was the Son of God. For John
Baptist, whose Heavenly authority they durst not deny, though they would not
confess it, received all men into this belief when they came to him, that there
was one COMING after him, who should gather Disciples as he did, and that he
was the Christ. This he told them was the very end of his Preaching and
Baptizing, to prepare the way of the Lord; to make them fit and ready to
entertain the next Prophet that should appear, as greater than him, even as the
Son of God. And therefore when Jesus did openly appear and come to his Baptism,
and John saw the Spirit descend and remain on him, then he told them in plain
terms that this was the person whose way he came to prepare, and that they must
receive him as the Son of God, and the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world, i. John 29, 30, 34. And that which he said at this time, there is no
doubt he declared at all times, when the people came to be baptized. For thus
the Jews describe Jesus when they disputed with some of John's Scholars about
his Baptism, iii. Joh. 25. HE TO WHOM THOU BAREST WITNESS, behold, the same
baptizeth, etc. ver. 26. Thence he is frequently called one of his WITNESSES,
and said to come for this end, that he might be a WITNESS to him, that ALL men
through him might believe; that is, might be persuaded that Jesus was the WORD
of God, by this testimony of John, i. John 6, 7, 8. And our Savior afterward
appeals to this Testimony of his, and bids the Jews consider it, v. John 32,
33. For you know, says he, that he bare WITNESS to me, when ye sent to him: And
I know that the WITNESS which he WITNESSES of me is true.

And great reason there was that they should consider it, and be convinced by
it. For John was a burning and a shining light (as it there follows, ver. 35.)
and they themselves were willing for a season to rejoice in his light. If that
fit was over, and now they were less delighted in him, it was merely because he
testified of Jesus. There was nothing else to damp their affection; for
otherways they could not but confess him to be an illustrious person. Who
shined with the greater splendor, because He was miraculously conceived in his
Mothers old Age; and his Birth was predicted by an Angel; and his Father struck
dumb because he believed not his Word; and this Angel appeared in the very
Temple, at the Altar of Incense, and therefore was not like to be a delusion;
And his Father was endued with the Spirit of Prophecy, and his tongue unloosed
when this Child came to be Circumcised; Then He spoke concerning his quality,
by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost; and John appeared to be prophetically
endowed from a child; God also took care of his education in the Wilderness,
where he was trained up to a resemblance of Elias; so that his life and manners
transcended all in that Age; and his Spirit and Doctrine was so powerful and
convincing, that it was hard for them to say who he was; the people admiring
his sanctity and preaching, held him for a Prophet; and some of the Priests and
Levites having such an esteem of him, that it was a question among them,
whether he was not the CHRIST.

They were sent, you know, from Jerusalem to enquire about it, i. John 19, 20,
etc. and yet this Person, who shined with such a luster, whom Jesus himself
calls the greatest that had been born of women, of whom he was baptized;
declares to these persons who came to ask who he was, that he was not worthy so
much as to carry the Shoes of him that was coming after him, ver. 27. and that
his Doctrine, as you have heard (iii. 31.) was of the Earth, flat and low in
comparison with the words that Jesus should speak; who he told them plainly was
the Christ, the Son of God: but as for himself, he confessed, and denied not;
but confessed (that is, repeated it more than once, and affirmed constantly) I
am not the Christ.

What reason was there then, why both they that heard his testimony of Jesus,
and they that sent these messengers to make enquiry, should not believe him,
since all this was so known a truth? His Father Zacharias was a Priest, whom
they could not but reverence more than to imagine he studied to deceive,
especially since he was noted for a righteous man, walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless. And John himself was a
Nazarite, one whose head was never troubled with the fumes of Wine or of strong
drink: (i. Luke 15.) and bred up likewise in the Deserts or Wilderness of Judea
(i. Luke 80.) after a plain and simple fashion; where he was like to learn no
craft or guile. If any body should take the confidence to fancy that there
might be a compact between Jesus and him, to cry up and speak great things of
one another: He is confuted by the plain story of both their lives. I have told
you how far Jesus was from seeking his own glory; and John Baptist was a man of
such confessed sanctity and severe virtue, that none then could suspect him of
such a guilt. Besides that it is manifest they never had seen one another, at
least John had no knowledge of our Savior, until He came to be baptized of
him: when he immediately proclaimed him to be that person whom he had magnified
so much, and told them should be preferred above himself, before he had any
such acquaintance with him. And it is not unfit to be remembered, that even
before he was born, John Baptist leaped in his Mothers womb, when the blessed
Virgin came to visit her; as if he had then begun to confess him to be the LORD
(as his Mother calls him, i. Luke 41, 43.) and to rejoice to be a WITNESS unto
so great a person.

For a conclusion of this, let the place be noted where Jesus came to be
baptized of John; and where he gave so ample a testimony to him: For from
thence we shall draw something, which will help to settle this belief in us,
that Jesus is the Son of God. It was at BETHABARA beyond Jordan, as S. John has
recorded, i. John 28. There the Priests and Levites, who were deputed by the
Sanhedrim, or great Council at Jerusalem to go and examine him, received their
Answer from him again and again, that he was not the CHRIST: For there he was
baptizing, and there Jesus came to receive his baptism; for as he was speaking
those words which you read ver. 27. and saying he was not worthy to loose the
latchet of his Shoes; Jesus came from Galilee (as S. Matthew writes, iii. 13.)
to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him. Now this Name BETHABARA signifies
the place of passage, or going over ((...) Beth in their language being an
house or place, and (...) Abara, a passing over from one place unto another)
and therefore in all likelihood hereabouts the children of Israel went over
this River Jordan, when they entered upon the land of Canaan. This was the place
of their passage, when God brought them out of the Wilderness to their desired
possession; and so had the name of Bethabara affixed to it, in memory of so
great a blessing.

Now Jesus being baptized at that very place where Joshua or Jesus (as he is
called iv. Hebr. 8.) conducted the children of Israel over that River unto
their rest; and receiving there such a testimony both from God the Father, and
likewise from John the Prophet of the highest: It was a notable sign and token
(joined with those two) that this person called Jesus also was He that should
lead them into the Heavenly rest, and be the Captain of their Salvation. And
the Holy Ghost descending also in this very place upon him; here he was
anointed to be the Guide, the Leader and Conductor of God's people: that is (as
we render the word (...), v. Acts 31.) a PRINCE and a Savior, who should put
them in possession of the greatest blessings. As Moses laid his hands on ^^shua
near this place (which we may reasonably conjecture from xxxiv. Deuteronomy. 9.) and
made him the Ruler and Governor of that Nation: so here did God himself give
all things into the hands of Jesus, by the Holy Ghost coming down upon his
head, appointing, constituting and ordaining him to be the Royal Prophet who
should bring all the world to his obedience.

And it is observable, that to this place our Savior a great while after
returned again, and there made his residence, when the Pharisees sought to kill
him, x. John 40. I cannot but think that this Evangelist would have us learn
something from his so particular remembrance of this place, both at our
Saviors baptism, and at his return again into the Country beyond Jordan. For
it is not their manner to mention such circumstances in so short a History as
this is, without some considerable reason. Now as we have guessed at the cause
of his being baptized and receiving the testimony of John at Bethabara; so it
is likely the reason why our Savior went hither again and here abode was, that
he might call to the peoples mind what had been done here formerly; the
Testimony which John received from God concerning him, and the Testimony which
thereupon John gave to them of him, at this remarkable place. For he knew those
things which were done at Bethabara, had a great force in them to work a much
better disposition in the people, than was in the murderous hearts of those at
Jerusalem, and to move them to become his Disciples. According to which
supposition you read in the very next words (x. John 41, 42.) that many
resorting to him, began to discourse among themselves concerning John, and of
what he had spoken concerning our Savior (for which we can find no occasion
but the place, and perhaps our Saviors putting them in mind what had been said
and done here) and that many believed on him THERE. The word there is to be
remarked; for it tells us that these Disciples were won to Jesus at that place,
where John at first baptized. They remembered, it is probable, what he had said;
how he told them, that he saw the Holy Ghost here descend and remain upon him,
and that this was he whom he had spoken of before who was greater than himself,
and that he saw and bare record that this is the Son of God. And they likewise
now beheld some miracles wrought by our Savior (whereas John wrought none)
which proved John's words to be true which he spoke of him, that he should be
preferred before him: be the true Joshua whom they must all follow, the
Messiah, the KING of Israel, to whose conduct they must trust, if they meant to
enter into rest.

I have done with the first BAPTISM, that of John; which if you consider
thoroughly, the Person from whom Jesus received it, the place where he went into
the water, the testimony that was here given him, both by the Father, by the
Holy Ghost, and by John; you will easily grant it might well be affirmed in
respect to all these, that he came by WATER, and that this was one of his
WITNESSES.

II. It is time now to come to the second particular, and take into
consideration awhile his OWN BAPTISM which he administered: For that is not
without some proof, that he was the CHRIST. Indeed Jesus himself baptized not,
but his Disciples, as you read, iv. John 2. But yet because whatsoever a
Servant does by the authority of his Master, it is reputed the Masters Act, and
he himself is said to do it; therefore Jesus also is said to baptize in the
same Evangelist, iii. 26. iv. 1. Now this was an argument to the Jews that he
was the Messiah.

1. First, because all expected that the Messiah or CHRIST should come with
Baptism, and thereby renew the world, as the Hebrew Doctors sometime speak. It
began they say in the time of Moses, when he brought them to receive the Law
from God, and entered them by this Ceremony of washing into a new Religion, xix.
Exodus 10, 14. By which they tell us, Proselytes were received into their
communion in succeeding times; when they passed from the state of Gentilism,
and were regenerated to worship God with the Israelites. And therefore when
CHRIST came, and with him a new world (for there is nothing more common in
their Books than to call his days, The WORLD TO COME) they concluded he should
begin it with Baptism, as Moses did that frame of things which he erected.

This is certain, it was one of their marks of him, that in his days there
should be an universal Baptism and cleansing of the people. Which they gather
from xiii. Zach. 1. where we read of a FOUNTAIN opened for sin and for
uncleanness: and from several places in the Prophet Isaiah, where he speaks of
the Waters in the wilderness (in which S. Mark tells us John baptized, i. 4.)
and from the xxxvi. Ezekiel. 25. where he says, I will sprinkle Water upon you,
etc. a new heart also will I give you: which is applied by the Apostles to the
days of Christ, who began his new Kingdom with washing with Water or Baptism in
his name. And therefore when John the Baptist came with this Water, they sent,
as I noted before, to know of him who he was, thinking he might be the Christ.
For which there appears no reason (for he did not work so much as one miracle)
but that all Judea, and all the region about Jordan went out to him, and were
BAPTIZED of him in Jordan confessing their sins, iii. Matthew. 5, 6. And
therefore when He told them that he was not the CHRIST, nor Elias, nor that
other Prophet; whom they expected to accompany him, they ask him then, i. John
25. Why BAPTIZEST thou, if thou art none of these? They thought it was not in
the power of any man to institute and introduce this new Ceremony, unless he
was either the CHRIST or his Forerunner, or some other Prophet ( Jeremiah it is
like) who they fansied should rise from the dead and come along with him. A new
Ceremony I call it, because though we should grant that Baptism was in use
among them (as much has been said by Mr. Seldom Lib. de Jure Not. and L. de
Succession.
among others to prove it) yet thereby they only received Proselytes and their
children from other Countries. But it was not the manner to baptize Jews, such
as were grown and adult; much less did any of the Masters in Israel gather
Disciples after this fashion; and therefore the Sanhedrim might well send to
enquire who this was, that took upon him to call all the Country to repent, and
sanctify themselves; and also like a Prophet had particular scholars
ministering unto him.

The most learned of the Jews indeed had but confused notions of things to
come, and the Priests and Levites you see here by their questions, did not
certainly know whether Baptizing with such an authority, was a sign that a man
was the Christ or not: yet they generally inclined to believe that it was a
note of him, as may be gathered, I think, from iii. Luke 15. where you read
that the people were in expectation (knew not what to think, but waited that
John would declare the Christ to them) and ALL MEN mused in their hearts of
John, that is, debated and reasoned within themselves (as it is in the Margin)
whether John would at last declare himself to be the Christ or not. And another
Argument there is to prove that they looked upon Baptism as a mark of the
Messiah; for as soon as our Savior began to make this his business, and to
authorize his Disciples to baptize, then they were more in suspense (as that
word expectation in S. Luke now mentioned may be rendered) than ever: And knew
not what to imagine, when they saw two great men doing one and the same thing,
and thereby drawing the people after them. But after they had debated the
matter better, it seems they began to leave their opinion of John's being the
Messiah, and to look rather upon Jesus as the person; at least to have some
thoughts that it might be so.

For we find in iii. John 25. that there arose a controversy between some of
John's Disciples and some Jews who were not his Disciples, about purifying or
cleansing: by which may be understood Baptism, which was the sign and the
instrument of it. And the dispute (as far as the following discourse directs
our conjectures) was this, Whether their Master John's Baptism, or that of
Jesus was the best, and which of them a Jew should receive? For they saw them
both baptize, Jesus in Judea, ver. 22. and John, in Enon near to Sabim, ver.
23. To which of these places therefore they should resort seems to be the
question. If John's baptism was from Heaven, why should it be laid aside, or
why should another come and take his work out of his hand? Was Jesus now sent
with a greater authority, so that they must leave John, and go to him? To this
his Disciples being able to give no satisfaction, they go to the Master himself
for a resolution, and tell him, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan to
whom thou barest witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all men come to him.
As much as to say, we are much perplexed, being in doubt which of you two to
receive for our Master. For Jesus who was baptized of thee at Bethabara (a note
they imagined of his inferiority to John) and yet had a testimony from thy self
that he was sent of God too; does not only now take upon him thy office, and
thereby lessen and extenuate thy authority, but quite eclipses and obscures
thee, baptizing far more than thou do. Which shows that they began to
conceive John was not the man they had taken him for; but that Jesus rather
should enjoy that name which they had been apt hitherto to bestow upon him: and
their Argument was, because Jesus baptized more Disciples than the other did.

To this John answers in the next words, ver. 27. A man can receive (or take
unto himself) nothing, except it be given him from Heaven. That is, let not
this trouble you, that Jesus Baptizes, and all come to him; it is no more than
I told you, that I was no body in comparison with him. For no man can honestly
assume more authority to himself than his Commission gives him. And for that
reason I could not do so much as Jesus does, because I have not received so
much, nor can pretend so large a power from God, who alone can give it. And
then he adds, that it is strange they should forget what he had told them in
express words, ver. 28. Ye your selves bear me witness, that I said, I AM NOT
THE CHRIST, but that I am sent before him. That is, it is a wonder you raise
this dispute, when I never gave you any occasion to fancy me to be as great as
he; but told you plainly, as you your selves may remember, that I was not your
KING anointed by God to rule over you; all the honor that I had being no more
than this, to be ordered to come and prepare his way for him. I never intended
that my washing you with Water, or gathering Disciples, should be a mark that I
was the CHRIST: Alas! I only baptized you with the water of repentance, that
you might be disposed to believe on him, who I told you was coming. To whom you
would do well, now that he is come, to go and be baptized of him. For he brings
a nobler baptism than that of mine, being as much above me as the Bridegroom at
a wedding is above him who only waits upon him, and prepares things belonging
to the marriage. That Is the sense of the 30. verse. I never intended to set up
my self as the Principal person in this business, that we are come about. For I
know very well, that he who has the bride, is the bridegroom, that is, he is
the Head of the Church or people of God, to whom God has designed that high
honor. And that is Jesus, not I, who am only his Friend, sent before to make
things ready for him. It is a great honor for me to be one of his Disciples,
and to receive his instructions. And I am glad with all my heart that I live to
hear him preach. It is an exceeding great pleasure to me, all the joy I can
desire, to hear him, the Bridegroom speaking to his Bride the Church, and
telling her himself what he intends to do for her, and what he would have her
to do. Question no more therefore to whom you should go for purifying from your
sins, nor think it strange that he Baptizes more than I. For He must increase,
but I must decrease, ver. 30. There remains now nothing for me to do; but I
must be obscure, as Theophylact glosses, like the Day Star when the Sun arises.
All must become his Disciples, even they who now are mine, and I my self too,
as in truth I am. For he says, the Friend of the Bridegroom, that is, himself,
stands (which was the posture of a Scholar before his Master) and hears
him, rejoicing greatly because of his voice, that is, because he is come to
teach, who could do it better than himself. For there is as much difference, he
presently adds in the next words, ver. 31. (which I have explained before)
between their two doctrines, as there is between the Heaven and the Earth. And
therefore they must needs be inexcusable who did not receive his testimony (
ver. 32.) and become his Disciples. Who came with such authority from God (
ver. 33.) and had not the Spirit by measure ( ver. 34.) but the power to reveal
the whole will of God, and do all his pleasure ( ver. 35.) For, as he
concludes, everlasting life is the portion of him who believes on Jesus: but
if a man believe not, he shall never see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him.

Thus you see John himself directs them again unto Jesus, and bids them go to
his Baptism, become his Disciples, and no longer doubt whether he was the
Christ or not. For as he did not pretend to an equality with Jesus, so they
should see his fame continually decline and grow less, by the growth of the
Glory of Jesus, who should shine alone by himself, and quite darken him. So
Gregory Hom. 20. in Evang.
the Great expounds those words now mentioned ( ver. 30.) He must increase, and
I must decrease; the sense of which he seems to have hit better than any that I
have seen, when he says: In what was John diminished, and our Savior advanced
but in this: that the people seeing the abstinence of John, and his retirement
from the society of the world, imagined him to be the Christ; whereas our
Savior, whom they beheld eating with Publicans, and keeping the company of
sinners, they fancied was not the Christ, but only a Prophet? But when in
process of time, both Jesus who was taken for a Prophet, appeared to be the
Christ; and John who was taken for the Christ, was discovered to be but a
Prophet: then was fulfilled what he had foretold, He must increase and I must
decrease. For both our Savior increased in the esteem of the people, because
he was acknowledged to be what he was; and John decreased, because he ceased to
be called what he was not.

2. And this leads me to the next consideration, which I shall but briefly
mention. That as John directed them to prefer our Saviors Baptism before his,
and to become the Disciples of a far greater Master: so the end of the Baptism
of Jesus was to entertain men for his Disciples, that thereby they might make
profession of their belief in him. And here now our Savior began to eclipse
the luster of John, and showed himself much superior to him: both in that he
did not administer Baptism himself by his own hands, as John did, but appointed
his Disciples to do it, who thereby became equal with John; and that he
gathered Disciples to himself, whereas John Baptized them into the belief of
him that was to come after him, as you read expressly, xix. Acts 4. None I
suppose can doubt of this, but that they who received baptism from our
Savior's Disciples, who waited constantly upon him, did thereby own Jesus for
a Teacher or Master sent of God (as Nicodemus speaks, iii. John 2.) and
consequently professed themselves desirous to learn of him, and ready to
believe what he taught. But I cannot say that they baptized them now into the
Name of Jesus, or into a belief that he was the Christ, as they did after his
ascension into Heaven. For they were forbid to publish this openly, xvi. Matthew.
20. men were to learn it by degrees under his discipline, to which they
delivered themselves by being baptized of him. Yet this prepared them for the
belief that he was their Christ: which his Apostles afterward most zealously
and strongly asserted by Baptism. For when he was exalted at Gods right hand,
they went, according to his Commission, and Discipled all Nations, baptizing
them into his name, as well as into the name of the Father. That is, they
engaged them to believe, that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of God, otherways
they would not baptize them.

By this WATER therefore he may be said to come, because he hereby made
proselytes to himself, whom he undertook to teach and instruct after the manner
of the Prophets, but with an authority which spoke him to be greater than all
Prophets; and because it was not a baptism like John's, with simple water, but
was presently after accompanied with the Holy Ghost. Nay, the Baptism it self
was a WITNESS to him (joined with what went before) because it argued
authority, and such as was much superior to that of John, though he was
greater than any Prophet: which could be no other therefore but that of Christ.
For who beside could baptize the whole Nation, and into an higher Institution,
than his whom they took for the Christ? who confessed and asserted (and no body
appeared to contradict it) that he was not that light (by whom they must begin
to be illuminated by Baptism) but Jesus was the true light, which coming into
the world lighteneth every man. John's baptism therefore, as S. Basil Exhort.
ad Bapt.
aptly calls it, was only (...), introductory to something else more perfect
than it self: that is, to our Savior's baptism, which was (...), that which
completed men in a full belief that he was the Christ.

3. For lastly, the Baptism which the Apostles administered, especially after
his Resurrection and Exaltation, was an entrance of men into a new Religion:
For they did not baptize them into Moses, but into another Name, that of the
Lord Jesus. This was a sign that He, who had so many ways been approved of God
among them, as S. Peter speaks, was indeed the Christ. For what greater mark
could there be of supreme authority, than the setting up, in such a manner as
he did; an Institution and Discipline which was not known before; and teaching
those who received his baptism, to observe a new Law, without those rites which
had been hitherto used? Who could repeal the Ordinances of Moses, nay, abrogate
Circumcision, which was ancienter than Moses; but only He who had the same
power with him that gave the Law to Moses, and Circumcision to Abraham their
Father, viz. the Son of God himself? Yet this did our Jesus; and Baptism was
the Rite appointed by him for the admission of Disciples into the profession of
this new Religion, which took away the old as unprofitable. By this they were
born again, and became his children, that is, his scholars (for the sons or
children of the Prophets were their disciples, those who learnt of them) whom
he endued with his principles and called after his name. And he plainly
declared, as you read in his discourse with Nicodemus, that no man could have
any part in that Kingdom, which the Messiah was setting up in the world, if he
contented himself with the old Religion, and were not by baptism born again;
that is, suffered himself to be further informed, and proceeded to entertain
the Religion which he delivered. Thus far Nicodemus was gone already, to
believe him to be a Master sent of God, which was the opinion of others of
their Rulers besides himself; for he says WE know it. Why then did he not own
it by receiving his baptism, and thereby put himself under the discipline of
this Master? That being instructed by him till he acknowledged that he was the
Christ, he might be taught at last by the Spirit, when it came down upon the
Apostles; and so be perfectly born again, or informed in the Christian
Religion. Till this was done he was but (...) (as Gregory Nazianz. Orat. 16.
calls him) a lover of Christ by halves. To make him an entire Christian, he
was to receive his Baptism, and to own him to have full power and authority
from God to make what change he pleased, so far as to turn them into new men,
and to make them over again. The Pharisees one would think saw very well that
this was the consequence of his gathering so many disciples by baptism, that he
out-did John the Baptist. For to avoid their rage which they had conceived
against him upon this account, but never expressed against John, he left Judea
(where he was baptizing, as you heard before, iii. 22.) because they had great
power there, and departed into Galilee again, where their authority was less,
iv. 1, 2, 3. They were afraid of an innovation in the state of things, which
they had a mind should continue as they were. Their Baptism they saw would
signify nothing, if he went on thus to make disciples. Whom he informed
according to his own mind, and persuaded to believe on him as their King, in
whose Sovereign power it was to make all old things pass away, and cause all
things to become new.

By this WATER therefore He may be said to COME, and it may be called one of
his WITNESSES, as he baptized, that is, gave his Apostles authority to baptize
men, not into Moses, but into himself; to learn new lessons of him, and to
leave the old, though they had been taught by God himself. Who found no fault
at all with this baptism, but justified it, as you shall see, many ways, to be
according to his mind, and in pursuance of his will.

And so much pains may suffice about the examination of the first WITNESS of
these three that speak on Earth, which is WATER: The Holiness of Jesus both in
his Doctrine and Life; and the Baptism, both of John and of Jesus.

I wish that every one who considers how great and necessary a proof this was,
of Jesus his being the Son of God, would labor to prove himself to be indeed
born of him by the same argument of purity and holiness. For as we could never
have believed Jesus to have been God's Son, unless he had come thus by Water;
no more can any man rationally conclude that he is one of those whom he will
own for his children, unless he conform to his holy will, by washing himself
from all filthiness, and becoming clean every whit. Read over the Sermons and
the Life of Christ, and remember that your Baptism engages you to learn of him,
and to become like him. Express that Honor toward God, that Fear and that
Love of him which he requires. Employ your selves carefully in all actions of
Justice, Charity, and Sobriety. Yea, be prepared cheerfully to follow him, in
suffering as well as in doing his blessed will. This will be an infallible
testimony, that you are the children of God; as, on the contrary, if you want
this Witness, all other evidence of it will fail you. There is no reason to
distrust this; but the stronger your confidence is without it, the more grossly
you deceive your selves, if you conclude your selves to be dear to him. You
find both these strongly asserted in this Epistle. For the Affirmative read,
ii. 29. If ye know that he is righteous, know ye that every one that does
righteousness is born of him. And iii. 7. Little children, let no man deceive
you; he that does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous. For the
Negative, read the following words, ver. 8, 9, 10. He that commits sin, is
of the Devil; for the Devil sins from the beginning. For this purpose the
Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil.
Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin; for his seed remains in him;
and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. In this the children of God are
manifest, and the children of the Devil: whosoever does not righteousness, is
not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother.

And for your encouragement to purify your Souls, remember that the purity and
holiness of Christ's Life and Doctrine, secures you of the truth of all his
gracious promises. We may say with a greater assurance than the Psalmist did in
his days (xii. Psalm. 6.) The words of the Lord (i. e. his promises) are pure
words; as silver tried in a furnace of Earth, purified seven times. Which
should make us value them more than thousands of Gold and Silver, though never
so perfectly refined; and to say as he does in another place, cxix. 140. Thy
word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it. Those Metals are not freer
from Dross, after they have passed never so often through the Fining-pot, than
his promises are from all mixture of deceit. We may rely upon them with the
greatest confidence, and be secure they will never fail us. It is as certainly
true, that God will take us to be his Sons and Daughters, that he will dwell in
us, and give us everlasting life, as it is, that Jesus is the Son of God. He
that says the one, says the other too: and he may be alike believed in both.

But then, having these promises, we must cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2
Cor. vii. 1. For the Son of God was manifested, you heard, for this purpose.
And this was the end for which he gave himself ( i. e. to die for us) that he
might sanctify and cleanse his Church, with the washing of Water, by the Word
(v. Ephesians. 26.) and redeeming us from all iniquity, purify to himself a
peculiar people zealous of good works, i. Tit. 14. Which if we study sincerely,
then this WATER here spoken of, is part of the Waters of Life: and this
Testimony gives us assurance that we shall have our share in those Eternal good
things, which he has promised in his holy Gospel: For he is the Truth, and in
him there is no Lie. But of this more hereafter, when we have heard the
following Witnesses, and given glory to Jesus, and made our acknowledgments to
him in some such words as these.

A PRAYER.
I Believe, O Lord, not only that thou art a Teacher come from God, and
speak the words of God; but that thou art above all, the very WORD of God it
self; into whose hands the Father has given all things. I admire the holiness
of all thy Precepts, and rejoice in the purity of thy exceeding great and
precious promises. Thou art the Truth, the Holy one of God, without spot or
blemish, in whose mouth was found no guile. There is all reason that we should
receive thy testimony, which thou have given of thy self; and all that thou
have testified to us to be the will of God; and believe that without holiness
no man shall see the Lord.

Good Lord, increase my Faith: that as I see still further demonstrations of
thy power and glory, and cannot but acknowledge the perfect sanctity, equity
and goodness of all thy Laws, and be in love with the beauty of thy most holy
life; so I may feel my heart inclined more and more to submit it self to be
governed by thee, to obey thy will, and to imitate thy example. Happy are those
holy Souls who have learnt of thee to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world; and whose hearts, by that means, are full of the blessed
hope of immortality hereafter, and of thy tender care of them, while they are
here. There is nothing so desirable, as to be holy even as thou who have called
us art holy, in all manner of conversation. It is the perfection of our Nature,
the end of our Being, and the true satisfaction of our hearts; to have thy
image formed in us in righteousness and sincere holiness. Imprint this sense
deeper, O blessed God, in mine and every Christian heart. That it may be our
perpetual delight, as well as our study, to give thee the honor that is due
unto thy Name; to love thee with all our heart and soul and strength; to
preserve an holy fear of thee in our mind; to trust in thee and cast our care
upon thee; to hope in thy never-failing mercies; and to rejoice evermore in thy
love and that good hope, which are better than life it self.

O that we may never cease to testify our true love, and honor, and fear of
thee, with all other religious affections, by praying without ceasing; and
offering the sacrifice of praise continually; and in every thing giving thanks,
especially for the oblation which our Lord made of himself to thee: which love,
may it be published with perpetual praise and thanks, every where, to the end
of the world. And give us the grace to add unto our love of thee, a sincere and
unfeigned love of all men. That we may do to them, whatsoever we desire that
they should do to us. Let this be the constant Rule of all our designs,
desires, words and actions. Let it ever be before our eyes, to make us duly
honor and observe our superiors; pity, succor, relieve, and comfort all
those who are below us; and be just, faithful and friendly to all others. O
that every man would speak the truth with his neighbor; and be charitable in
their judgments one of another; meek and gentle in all their words and
behavior, ready to distribute and to do good; studious of the things that make
for peace; forward to be reconciled to those who have offended them; to pass by
injuries, and to do good for evil; and especially to be kindly affectioned one
to another in the love of the Brethren; in honor preventing one another.

For which end, endue us all with true humility of Spirit; with very contented
minds and moderate desires. Let no covetousness, no ambition, or love of any
pleasure, betray us to dishonor thee, hurt our neighbors, or abuse our
selves. Help us to possess our bodies in sanctification and honor; to preserve
our hearts chaste and pure; to be temperate in all things; to mortify our
members that are on the Earth; to put away all foolish talking and corrupt
communication out of our mouth; and to abstain from all appearance of evil.

Finally, whatsoever things are sincere and true, whatsoever things are grave
and honest, whatsoever things are just and equal, whatsoever things are pure
and modest, whatsoever things are amiable and endearing, whatsoever things are
of good fame and well spoken of, if there be any occasion to exercise a virtue,
if there be any thing laudable, dispose us to have these things always in our
mind, and to be readily prepared for them. That so we may be good in every
relation; Governors and Subjects, Priests and People, Husbands and Wives,
Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, doing their duties faithfully, and
to their mutual comfort, joy and satisfaction. And if thy wise Providence call
any of us to part with any thing for thy names sake. O that our Love may give
an eminent proof of its sincerity, by resolved and patient suffering, with an
humble, meek and cheerful submission to thy holy will.

Then shall our Souls rejoice and triumph in thee, when we not only call thee,
Lord and Master, but do those things that thou say. It will be our exceeding
joy to think that thou love us as thy children, and delightest to behold
thine own Image in us. We shall rejoice that thou reignest, and rejoice again
in hope that we shall reign with thee. Blessing, honor, glory and praise shall
we be for ever giving unto thee; who have washed us from our sins in thy own
blood, and redeemed us from all iniquity, that we should be holy and
unblameable before God in love; looking for thy mercy unto eternal life. Amen,
and Amen.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Second Witness upon Earth, the BLOOD.
COME we now to hear what the next Witness says, which we shall find to give in
an Evidence as strong as the former, and that is the BLOOD. By this word every
body presently understands the Sufferings and DEATH of Jesus; when his Blood,
you know, was shed upon the Cross, in a most ignominious manner. For that envy
which began to rise in the Pharisees hearts (as I observed in the end of the
foregoing Chapter, from iv. John 1.) when they saw him baptize so many
disciples; never ceased boiling till it turned into perfect Gall, and the
rankest hatred and malice in the World: which was never satisfied till they had
baptized him (as S. Luke speaks, xii. 50.) with his own blood. For the present
indeed, as you read there and in many other places, he avoided their snares,
and went out of their way when he thought they intended to apprehend him,
because he would preserve himself till he had preached all the Country over.
But when that was done, he suffered them to take him at a public feast, and
delivering up himself into their hands, let them do with him just as their
murderous malice inclined them.

Now this voluntary Oblation and Sacrifice of himself to suffer what they
pleased to inflict, was such an evidence, that in truth he was the Son of God,
as he had made his disciples believe, that there is a particular mark set upon
it, to this purpose, both by himself and by his Apostles. He himself, in his
discourse with Pontius Pilate, just before his crucifixion, and when he stood
before him condemned by the Jews, for saying he was the Son of God, expressly
affirms, that for this end he was born, and therefore he came into the world,
that he might bear witness to the truth, xviii. John 37. Which was as much as
to declare, that he had rather die than lose the end for which he had lived
thus long; which was, to speak the Truth, and particularly this Truth, that he
was indeed a KING (as you there read) the very Son of God. This was the thing
he would justify, whatsoever he suffered for it. God had appointed him to seal
this with his death, and to attest it in the most solemn manner, even before
his Judge here on Earth, and when he was going to be judged by God; and
therefore he would not for all the world deny it, or not confess it. We
ordinarily say, when we would affirm any thing very strongly, that if it was
the last thing that ever we should speak, we would not stick to maintain it.
And just so did our Savior; I came, says he, into the world for this end, to
bear witness to the truth, and here I take it upon my death that I do not
swerve from it in the least, when I say, that I am the Son of God.

S. Paul also, as I have noted already, takes particular notice of this, when
he remembers Timothy, 1 vi. 13. how Jesus did WITNESS a good confession before
Pontius Pilate. That is, asserted this Truth, that he was a KING, though not of
this world, by confessing it before him, who sat in judgment upon him, with
the apparent danger of his life. He durst not retract any thing which he knew
to be a truth, though he knew withal it would prove so costly, that he must
defend it with his blood. He stood in this to the very last, that he was the
CHRIST, and durst not to save such a precious life speak one word otherwise:
for then he knew that he should have been a liar, like the Jews who denied it.

This that has been thus premised to the following discourse, is very
serviceable to the demonstrating what a Witness his BLOOD was: because it calls
to mind that which is necessary to be here again considered, how he lost his
life for nothing else, but merely because he confessed that he was their
CHRIST, the Son of the Blessed. Many causes of death were industriously sought
for, and sundry false witnesses boldly rose up against him; and yet none of
their testimonies, when they came to be scanned, were found to be (...) (as S.
Mark's expression is, xiv. 56, 59.) equal to the endictment or charge that was
brought against him, and to the intended judgment which was to pass upon him.
There was nothing ponderous enough, of sufficient weight to justify such a
sentence as that of death, which they were desirous to pronounce upon him: and
therefore they despaired of attaining their end, unless they could have such
words out of his own mouth, as in their opinion would prove him a blasphemer;
for which they might justly condemn him. Which of you (says he himself, viii.
John 46.) convinces me of sin? No, when they must either prove him a sinner,
or themselves for apprehending him without a cause; they were not able, no, not
by the help of a great sin, in bringing false witnesses into open Court, to
fasten any crime upon him, which would touch his life. All that they could find
to warrant a sentence so heavy, was nothing but what they got out of his own
mouth; by adjuring him in the name of God, to tell them whether he were the
CHRIST.

His affirming this was the thing for which he was adjudged by the great
Council of Jerusalem, to suffer death. This was the only truth they told
Pilate, when they brought him into his Court, that he made himself CHRIST, a
KING, xxiii. Luke 2. xix. John 7. This was the inscription over his head, the
Title upon the Cross, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS, xxiii. Luke 38. This was
the thing they scoffed at, after they had condemned him themselves, xxvi.
Matthew. 68. and which they taught the soldiers to mock him withal, after he
was condemned by Pilate, xv. Mark 18. and which the Chief Priest, with the
Scribes and Elders, made the subject of their taunts and jeers, as he hung upon
the Cross, xxvii. Matthew. 40, 41, 42, 43. Read all these places, and you will
see, that the asserting of this being the cause of his sufferings and shame, S.
John had reason to allege his BLOOD as a great evidence or Witness to this
Truth.

Now that the strength of its testimony may the better appear, let these things
following be distinctly considered.

I. First, that Blood is the life of every living Creature; and therefore the
pouring out of this is the losing of ones life. It is not only a frequent
Precept in the Law of Moses, that they should not eat the blood, because it was
the life of the Beast; but common observation teaches us, that it is the
Vehicle or Chariot wherein the Spirits ride their Circuit round the Body; and
that if it lose its way and run out of the Body, all motion ceases, the Spirits
flying away together with it.

II. Consider then further, that nothing is so sweet as Life, and that of all
other things we naturally most abhor death. All that we eat and drink is to
prevent it; and men are too much inclined to do unworthy things to escape it,
because it robs us of all our enjoyments here, though never so near to us. Skin
upon skin (says he who has the power of death, ii. Job 4.) one skin after
another, though it be never so tender and delicate, and never so painful to
part with it, Yea, all that a man has will he give for his life.

III. Life therefore being a thing so pleasant and desirable, and Death so
dismal and affrightful; no man sure in his perfect health and perfect wits,
will be persuaded to part with the one and run headlong into the other, for a
mere fancy by which he received no benefit at all while he lived, and can hope
for none when he is dead. What rational man is there (as our Savior appears to
be by all his discourses and actions) who knows the value of Life; who that is
not in a frenzy (the least spice of which is not discernible in him) will choose
to part with his life, and so part with all his Friends, who are infinitely
desirous of his company; when he may innocently save it, and comfortably enjoy
those lovers, friends and acquaintance, and all other things which he must
leave by dying? Ask your selves, (that is the best way) is Life such a trifle,
that any of you are inclined to throw it away in a mere humor? Is it so
contemptible, that a serious man and one that need not be miserable, will
studiously lose it, only to be talked of? Nay, would any of you take the most
cruel pains and torments in your way to Death, and pass out of the world with
all the disgrace imaginable, merely because you will? when it is as much in
your power to free your selves from them all, and to live in pleasure, honor
and good repute among your neighbors?

VI. Much less would any man, that is not beside himself, die for a lie. Death
being uncomfortable in it self, would become still more dismal if it should be
for that which we saw proved an untruth; but most of all black and dreadful if
it must be endured for a lie; that is, for such an untruth as we had devised
our selves, and knew to be a falsity; and whereby we intended to deceive, and
might have chosen whether we would have told it or no. If any man should be
tempted to tell a lie, yet what should tempt him to endure the rack, yea to
suffer death for it; when neither He nor any man else shall get any thing by
it, and he might live far more honorably by telling the truth? Make your
selves Judges, and enquire of your own minds, whether you can think of any
thing that has such a power of persuasion in it. No, no, we all love life
better than so. When a man will give all that he has for it (as the Tempter
himself said) it were very strange if he should not part with a vain lie, that
he might enjoy it.

And therefore the Apostle here bids us consider this, that Jesus CAME not by
WATER only, but by Water and BLOOD. That is, He did not only preach this, and
by his holy Life justify his integrity in what he said, but He died to attest
this, and make it good. If the WATER be not enough to persuade us that he did
not falsify, yet the Water and BLOOD together are sufficient to confirm us in
a strong belief of his sincerity. For should the tongue of an honest man chance
to slip, and to speak on a sudden what he knew to be false, yet he would never
be such a fool and a villain too, as to die to make it good: whereas Jesus both
said and took it upon his death, that he was Gods Son; in neither of which such
a person as he could possibly design to deceive us. He was not so shallow but
he could easily see that a lie would sometime or other be disproved; for all
men naturally hate it, and, when they have any suspicion, can never be at rest
till they have discovered it. And therefore if he proposed to himself glory and
honor, fame and a great reputation after a shameful death, he could never be
secure that he should win it, but rather had just cause to fear the forgery
would be detected: And then it would have proved a greater blot upon him, and
more reproached his name, that he was a wilful obstinate Liar, than the Cross
or Gibbet, the buffetings, spittings, cruel mockings, and all the other
indignities that he endured. This would have branded him with eternal infamy,
and have made his name stink throughout the world. Nothing could have
stigmatized him like this (unless it had been the mark of folly added to that
of insincerity) that he was a shameless deceiver. And therefore I conclude that
he would have witnessed a good confession by denying all that he had said
concerning his being the Son of God; if he had not known assuredly that he had
said nothing but that great Truth, which must not be denied, whatsoever
miseries and disgraces it cost him to make it good.

V. And this truly is much to be considered, that if he had been wont to cheat
and speak falsely, there could not have been a more seasonable time to make use
of some lie, than now that it would cost him his life to assert this, which, no
doubt, he took for a truth. If he would but have denied this one thing, and
said that he was not the Son of God; all their malice, as I said, could not
have found a crime great enough to warrant the taking away of his life
according to their Law. And therefore supposing him an Impostor and deceiver,
as the Jews called him, he must be a very silly one, who would not now make use
of his art to save himself; when that one little word NO would have done it, in
answer to the question, that the High Priest put to him. For what reason can be
imagined why he should now scruple to tell an untruth (if he were a man of that
stamp) which would bring such a great advantage to him as the preservation of
his life.

VI. He might at least (especially if he had dealt with Beelzebub, as the
Pharisees calumniated him) have put some trick or other upon them, and shifted
himself out of the hands of his enemies; for that would have got him more
credit and fame than dying for a lie. Why did he not escape from them, if he
had not both believed this, that he was the Son of God, and thought it
necessary also to attest it, even with his BLOOD? Had he not opportunity to run
away? or rather might he not have kept himself among his friends, far enough
out of their reach? Was it not a question whether he would come to the feast or
not? xi. John 56. Nay, after the assembly of the wicked had enclosed him, as
the Psalmist speaks, had he not power to break through them, and make his
escape? Yes sure; for what else is the meaning of that which you read, xviii.
John 6. that the band of men which came to apprehend him, went backward, and
fell to the ground; when he did but tell them that He was the man whom they
sought for? Was not this a fit time to fly and get away, when they had no
strength to lay hold on him? Had not he power as well to depart, as to weaken
their hands that they could not approach him? Nay, was it not far easier to go
away himself, than to make them lie prostrate there? No doubt of it: only he
would stand to it, as I said, and make it good by his Blood that he was the Son
of God. He showed that he had not lost his power to baffle them, but his will
was not to use it. His death was a voluntary Sacrifice; He laid down his life
of his own accord, and no man took it from him, as it is x. John 18. All their
Armies, had they compassed him about (to speak in the Psalmists phrase) as
strong Bulls of Bashan; had they gaped upon him with their mouths, as a
ravening and a roaring Lion, i. e. with the most greedy desire to devour him,
could not have touched him, unless he had been pleased to deliver himself up to
their fury, and chosen to become their prey, that they might do execution upon
him. And therefore it is most absurd, and contrary to nature, to imagine, that
He would have thus freely exposed himself to such cruelties and vile usage as
he saw was intended for him; unless he had certainly thought it a most eligible
and honorable thing to endure them, in defense of a great Truth, which it
concerned all the world to have well asserted, and vindicated from all
suspicion of falsehood.

Would it not have angered any man but Him, to be betrayed by a domestic
servant, by a Friend; one whom he had freely chosen to be a great Minister in
his Kingdom, and had made at present the keeper of his purse, besides many
other favors conferred on him? Was it not a vile dishonor, first to be
brought before the Magistrate as a Criminal, and then to be abused there by
base soldiers, and the dregs of the people; as if there had not been a more
contemptible wretch in the whole Country? What was it then to be beaten and
cudgelled? to be spit upon and mocked? to be laden with lies and forgeries? to
be condemned to suffer among thieves? to be counted less worthy to live than a
murderer? to be scourged? to be crowned with thorns? to be crucified? that is,
to endure a tedious, a disgraceful, a painful and accursed death; and after all
this to be unpitied; to be laughed at even upon the Cross, and called a
senseless deceiver, who had not the wit to keep some of his kindness for
himself; but having saved the lives of others could not now at last save his
own? Can you think of any one that would have the heart to offer himself freely
to suffer such things, but only He, who took all this so patiently, that he did
not utter one discontented or angry word? And who can think that he would have
endured them, when he might have easily avoided it, unless he had thought it
necessary and worthy to submit himself to such torments and reproaches, that he
might confirm this Truth, and make it live by his bloody death?

VII. Which had the greater efficacy in it to show the importance of this
Truth, and the certainty which he had of it; because he affirmed it not only
before the High Priest, when it was apparent they intended mischief against
him, but before Pontius Pilate also, as I observed above from xviii. John 37.
when they were importunately desiring him to condemn him. If we could imagine
it was his rashness and heat that made him say as he did, before the Council of
Jerusalem; yet he had time enough sure to have cooled himself, before he came
to be tried at this other tribunal of the Gentiles. Why did he not think of
some other answer, now that he saw the Jews were not in a sudden passion, and
transported with a fit of rage to condemn him; but by a concocted hatred were
resolved to pursue him till they had his blood? There can no account be given
of it but this, That his Death was an advised thing, and his BLOOD deliberately
shed, to obtain the greater belief to him; because he professed again and again
(though he knew he must die for it) that He was CHRIST their KING.

VIII. And observe likewise, that even when he was in the midst of his
sufferings, and when he was ready to give up the ghost, He again sets his seal
to this Truth; calling God his FATHER twice as he hung upon the Cross. First
when he prayed for his Enemies, FATHER forgive them, xxiii. Luke 36. and then
when he prayed for himself, FATHER into thy hands I commend my Spirit, ver. 46.
With these words he resigned up his Soul to God. And had it not been a
seasonable time now to retract what he had said, if it had not been a Truth
which must be justified to the last gasp? How can any one think that a man who
preached the Life and Judgment to come, and lived as if he believed it, would
venture to die with a lie in his mouth? and that of so high a guilt? and which
he knew also could not be long undetected here, as it would be severely punished
in another place? nay, which He himself, he knew very well, would presently
confute? For he frequently had said, as his very enemies understood, that he
would rise again the third day after he was killed; which he must needs think
would prove a lie, if the other had been so, when he told them he was the Son
of God.

God who only can raise the dead, but cannot lie, would never have justified so
blasphemous a lie as this; and given it an undeniable authority, by fulfilling
his word. For as his bloody death plainly proved that he believed himself to be
the Son of God, and took it for an undoubted truth; so his Resurrection was an
infallible proof that he was not mistaken, but had witnessed that by his death,
which was as true as he thought it. His Death showed that he was certain of it;
and his Resurrection makes us certain that he was not deceived. These two
therefore must be joined together to make up a complete evidence: and so they
are, as you shall see, for the Witness of the SPIRIT contains the Resurrection
in it. Yet I must add that his BLOOD considered alone, did not barely prove
that he believed he was Gods Son, and thought it the greatest sin to deny it;
but it proved also that he had great reason for such a belief; Reasons so
weighty that they overbalanced the natural love of life. And therefore this
alone may be called one of his Witnesses, which not only justified his
integrity, but declared that he had the greatest assurance, and the clearest
evidence of that which he asserted: being so certain of it, that the fear of
death could not make him doubt it, nor all the torments in the world tempt him
to deny it.

IX. And if you consider what manner of person Jesus was, you will soon be
satisfied also, that he was not liable to mistake strong fancies for weighty
reasons: but was as far from being deceived himself, as he was from any
intention to deceive others. The principal thing indeed which his Blood
testified was, that he did not on set purpose go about to put a cheat upon the
World, or invented his Doctrine himself. Yet, all things considered, it proves
likewise that his Doctrine was true, and ought to be believed by us. For such
was the quality of his person and of the rest of his Doctrine, that they
plainly manifest He was neither led by fancy, nor possessed with any Demoniacal
illusion, when he said he was the Son of God. So great was his wisdom and the
sharpness of his understanding, that any man who has not lost his own
understanding, may easily see, he could not be apt to be gulled with the
impostures of imagination. And so great and discreet was his Piety, that it is
as visible he was not obnoxious to be deluded any other way. When He was but a
child, He amazed the principal men of the Nation with his questions and
answers. And afterward in the whole course of his preaching, there appeared
nothing but what declared a most prudent, sober and excellently composed mind.
Nothing of inequality and unevenness in his temper. No rapturous discourses or
ecstatical expressions. Nothing that savoured of Melancholy, which imposes upon
some; or of Pride and Vanity which abuses others. But the greatest gravity and
seriousness, mixed with admirable sweetness and humility, is the plain character
of our Savior. Then look over all his Doctrine, and where shall we find any
that ever spoke so clearly, and with so much Majesty, of Righteousness,
Temperance, Charity and Piety; of all our duty toward God and Man, as he did?
Who had the gift of comprehending much in a few, but perspicuous words; of
illustrating his Doctrine with apt and familiar resemblances; of confirming it
with powerful arguments, and of confuting all the cavils of his adversaries
with the strongest reasons. None of which things are to be found in any of
those who have been abused by their own fancies and passions, or by the
juglings of evil Spirits: as will appear more plainly by considering a little
more particularly those two cavils.

Let it be taken then for granted, that there have been some men who meant not
to deceive, that were notwithstanding so overborn by a strong fancy or haughty
imagination, as not only to take their own dreams for Divine Revelations, but
also most vehemently to assert them, even with the loss of their liberties,
estate, nay, and life it self. And suppose withal that there have been some,
who were so fully possessed with a conceit of nearer communion of God, that
they took themselves to be Christ himself, or Apostles sent by him; and that no
torments could persuade them to think otherways. Yet see what a vast difference
there is between such vain pretenders and our blessed Savior; even in the very
words that they spoke. And first I think it is very consirable that you never
read of any man so presumptuous, as to fancy he was the very Son of God, who
sits at his right hand, and rules over all, and has power to judge the quick
and the dead. No, these vain Enthusiasts have only conceited, that they were,
after I know not what spiritual manner, made one with Christ, and so united to
God; that, as they phrase it in swollen words of vanity, they were Godded with
God, and Christed with Christ. But who discerns not the disparity between this
foolish language and the words of soberness which our Savior spoke? Which
indeed is the most remarkable thing. If you consider all the Doctrine of these
empty Pretenders, there is nothing more ridiculous. They have ever affected big
words, lofty and high-flown phrases, and mystical expressions, wherewith they
love to stuff their Books and their discourses: which either have no meaning;
or if they have, it is very poor and despicable, when it comes to be stripped of
the fantastical language wherewith it is clothed. And therefore such men have
been so far from amazing any considerate persons, that they have rather moved
their laughter and scorn, while they heard them babble nothing but mystical
nonsense, with abundance of confident boldness.

And if they have found any followers, they were such as had no depth, no
solidity of judgment; but were carried away merely with the sound of seemingly
mystical words; which they could never make any sober person understand the
sense of. Whereas, on the contrary, the words of our Savior are not only
intelligible, but penetrate into the very heart and soul of him that reads
them. Every man bears witness to most of them in his own Conscience: And the
rest are such as plainly aim at the same end, to oblige and encourage us to be
more strictly pious. And therefore He astonished all his Auditors; who
acknowledged an Authority in his words, greater than was in the discourses of
the wisest men among them. They said, never man spoke like him. Whole
Synagogues, as I have shown, wondered at the gracious words, that proceeded out
of his mouth. They enquired one of another, how a man should come by all that
wisdom, who had no learned education. His adversaries were often silenced by
his answers. They found themselves so non-plust, that they durst not ask him
any more questions, merely for fear of being more confounded. All which, and
much more that might be said, is a sufficient evidence that he knew very well
what He said, and understood his doctrine, and was a person of a clear reason;
who could not be abused by the impostures of fancy and imagination.

X. And as for the other cavil, that possibly a man may suffer the illusion of
evil Spirits, which may make him confident without reason: Let it be also
granted, because the Devil has sometimes transformed himself into an Angel of
light, as the Apostle S. Paul speaks; and so might persuade men that God or an
Angel had spoken to them, or that they had visions and revelations from above;
with which conceit He might so possess them, that they might be ready to take
it upon their death, that they said nothing but the Truth. But withal it is
notoriously evident that such a person as our Savior could not be liable to
such diabolical impressions. For first, the holiness of his doctrine, which
overthrows the Devils kingdom and authority, plainly shows how much he was in
the favor of God. And secondly, his conquests over the Devil when he assaulted
him with his temptations, his turning him out of his possession every where,
and making him acknowledge his authority, is an evident token how much
superior he was to him, and so not obnoxious to his abuses. And thirdly, they
who had been the followers of Jesus, but a little while, were too strong for
the Devil, and much above his power to hurt them: and therefore how could he
himself be touched by him. They are S. John's words in this Epistle, ii. 14. I
have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God
abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. And again, the further his
doctrine was propagated, the more was the kingdom of the Devil overthrown, and
all his cheats detected and discovered. As all impiety was plucked up by the
roots, and godliness planted in the room of it: so all superstitious devices,
all Magic, all Divination, wherewith he had long gulled and couzened the World
and kept them in Idolatry, were laid so naked and bare, that they were ashamed,
and presently vanished. There is an excellent discourse concerning this in
Athanasius his Book, concerning the Incarnation of the Word; which must not
here be entirely transcribed, but only these few words of it. (...); Who then,
let it be considered, and how great is this CHRIST? who by his name and
presence obscures and abolishes all things every where; and alone prevails over
all, and fills the whole world with his Discipline? Let the Gentiles that blush
not to deride and laugh at us, tell me, whether He be a mere man who does these
things. If he be, why do they not blush to see one man stronger than all their
Gods? How comes he to demonstrate by his power, that they are nothing? But if
they will call him a Magician, let them tell me again how it comes to pass that
he destroys all Magic, and does not rather establish it?

He that can fancy all that I have now mentioned to have been done by the
Devil, which was so much to his prejudice; must, one would think, be possessed
with some evil Spirit himself. There is nothing can declare a man not to be
deceived by the Devil, if this will not; that He is the very person who lays
open all the Devils frauds, and discovers his wiles, and delivers men from all
his subtle impostures. So did our Savior; and therefore we may conclude that
as he believed his doctrine even concerning himself, to be true, so that was
true which he believed: and that he was not deluded, either by his own private
Spirit, or by any else. And the truth is, his Adversaries never took him for a
vain Enthusiast, or for a man that was ignorantly deceived; but still they
accuse him as a subtle Impostor, and would fain have had it thought, that he
craftily invented what he preached, to destroy their credit, and establish his
own. But this I have shown is incredible: For who could imagine that he should
gain any credit and reputation by being put to death upon a shameful cross;
into which he was not ensnared by their cunning, but foresaw and frequently
foretold, and voluntarily offered himself to suffer it? Allow him but to be a
man of common sense, and you must think he would not have contrived this way to
procure fame, and to propagate his doctrine in the world: unless he had verily
thought it to be so true, that his Cross, which proved the laughter of the
Gentiles, and the stumbling block of the Jews, could not hinder him from being
honored in the World as the Son of God. Nothing else could make him choose to
die on this manner, but his sincere belief of what he preached: and there being
no cause in the world to suspect any thing of a melancholy proud imagination,
or a diabolical illusion that should impose upon him such a belief; it remains
that our Savior by his very death proved and confirmed the truth of what he
preached. He first came by WATER and then he came by BLOOD. And as his BLOOD
proves he did not abuse us, with that which he knew to be false; so the WATER,
his holy Doctrine and Life proves that he had no flaw in his understanding, nor
was abused himself with any fancies or illusions, when he took himself to be so
certainly the Son of God, that he sealed it with his precious BLOOD.

XI. And it ought to be considered also, that it was prophesied before by the
holy men of God, that their CHRIST should suffer, and be despised of men, and
be in nothing more remarkable than in his sorrows. And therefore his BLOOD was
a sign to those who believed those prophecies, that Jesus was the CHRIST,
especially his blood so disgracefully shed; because He appeared hereby, as well
as by other marks, to be the person, whom all their inspired men pointed at and
foretold should come to be their King. For the descriptions they have left of
the cruel usage and horrible sufferings of the Messiah or Christ, were answered
to the life, and exactly fulfilled in our Savior Jesus, whose torments rather
exceeded than fell short of the tragicalness of all their expressions. Thence
it is that when He had ended all his sufferings, he said, xix. John 30. IT IS
FINISHED: and so bowed his head ( i.e. did reverence to God) and gave up the
ghost, i.e. resigned his Spirit to God in that prayer which S. Luke mentions.
By which words [ It is finished] He bad them mark that now all things that were
written of him in the xxii. Psalm, liii. Isaiah, and other places of their holy
Books, were perfectly fulfilled, and received such a punctual completion in
him, that there remained nothing more to be done, but only to die. He had done
all his Fathers will, and finished his whole work in every point, and so,
having no further business here, He worshipped God that sent him, and departed
the world to go to him.

XII. It will also much advantage this discourse to observe the accidents that
happened at our Savior's death, and accompanied his bloud-shedding; which have
no small force to verify what he said concerning himself. And to omit the
death of Judas which prevented our Lord's, and declared that he thought Jesus
innocent, and himself guilty; together with several other things which may be
better mentioned afterward; let us only observe how the Sun contrary to its
usual course, when the Moon could not interpose it self between its light and
them, was eclipsed three whole hours, as he was in his passion, xxiii. Luke 44,
45. And that in the conclusion of it, the veil of the Temple (of that Temple
wherein the Jews so much confided) was rent in twain from the top to the
bottom, xxvii. Matthew. 51. The Earth quaked, the Rocks rent, and the Graves were
opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept arose, and went out of the Graves
after his Resurrection, and appeared unto many in the holy City, ver. 52, 53.
What judgment can any sober man make of so many strange things concurring at
this moment? When was it ever heard that the Sun blushed, as one may say, to
show its face, and look upon him; when any malefactor or innocent man either
was hanged upon a gibbet? or that the holy place was torn, together with that
man's body? or that the Earth groaned when he expired? and the hearts of Rocks
trembled when he cried out, and the monuments of the dead opened at his death,
which three days after gave them life? All these things were peculiar to the
death of Jesus, and never met together but only to honor his blood. And so
notorious they were, that the Centurion and those who under him had the charge
at that time to see the execution done, were convinced by them and by the words
that he spoke, that he was no Deceiver, but in truth the Son of God.

So S. Matthew there relates, ver. 54. that when the Centurion, and they that
were with him, watching Jesus, saw the Earthquake, and those things that were
done, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this man was the Son of God.
Whatsoever the Jews had decreed, they saw by the displeasure of the Heavens, by
the trembling of the Earth, by the hand of God upon the Temple (which was soon
known by the Priests) that Jesus had exceeding great wrong done him; having
spoken nothing but the truth, when he confessed to Pilate, that he was the Son
of God. They dreaded to think what would be the consequences of this horrid
murder; and were sorely afraid that they themselves, who had attended upon it,
should feel some of those tokens of Gods wrath, which elsewhere was very
visible. But S. Mark tells us that the Centurion also observed the words of our
Savior, as well as was struck with these miraculous accidents, and that they
helped to convince him, xv. 39. And when the Centurion which stood over against
him, saw that he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, he said, Truly this man
was the Son of God. That is, when he heard him call God FATHER (for those were
the words, as you heard out of S. Luke xxiii. 46. which he cried with a loud
voice at the giving up of the ghost, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit)
and when he saw that he stood in this to the very last breath that God was his
Father, and also beheld such strange testimonies of it, both in the Heaven and
in the Earth, he said without all doubt he ought to have been acknowledged to
be no less than he said, and not crucified as a malefactor. And S. Luke relates
it thus, that Jesus crying with a loud voice, and saying those words before
mentioned, The Centurion saw what was done (that is, all spoken of in the
precedent verses, xxiii. Luke 44, 45, 46.) and GLORIFIED God saying, Certainly
this was a righteous man. Which was as if he had said, God be praised for
showing us the truth, or let us do God honor in acknowledging the truth,
whatever come of it; I make no question but this man was innocent, and said
true when he affirmed he was God's Son; though the Jews have got him crucified
for this saying, and brought us to wait upon his execution.

That, as I have often noted, was their quarrel with him, That he being a man
made himself equal with God, x. John 33. v. 18. This was the blasphemy they
accused him of, that he said, They should see the SON OF MAN (that is, Himself)
sitting at the right hand of power. But the Centurion, an honest Gentile,
acquitted him of this crime; and seeing the things that were done, and hearing
the words he uttered, concluded him to be Righteous, free from all blame, and
not at all guilty of that blasphemy for which he was arraigned and suffered:
but ought to have been believed and acknowledged as the CHRIST, the Son of the
blessed. Thus was that fulfilled which our Savior had foretold, viii. John 28.
When ye have lift up the Son of Man (upon the Cross) then shall ye know that I
am He, (that is, the CHRIST) and that I do nothing of my self, (assume not this
authority of preaching thus without Gods leave) but as my Father has taught
me, I speak these things; that is, even this that I am his CHRIST is that which
he bid me affirm. And he that sent me is with me (to justify what I say and
do) the Father has not left me alone: (no not upon the Cross, nor after death,
as appears even by this Testimony which he forced the Centurion to give him)
For I do always those things that please him. Keep to my office, that is, both
now, and when I suffer you to lift me up to the Cross; for God declared that he
was never better pleased with him, than when he laid down his life in this
manner, to testify to the truth.

XIII. Which was very much justified likewise by all that passed before this,
from the time that the Sanhedrim had judged him worthy of death. In the whole
process against him, before his condemnation to the Cross, there were the
plainest marks of his innocence: and it may justly be reputed a notable
testimony to him, that their very charge against him, cleared him; and that he
who gave judgment upon him, declared all along he did not deserve it. Which
will make it worthy our consideration, I think, if I give you as brief a
relation as I can of all those passages which were preparatory to his Bloody
death, after the Chief Priests had bound him and led him away and delivered him
to Pontius Pilate the Governor of Judea. Who, as soon as he had examined him
whether he was the King of the Jews, and received our Saviors answer, that he
was, xxvii. Matthew. 11. presently discerned that it was no Earthly Kingdom (as
the Jews would have had him believe) to which he pretended, and that he did not
at all intend to entrench upon the Roman rights: as you may see evidently if
you mind what follows this in S. Luke xxiii. 4. Then said Pilate to the Chief
Priests, and to the people, I find no fault in this man. This netled them very
much to hear him pronounced innocent, whom they had judged guilty of the
highest crime, and therefore they began with more than ordinary fierceness to
endeavor to make good their charge; and said he stirred up the people (to
sedition, which was an argument, had it been true, that he affected a Kingdom
in this world which would have been prejudicial to Caesar) teaching throughout
all Jewry, beginning from Galilee to Jerusalem, ver. 5. But Pilate so little
believed that his Doctrine tended to the raising sedition, that, to be rid of
any further trouble, he lays hold on that word Galilee, where they told him he
began to preach, and sent him to Herod the Tetrarch of that Country, who was at
that time at Jerusalem, ver. 6, 7. But he was soon weary of the business, and
remitted him back to Pilate, arrayed in a gorgeous robe, ver. 10, 11. as much
as to say that he could determine nothing, but that he was a ridiculous
Monarch, a mock-King, nothing else.

Being returned to Pilate, He received from him many testimonies of his
innocence (notwithstanding that he affirmed he was a KING) and Pilate devised
by sundry means to deliver him, because as he told them, neither He nor Herod
could find any fault in him, which should make him worthy of death, xxiii. Luke
13, 14, 15. First of all, he gives them their choice (but plainly showed that
his inclinations were to dismiss Jesus) whether he should release him, or a
notorious villain, who had committed murder in an insurrection, ver. 17, 18,
etc. And when they most ungratefully preferred that seditious murderer before
him who had given life to so many among them, Pilate was disposed still to
favor him, by reason of an admonition he received from his wife (at this very
instant, when he was set down again in the Judgment Seat) to have nothing to do
in the condemnation of so righteous a person; for she had suffered so many
things, and been disturbed with such troublesome thoughts in her sleep about
him, that she was confident he would suffer much if he were guilty of his
death, xxvii. Matthew. 19. This startled him so much, that he labored more than
before to set him at liberty. He asked them indeed, which was unbecoming a
Judge, what he should do with Jesus which is called CHRIST ( ver. 22.) as if
his accusers, not He, were to determine his punishment: But yet he asked them
again and again, no less than three times, Why, what evil has he done? for he
protested he found no cause of death in him, xxvii. Matthew. 23. xxiii. Luke 22.
In which last place, you may read, that having declared his innocence, he next
of all contrived how to appease their blind rage, only by giving him the
chastisement of scourging. Which S. John tells us was bestowed on him, xix.
John 1. and that the soldiers also added some ridiculous ensigns of royalty,
which they put upon him to expose him to the greater scorn, and made a
mock-proclamation, saying, Hail King of the Jews, ver. 2, 3. This Pilate
imagined would have given satisfaction to their wrath; and therefore went forth
again (ver. 4.) to let them know that he found no fault in him. But they might
see that he had rendered him so contemptible, that no body hereafter would
follow him as their King. For he brought him forth in that ridiculous dress
into which the soldiers had put him ( ver. 5.) and bid them look upon him,
whether he was not despicable enough. That seems to be the meaning of those
words that follow, Behold the man. See what a poor despicable person they have
made him. You need not fear that such a man will do you any harm; for there is
nothing of royal Majesty in him, more than this which you laugh at.

But they would not be content with this contempt which was put upon him; their
malice was implacable, and nothing would suffice them but to have him
crucified. Which at the instigation of the Priests, was demanded by the rabble,
who bawled as loud as ever they could, saying, Crucify him, crucify him, ver.
6. As much as to say, Go on sir, thou have begun well, proceed to finish the
execution. For scourging used to go before Crucifixion, as S. Hierom observes
upon xxvii. of S. Matthew. It was appointed by the Roman Laws, that they who
were crucified should first be scourged. The Jews themselves who were taken in
the siege of Jernsalem by Titus (five hundred commonly every day, sometimes
more) were first miserably lasht, and as it were, crucified beforehand with
great torments, and then fastened to a cross over against the wall of the City,
as Josephus Lib. 6. c. 12.
relates in his Book of the Jewish war. By a just judgment of God they
themselves suffered that from the Romans, which they had made our Savior
suffer unjustly by the same hands. For they never left their yelling against
him, and beseeching the Governor not to leave off thus; till Pilate bid them
do the rest themselves if they would, for he had rather it should be their act
than his: Take ye him, faith he, and crucify him; for I find no fault in him,
ver. 6. One would think that the very manner of this speech was a sufficient
declaration of the Governors mind; beside that he again repeats it, that he
saw no pretense for the putting him to death. But yet they continue to press
him with an obstinate violence to gratify their desires. And since they saw
there was no good to be done, as we say, in this way wherein they had hitherto
prosecuted him; they form a new endictment against him: and tell Pilate (ver.
7.) that if he could not find him guilty of death, according to the Roman Laws,
yet by their Law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.

This was to make a new Process against him, and to forsake the former
endictment, which accused him of Treason against Caesar. Now they make him
guilty of Treason against Almighty God, and seem to lay hold of a License which
Pilate had given them before, xviii. John 31. to take him and judge him
according to their Law, which pronounced the sentence of death upon him. But,
as they add there, they had no power remaining among them to execute such a
sentence: and therefore implore his favor to help them out, and to punish
capitally this high crime of blasphemy, which, as things stood, they could only
condemn. And though they might be willing enough to understand his words just
now spoken (when he said, Take ye him, and crucify him) to be really meant for
an enlargement of his former grant, and to give them liberty to execute their
own sentence: yet it was more than they could do, they must be beholden to his
power for it. They were extremely desirous, it appears by the story, to have
him crucified, for his greater disgrace; but this was a punishment proper only
to the Gentiles, and never used among the Jews: and therefore that they might
neither act against the customs of their Country, nor yet let him escape that
ignominious punishment, they continue to beg of Pilate that he would pronounce
the sentence of crucifixion upon him, and then command his soldiers to see it
executed; for saying that he was the Son of God.

When Pilate therefore heard this (xix. John 8.) that he called himself the Son
of God (which the Jews took for blasphemy) it put him into a greater fear than
ever. He imagining, I suppose, according to the opinion of the Gentiles, that
he might possibly be some Son of Jupiter or Apollo, or some other of their
Deities. And therefore he went back again into the Palace ( ver. 9.) and asked
our Savior, Whence art thou? To which our Savior replied nothing: either
because he was unworthy to hear, or incapable to understand so weighty a Truth.
This put him into some indignation, for he asked him again with arrogance
enough ( ver. 10.) Do thou not speak to me? know thou not who I am? and
that I have power either to crucify thee, or release thee, which I please? To
which he received such an answer ( ver. 11.) as satisfied him, that whatsoever
power he had, he should abuse it, though not so much as the Jews did theirs, if
he employed it to his condemnation. For from thenceforth ( ver. 12.) he
labored more than before to release him, whose innocence, modesty, constancy,
and contempt of death were so apparent. But being told that if he did, it would
be in effect to declare himself Caesar's enemy, as you read in the same verse;
He had not the courage to befriend our Savior any longer, but resolves at last
to sacrifice him to their rage, that he might save himself. For the very
suspicion of a crime, he knew, had been the ruin of diverse persons with
Tiberius; who would not want informers, he imagined, of what was now said. He
thought it better therefore by the condemnation of an innocent person (such are
the counsels of worldly wisdom) to preserve his interest in the Emperor, and in
the Jews, and perchance prevent a popular tumult, than hazard the loss of their
favor and of the public peace, by preserving one who was poor and mean, and
for whose death he was not like to be called to any account, nor incur any
danger.

But yet (so pure and free from all spot was this Lamb of God) he would not
pronounce the sentence against him, till he had first, in as public a manner,
pronounced him innocent, and washed his hands of his blood. For he took water,
says S. Matthew xxvii. 24. and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I
am innocent of the blood of this just person; see ye to it. This very WATER, as
well as the other, I have mentioned, was a witness to Jesus, that his very
Judge thought him guiltless, though he had openly confessed himself to be the
Son of God. If it had been left to his free choice, he should have been
acquitted, even by him that condemned him: He had such a regret in his mind, at
that very time when he brought him forth to pass the sentence upon him, that he
tries again if he could move those obdurate hearts from their cruel resolution;
saying, (xix. John 13, 14.) Behold your King. That is, say what you will, this
is your King, whom I am going, because you will not else be satisfied, to
condemn. Or else, this is spoken by way of upbraiding and derision, that they
should make such a do about so poor a man as this; who had no power to do any
harm if he had a mind. Why should they desire so eagerly and impatiently to be
rid of him? If he was their King, how could they answer it? if he were not,
what hurt could he do? But the former seems to be the sense of his words: for
the Jews turned away their heads, and cried out, Away with him, away with him,
crucify him, ver. 15. As much as to say, This is none of our King, we have
nothing to do with him: And therefore they would not have him trouble himself
about their affairs any further, than only to order him to be crucified. Let
him not be so much concerned for them, or for their King; they would look to
themselves (as he had bidden them) and be content to bear all the blame, if
their King were crucified. They did not desire any of the guilt should light
upon him. No, for their part they declare they will perfectly acquit him, and
take all upon themselves and theirs. So all the People answered and said, His
blood be on us, and on our Children: xxvii. Matthew. 25.

And yet, as if he would vie with them in pertinacious resolution (so sensible
he was of his innocence) he desires them once more, to consider of the
business, and not thus rashly destroy him whom they ought to preserve. What,
says he, Shall I crucify your King? xix. Joh. 15. To which the chief Priests
immediately returned such an answer as stopped his mouth, and made him not dare
to speak one word more in his behalf. And indeed it is a great wonder he had
said so much, considering his natural disposition; which, if we may believe
Philo Legation. ad Caium.
, was so fierce and cruel, that he little regarded any body; or cared what
crimes he committed. Strange! that he should be so nice and tender in this
point: So extremely unwilling to pass sentence on our Savior (a Man that had
not one friend appeared for him) that nothing could make him do it, till they
reminded him of his duty to his Master, saying, We have (i. e. acknowledge) no
King but Caesar. Then, as it follows in the very next words, verse. 16.
delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified. When he heard they still
obstinately pretended respect to Caesar, and would have him to be concerned in
the case; he thought it was time to make an end, and give sentence that their
new King should be crucified. For this at last was the crime, for which he must
suffer, verse. 19. Pilate wrote a title (showing the cause of his death) and put
it on the Cross. And the Writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
Which Pilate knew was false, in the sense wherein they meant it, a King
opposite to Caesar: and therefore the words were so contrived that he might
still express the opinion he had of him, and yet satisfy Caesar too. To the
very last he would give testimony to the innocence of Jesus, as far as he
durst: and even then proclaimed him their King in several Languages (an Omen of
the proclaiming it shortly in all Countries) to their everlasting reproach;
when he hung upon an infamous Gibbet. And therefore they were not yet
satisfied; because they saw themselves plainly indicted by this Title, in the
face of the World; as the Murderers of their KING. Which made them renew their
Petitions to Pilate that he would alter the Inscription; and not write The King
of the Jews, but that he said, I am King of the Jews, verse. 21. But now Pilate
grew as obstinate as they, and gave them this short answer, verse. 22. What I
have written, I have written. That is, content your selves; for the first
writing shall stand, let the World make what they can of it. And there is no
question but there was a Divine Providence in the business, that the cause of
his death should be so expressed, as that the Jews should be openly condemned
and Jesus still cleared by Pilate; even after he had not only given sentence
against him, but ordered it to be put in execution. All things concurred to
justify him when his BLOOD was shed. Which this very Title declared was upon
this account, to testify that he was their KING: and told the World withal,
that in the judgment of him who was his Judge, He was no deceiver, when he
affirmed that he was their KING; but the Jews, villainous Traitors, who had
crucified that Person whom they ought to have honored and obeyed.

XIV. For which the terrible vengeance of God followed them; and never left
them till they had their own wish. His BLOOD was required at their hands, and
at the hands of their Posterity. For they never thrive from that time forward:
but declined more and more, till about Forty Years after, their City was
besieged by those whom they had importuned to crucify our Savior; multitudes
of them were crucified (as I told you before) in the face of all their
Brethren; far greater numbers were famisht; Jerusalem and the Temple at last
destroyed; the People of the Nation banished; and their Children became
Vagabonds, even to this day. For it was not very long, before those very Men,
who (when they said those words, We have no King, but Caesar) in the same
breath had for ever renounced their CHRIST, and pronounced themselves Rebels,
if they were not obedient to Caesar; took up arms to deliver themselves from
their subjection to him, whom they really hated, though, now, to serve a turn,
they courted and flattered. They who had rejected their true CHRIST and KING by
whom they might have been restored to true liberty, were ready upon all
occasions to run after those false CHRIST'S (of whom our Savior prophesied,
xxiv. Matthew. 5.24.) who by the promises of a false liberty, led them into
perdition. They could never be quiet till they had undone themselves, by
provoking the only King whom they pretended to reverence, to be the Instrument
of our Savior, to make them the vilest slaves, and the most miserable wretches
upon the face of the Earth. S. John lived to see the day of Jesus his COMING
WITH POWER to execute Judgment upon them; and we see their wish still more and
more accomplished upon their Children. Who, as they never yet solemnly
endeavored to wipe off the guilt of his BLOOD from them, by acknowledging the
crime of their Forefathers (as the manner of former times was, we see in the
examples of Nehemiah, and Daniel) so they continue to taste of the bitter
fruits of this execrable Treason against their Sovereign Lord and King, CHRIST
JESUS. By which you may see, that his BLOOD both upon the Cross and upon their
Heads (by the heavy guilt it loaded them withal) is very fitly here alleged
by S. John, as a great WITNESS that He was sent of God as his only Son. For
Pontius Pilate himself did not wholly escape, but some of it lighted also upon
his Head. Though he was not so guilty, our Savior confessed, as they who
pursued him out of hatred, whereas he having no unkindness for him, delivered
him to be crucified, only out of fear: yet he felt the weight of this crime,
and was oppressed himself, as our Savior had been, by false accusations which
the Samaritaus brought against him. Whereupon he was deprived of the Government
of Judaea by Vitellius then President of Syria. And having lost the authority,
which he abused in condemning our Savior; he was required to go to Rome, and
there answer the crimes that should be objected to him. There indeed he found
Tiberius dead; but he did not live long after him. For he fell into so
distressed a condition, that, about the third year of the succeeding Emperor
Caius, (...) (as Eusebius his word is L. 11. Hist. Eccl. c. 7.
) he was constrained, either by the grievous afflictions he endured, or by the
command of Caesar (which was an usual thing) to become his own Executioner, and
punish himself with Death for all the crimes he had committed.

But I shall not pursue either his or their story any further; it being time to
put an end to this Argument, which I shall conclude with these Two observations.

1. First, That after our Savior was dead, one of the soldiers pierced his
side with his spear, and forthwith came thereout WATER and BLOOD, as this very
Apostle has recorded in the Chapter so often mentioned, xix. John 34. Now some
have from hence imagined, that he being the only Evangelist that takes any
notice of this, and setting a particular remark upon it, as a thing that he saw
and bears witness of, ver. 35. it is most likely he has some respect to that
passage in his Gospel, and to the Water and Blood there mentioned, when he
speaks of the witness of WATER and BLOOD here in this Epistle. For the Water
and Blood which flowed out of his side, were an argument of the truth of his
humanity, which some wild Heretics then denied, and testified also that he was
truly dead, and not merely in appearance.

But it must be observed that S. John is not here proving Jesus Christ to be a
true man, consisting of Body and Soul like ours, and that this Body and Soul
were so separated, that he was really dead: but something far greater and more
excellent, viz. that he was God's Son: which the Water and Blood that came out
of his side were no competent argument to prove. That Water and Blood
therefore, if they have any relation to these Witnesses here mentioned, were
only emblems and adumbrations of these two grand Proofs of our Saviors being
the CHRIST, viz. his PURITY and innocence which appeared in his whole preaching
and life, to which the Water bears a resemblance; and his constant confession
of the truth even unto the DEATH, which was lively represented by that Blood.
These two flowed from him with such force, that they have overspread the world
with his Faith; and the knowledge of the glory of the Lord has covered the
Earth, even like to the waters which cover the Sea.

2. The second Observation is, That they who by apostasy from the Faith of
Jesus, denied him to be the CHRIST after they had acknowledged it, are said to
tread under foot the Son of God, and to count his BLOOD an unholy thing, x.
Heb. 29. Which expression could not be justified, if the Apostles had not looked
upon his Blood as an unreproveable Witness to him. For the meaning is, that
those men who fell back to their old Religion again, and deserted Christianity,
made nothing of the Testimony which God had given of his Son. As for his
Resurrection they did not give any credit to that, though so strongly attested,
but TROD UNDER FOOT the Son of God, as if he lay still in his grave: and as for
his Blood which was shed at his Death, they looked upon that as if it were but
COMMON BLOOD (so the word UNHOLY may be taken) or rather as if it were the
blood of a malefactor, which may be properly called impure and unholy. Which is
the reason that he says they shall be judged worthy of sorer punishment than
the contemners of Moses; because these men in effect made Jesus (who was
infinitely greater than He) to be a mere Impostor, a false Prophet, and a
Blasphemer, who had done things worthy of the vilest death. They justified
those that murdered him, and crucified the Son of God afresh (as it is in a
parallel place, vi. Hebr. 6.) by disowning him and denying that he was the
CHRIST. For this was to acknowledge that he was justly put to death, for taking
upon him that office: and that if he were upon Earth again, they saw no reason
why they should not treat him, as the Jews had done. This was the sense of
every Christians apostasy; it renewed the charge of imposture against Jesus,
and put him, as the Apostle there speaks, to open shame. They did as bad as
publicly declare him to be a deceiver; and that he deserved to lose his life
in that infamous manner wherein he suffered upon the Cross. For which cause
such vilifiers of Jesus deserved to partake in that judgment and fiery
indignation, which he says was ready to devour the adversaries ( ver. 27.) that
is, those who actually crucified Christ, and now persecuted his servants: for
they had his BLOOD in the same contempt, and made no more of it, than of the
blood of one of the Thieves that were crucified with him.

Now from hence it follows that his BLOOD testified his innocence (as I have
shown) and was looked upon by others as well as by S. John to be a witness that
he was the Son of God. Else they could not have been guilty of so great a
crime, and fallen under such an heavy punishment, who despised his Blood, and
were no more moved by it than if it had been common, like the blood of other
men; nay, relinquished him, as if his blood had been profane, like that of the
malefactors who suffered with him. This was their condemnation, that they cast
such a vile reflection on that blood, which heretofore they thought so
powerful, that thereby they were SANCTIFIED; that is, persuaded to devote
themselves to his service, as the only means to obtain remission of their sins,
which they had by his Blood. This is a sign that they looked upon it once, not
only as a thing most sacred, but also most powerful to make men believe in
Jesus. And this increased the sin and guilt of dishonouring his Blood by
Apostasy; because it was of great authority and force to draw men to the
Faith, and to preserve them in it: which, by forsaking the Faith it confirmed,
they made to be of no efficacy, nor consideration at all.

Moses his Covenant and Law were sealed only by the blood of Bulls and Goats,
and yet those men suffered death without mercy, as the Apostle here observes,
who either fell away to other gods, or did any thing presumptuously in contempt
of his precepts. By which we may judge, says he, what they are like to suffer
(a much sorer punishment sure) who renounce the Christian Religion, which was
confirmed by a much greater person, and by a more noble blood, even by the
blood of the Mediator of this better Covenant. Who did more than Moses ever
thought of to attest what he delivered, and to prove that he came from God, and
that all his promises should be made good (for he sealed them with his own
blood) and therefore might justly expect that men should prove more faithful to
him, and remain firmer in his obedience; at least not be so presumptuous as to
despise him by reproaching his precious Blood. Now if his Blood was not an
argument to induce men to believe, and to continue in the state of
Christianity; they could not be charged with such disrespect to it, when they
left this Religion, nor be punished for the undervaluing or rather scorning
that which was of no force to tie them to the Faith. But if they were guilty of
great contempt of it, and were to suffer sorely, extreme sorely upon this
account, that they gave no more reverence to his blood, then we ought to
conclude the Apostles thought it of great efficacy to engage their belief, and
make them constantly adhere to Christ, by the witness that it bare to him.
Which testimony, together with the rest, those apostates plainly rejecting,
they became liable to a far heavier condemnation than any formerly could fall
into, for affronting Christ, and all those who were his Witnesses. In short,
they who did not look upon his blood as Holy, must condemn him for a
Malefactor. But they that did confess the sacredness of it (which appears many
ways) must needs acknowledge him not to have been a Criminal, as the Jews
pretended, but, the Son of God, as at his death he professed himself.

A PRAYER.
I DO again acknowledge thee, O blessed Jesus, to be the Son of God most High.
I behold thy Glory shining through the blackest cloud of thy shameful
sufferings. Then thou appearedst to be the chosen of God, even when thou wast
scorned and rejected of men. Great was the splendor of thy Majesty, under the
mockery of a Crown of Thorns, and under the reproach of the Cross it self. And
great was thy Love, O thou Lover of Souls, who would shed thy own most
precious Blood to work and confirm thy Faith in our hearts, that believing on
thee, we might have life through thy Name. O how expensive was thy Love, which
never thought it had done enough, till thou had assured our hearts, by giving
thy self for us! How infinitely are we indebted to thee, who have so dearly
purchased our eternal joy, with thy most bitter sorrows! I ought to have the
greater regard to all that thou have said, either concerning thy self, or
concerning the obedience I owe thee, or the happiness thou have promised me;
because thou have sealed all in so sacred a manner, and chosen to die that thou
might bear witness to thy Truth.

For this end thou came into the world, and have honored thy self with the
Name of the True and faithful witness, the beginning of the Creation of God;
who have shown us the path of life, by thy bloody and most ignominious death. O
that none of us who are called by thy Name may ever prove so base and unworthy,
so ungrateful and disrespectful to thee, so insensible or forgetful of thine
amazing goodness, as to forsake that course which thou thy self have begun, and
into which thou have led us by thine own example. Let none of us prove unlike
thee who art the beginner and the finisher of our Faith. Let us never
degenerate from the Original from whence we come; nor dishonor the very Author
of what we are, by actions unworthy of his children. But be pleased graciously
both to excite and assist our pious endeavors to follow thee, and to witness a
good confession, as thou have done, at least in our lives and conversation.
That they may testify to all how much we reverence thee, by our observance of
thy commands; and justify the truth of thy Word, that thy yoke is easy and
thy burden light, by our cheerful, free and ready observance of them. And if
thou will have us to witness a good confession also by our blood, or by parting
with any thing that is as dear unto us, for thy names sake; O that we may then
imitate thee, the true and faithful witness, by continuing faithful to thee
unto death. Let no Soul of us ever faint in our mind, much less draw back for
fear of any thing that may befall us: But still go on, and courageously meet
whatsoever opposes us in our way to Heaven. Help us to stand fast in the Faith,
to quit our selves like men, and to be strong, as becomes thy faithful servants
and soldiers, who have vowed to be true to thee unto our lives end.

O Blessed Jesus, who can think that he does or endures too much for thee? Who
can complain of thy service, or repine at the sufferings it may require? When
he thinks of thy labor and pains to secure our hope in God of an eternal
redemption from all miseries and troubles, and from all sin the cause of them,
by shedding thy own most holy blood? We are unworthy to bear the Name of thy
servants, if we should be so ungrateful to thy memory, as not to celebrate that
love with perpetual praises and thanksgivings. And how fearfully shall we
reproach our selves if we continue to commemorate it, and yet grudge to deny
any thing for thy sake, or behave our selves as if we would renew thy
sufferings by our continued sins? Far be it from any of us to think any thing
so dear to us as Truth and Righteousness; that holy Truth which thou have
delivered to us. O that we may read with such an affection the whole history of
thy love, and all the Laws thou have left to govern us, and the gracious grants
thou have made us; as if we saw them written in thy most precious blood: By
which thou have testified the greatness and sincerity of thy love, and assured
us of the truth of thy Word, and consecrated thy self also to be a merciful and
faithful High Priest; who can have compassion on us, and ever succor and
relieve us when we are tempted as thou wast. And may we be so sensibly affected
herewith, as to depend on thy intercession with the stronger Faith; and with
greater care and diligence tread in those steps which thou have in such a
manner marked out to us; and persist in them so steadfastly, that none of the
terrors of this world may make us step aside, and turn from thy Commandments.

Give us grace, O Blessed Lord, in the worst condition, to express that
resolution, that undaunted resolution, that constancy, that confidence in God,
that zeal for his honor and glory, that charity toward our enemies, that
humble resignation, and that patient meekness, which appeared in thee under thy
greatest sufferings. Arm us with the very same mind and spirit, which we see in
thy self. That we who believe in a Savior who abased and humbled himself so
low, who was so content to be poor and little regarded, to bear all the
slanders and scorn, as well as the cruel torments which the malice of men could
inflict upon him; may not be proud and insolent, covetous and ambitious,
impatient of pain, or a little disparagement: but constantly endeavoring to
conform our selves to thy glorious pattern which we have before us, may rejoice
in that faithful saying, That if we be dead with thee, we shall also live with
thee; if we suffer, we shall also reign with thee. Amen.

Now unto the faithful Witness, the first-begotten from the dead, and the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth: Unto him that loved us and washed us from our
sins in his own Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his
Father; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Third Witness upon Earth the SPIRIT.
THere is one Witness more that remains still to be examined, whose testimony
was notorious and very well known, for it was upon the Earth; viz. that of the
SPIRIT. In the sixth verse S. John brings it in after the other two, I have now
treated of; though in the eighth Verse it be set before them. And there he adds
this illustrious character of it, which is not given to the two former, it is
the SPIRIT that bears witness, because the SPIRIT is the TRUTH. Which is not
to be understood as if the other two were not Witnesses, for they are called so
expressly in this eighth Verse; or as if they were not truth, for I have
abundantly proved that they are: But this mark is set upon the SPIRIT, to
denote it to be the most eminent Witness of the Three. The witness, or that
Witness; that which excels the other two in clearness and notoriousness; that
which was always accounted most powerful to prove a truth; that against which
nothing can be objected but with the greatest impudence and impiety; that which
adds greater strength and force unto the other two, and together with them
makes up a most complete demonstration. For whatsoever defect any one may think
there is in the witness of the Water and of the Blood alone; the SPIRIT
perfectly supplies it, and proves beyond all doubt that a person who so lived
and so dyed, must needs be the Son of God.

Now by the SPIRIT we are not to understand, either the descent of the Spirit
of God upon our Savior at his Baptism, or the pouring of it upon the Apostles
on the Day of Pentecost, or any thing of like nature; for this was the
Testimony of the HOLY GHOST, and that from Heaven. But we are to understand
thereby first the Miracles, Wonders and Signs which were wrought by him before
he dyed; and secondly his more wonderful Resurrection to life again, after he
was crucified, dead and buried. I will not be too confident, but I think there
is a plain difference, which is not observed, between the HOLY GHOST and the
SPIRIT, in the phrase of the New Testament. By the HOLY GHOST seems commonly to
be meant, the gifts of Tongues, of Prophecy, of Knowledge, of Wisdom, of
Revelation, and such like. Whereas by the SPIRIT, when it is used alone, or in
distinction from the other, is generally meant, the power of Miracles, of
healing Diseases, casting out Devils, feeding Multitudes with very little food,
and such like wonders. For we read that the HOLY GHOST was not given while our
Savior lived, vii. John 39. And yet even then the Apostles had the power of
casting out Devils, and healing all manner of Diseases; which was a portion of
that SPIRIT which our Savior had without measure, but was not the HOLY GHOST.
Thus S. Peter says our Lord was anointed with the HOLY GHOST and with POWER, x.
Act. 38. Where by POWER is meant something distinct from the HOLY GHOST; even
that which is here called SPIRIT, a faculty of doing wonders; as the other
signifies a faculty of knowing the heart, of declaring the mind of God, of
foretelling things to come, of prophesying, and opening all the secrets of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

And thus I am sure it signifies in the Old Testament; where when the SPIRIT of
the Lord is said to come upon Othniel, iii. Judge. 9. upon Gideon, vi. 34. upon
Samson, xiii. 25. xiv. 6. (as I may have occasion to note more largely upon
another occasion) there is nothing intended of the HOLY GHOST or any gift of
declaring God's mind that was then bestowed on them: But they were then only
made valorous and courageous; and were endued with great strength to atchieve
wonderful things, above the power of Man. And indeed in this consists one
principal difference, between the HOLY GHOST and the SPIRIT; that the former
consecrated Men to the office of interpreting God's mind; but the latter did
not: making them only valiant (as in those three now mentioned) or fit for the
Government of God's People, as in the case of Saul. All which is said briefly
to show what we are here to understand by the SPIRIT, viz. all the wonderful
things that our Lord did, and all that were done for him upon the Earth. For,
whatsoever may be thought of the rest, there is no doubt of this, that when the
HOLY GHOST and the SPIRIT are thus distinguished, as they are here by S. John
(the one being a witness in Heaven, the other on Earth) SPIRIT must be taken in
this limited and restrained signification.

I.
And first, I say, All that he did, as his cleansing the poor Lepers; opening
the eyes of the blind; curing of the Palsy, Bloudy-flux, and indeed all manner
of sickness and disease; commanding the Wind and the Sea to be obedient to him;
walking upon the Water; feeding many Thousands with a few Loaves and Fishes;
making an hundred times more fragments than there was meat; casting out of
Devils, and raising of the Dead; all these were notable witnesses to Jesus, and
hereby the SPIRIT bare record that He was the Son of God. The Prophet Isaiah
foretold that he, being Gods beloved in whom his Soul was well pleased, would
appear in this manner; for God, he says, would put his SPIRIT upon him. This S.
Matthew takes notice of, and applies to Jesus, x. 18. just after he had cured a
Man who had his hand withered: which shows what he understood by the SPIRIT.
And our Lord himself also expounds the meaning of it in the following Verses.
For after the recital of that Prophecy of Isaiah, the Evangelist relates
immediately how He healed a Man possessed with a Devil blind and dumb, verse.
22. which the Pharisees spitefully ascribing to the power of the Devil, and not
of God, He confutes them by this argument, that then the Devil would pull down
his own Kingdom. What men of sense, could imagine him to be so foolish? He was
not yet so blind as the Pharisees were: who ought to have concluded from these
miraculous works, (verse. 28.) that if he by the SPIRIT of God east out Devils
(as it could be by nothing else, according to the argument now named) then it
was apparent the Kingdom of God was come unto them. Here he both tells us what
the SPIRIT signifies, viz. such a power as this of casting out Devils; and also
what was the end of giving the SPIRIT, viz. that they might know the Messiah,
and his Kingdom was come. And whom could they take to be their KING, but he
who appeared anointed with such a SPIRIT, and who communicated the same power
unto others?

For this was an evident demonstration, that the voice was no empty sound which
said, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; and that it was no
deception, when John the Baptist thought he saw the SPIRIT descend and remain
upon him. It was plain by this, that indeed he was very dear to God, and that
he had a Divine Power residing and dwelling in him; which proved him to be as
great as that voice proclaimed him. That there was a mighty Power in him, his
sworn Enemies could not deny. The very accusation of Magic, which we find to
this day in the Jewish Books, against him, does us this service; that it is an
open acknowledgment, there were such miraculous things done, as are recorded in
the Gospel story. Which being granted, it is apparent the power that wrought
them was Divine, and that there was nothing of the Devil in the business; by
our Saviors argument in the place now named. For how could the Devil be
supposed to assist in such operations, unless we will conceive him to have so
little wit, as to contrive the most effectual way to overthrow all his own
authority? The very end for which our Savior dispossessed Devils, and did all
other miraculous cures, was to win honor to God; whereas the Devil, in all
that he does, has the quite contrary drift. If we should suppose with the
Pharisees that he has sometimes suffered himself to be commanded by his
Copartners, it has ever been with the same design, that cunning Gamesters
have; who permit a mere bungler to beat them a set or two, only to draw them in
to play for a greater stake. He never gives way to any of his Friends, or seems
to be afraid of their authority over him, but it is to bring Men to an
acknowledgment of his power; or to seduce them to the performance of some
magical services to him. Whereas our Savior demanded no other reward for all
his charitable Cures, but this alone; that they whom he had thus obliged,
should thank GOD, and give him glory, and sin no more.

To this purpose Origin admirably discourses, in the latter end of his first
Book against Celsus. It is senceless to think that any of his Miracles were
done by Magic; for there never was any Magician, that called Men to the
forsaking of the Devil and all Idolatry, and persuaded them to amend their
lives in good earnest. They never instructed them in the fear of God by all
their wonderful tricks; nor taught those that saw them so to live, as those
that are to be tried and judged by God. This is none of their business. They
neither can nor will carry on such a design; nor have any thing to do with the
amendment of Mankind: being themselves full of all filthiness and swarming with
the most abominable Vices. But he who by all the wonderful things he did,
called the spectators to the correction of their manners and the amendment of
their lives; propounded himself also, not only to his familiar disciples, but
to all others (...), a pattern and example of the best and most excellent life.
That so, both his Disciples might be instructed to teach Men the will of God;
and others, being taught by his Word and manners more than by his Miracles how
to live, might have respect to nothing else in all they did, but how to please
God. Now if the life of Jesus was such as this, what Man of sense is there that
can compare him with Magicians, and not rather believe him to be God appearing
in an humane body, (...), to be a benefactor to Mankind and bestow the greatest
blessings on us.

But, because this Argument is very large, let us draw it into a narrower
compass; and take particular notice only of these two sorts of miraculous
works; casting out of Devils, and raising the dead.

I. As for the former, the casting of Devils out of a number of distracted and
mad or melancholy People, whose depraved imaginations were oft-times furiously
moved by the power of evil spirits; it is the more remarkable, because it
declares he had as great a power over the invisible World, as they saw him have
over the bodies of Men, and over the water, the winds, and things growing upon
the Earth: all which yield some examples of his Miraculous works. Who could
this be, but the Lord of Angels and Men and all other things, who commanded the
Prince of the power of the Air and all his Legions, and they could not resist
him? Was it not an Argument that God was with him, as S. Peter speaks, when no
created power whatsoever could withstand him? For you may observe further, (2.)
That there were no kind of Devils which did not presently give place, when he
required them to come out. There might have been some color, as Athanasius
well observes Di incarn. verbi, p. 103.
, to say he cast out Devils by Beelzebub, if he had not expelled all; though
never so numerous, and never so outrageous. The Prince of Devils might have
been supposed, to have had power over the lesser fry. But since it was
apparent, that (...), all the fury and madness of Demons fled before him, at
the very mention of his Name; we must confess that our Lord and Savior was no
Daemonaical power; but the very Son of God, the Word, (as he speaks) the
Wisdom and the Power of the Father. Nay, (3.) he not only expelled them
himself, but gave his Twelve Apostles authority to cast them out. Thereby
showing he came to deliver Men from the dominion of the Devil, in that he gave
the meanest Men such power over him. Go ye, says he, x. Matthew. 7.8. and preach,
saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; heal the sick, cleanse the lepers,
raise the dead, cast out Devils, freely ye have received, freely give. This was
long before they received the HOLY GHOST, presently after they were called into
his attendance; and therefore was a portion of the SPIRIT, which testified
their CHRIST or KING was not far off, but would shortly visit them. For they
were sent to prepare the people for him, as seventy two Disciples more were
afterward, though with a less portion of the SPIRIT than the twelve Apostles
had. For when he sent them with the same commission to preach, that the other
had, we read of no other power given them, but to heal the sick in every City,
whereinto they came, x. Luke 9. But they were possessed with such an high
opinion of the power of their Master who sent them, that they adventured
further; and in his name cast out Devils, as well as healed sick people. For
when they returned back to give him an account, they tell him, with no small
joy, Lord, even the Devils are subject unto us through thy name, ver. 17.

Which might well have such power, though they had no particular authority
given them to cast out Devils by it, since it was very terrible to them (you
may observe further (4.)) when pronounced by those who were not of our Saviors
company. So S. Mark relates, ix. 38. that S. John brought a report to him of a
man whom they had seen casting out Devils in his name, and yet was none of his
followers; for we forbad him, says he, because he follows not us. To which
Jesus replies, that there was no cause to prohibit him; for this must needs
prove a convincing argument to the man himself, if not to others, that he was
the Christ, ver. 39. There is no man which shall do a miracle in my name, that
can lightly speak evil of me. Of this sort they seem to have been to whom our
Savior appeals when the Pharisees accused him of confederacy with Beelzebub.
That Is strange, says He, did you ever hear of a Devil cast out in the name of
any Magician? In my name there is, even by those who are more related to you,
than they are to me: Let them therefore determine this matter. That seems to be
the sense of those words, xii. Matthew. 27. By whom then do your children cast
them out? therefore they shall be your Judges. There are those who are none of
my Disciples, but yours, that use my name for the casting out of Devils, who
immediately fly before them. What do you think of them; do they deal with
Beelzebub? I know you will not pass such a judgment on your own disciples, and
therefore this fact of theirs condemns your partiality, and proves my Divine
virtue.

Nay, the Devils themselves we find, (5.) were so astonished at this power
which they felt in his name, that thereupon they acknowledged him to be the
CHRIST. For that is their meaning when they confessed him to be the HOLY ONE of
God, i. Mark 24. And so S. Luke expounds it, iv. 41. The Devils also came out
of many, crying out and saying, Thou art the Christ, the Son of God. And (6.)
the most unprejudiced people, who could not be worse than Devils, took this
miraculous work of the SPIRIT to be an argument of it, xii. Matthew. 23. Then was
brought unto him one possessed with a Devil, blind and dumb, and he healed him:
insomuch that the blind and dumb both spoke and saw. And all the people were
amazed, and said, Is not this the Son of David? By that name they called their
KING, whom they expected with the power of working more miracles than any
Prophet before had done, vii. John 31. And therefore (7.) when Cornelius and
his company were desirous to hear of S. Peter all things that were commanded
him of God, x. Acts 33. he refers them to this in the first place (after he had
mentioned his being anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power) as an argument
why they should believe in Jesus, that he went about doing good, and healing
all that were oppressed of the Devil. And he offers himself together with
others, as witnesses of all things that he did both in the land of the Jews,
and in Jerusalem. Which were the more wonderful I must add (8.) in the last
place, because he was a person of such mean education. Nothing like to Moses in
this, who was bred up in Pharaohs Court, and acquainted with all the learning
of the Egyptians. But Jesus was bred up privately and in an homely manner,
having no advantages at all from a liberal institution. Which was the cause
that the people of his own Country, who knew how he had been trained up, were
astonished, saying, xiii. Matthew. 54, 55. Whence has this man this wisdom, and
these mighty works? Is not this the Carpenter's Son? is not his Mother called
Mary? and his brethren James and Joses, and Simon and Judas? And his sisters,
are they not all with us? whence then has this man all these things? That is,
do not we know him and all his kindred? How comes he to be wiser and more
powerful than they? His parentage is poor; his breeding was in a Carpenters
house; he never learnt of any of the Doctors and Masters in Israel; nor was
otherways disciplined than we our selves; where then did he learn his skill?
and who gave him this power?

This was a just cause of astonishment, but none at all of offense, as S.
Matthew in the following words, ver. 57. tells us it proved. That which made
them stumble, should have rather drawn them to him, and wrought faith in them;
when they saw such wonderful things done, and such excellent things said, by
one that could not have them, unless it were from God. It could be no part,
they might easily think, of the Devils craft, to dispossess himself; and
therefore they ought to have concluded that he was the enemy of the Devil; and
indeed the destroyer of him, whom God promised to send into the world. And so
they would have concluded, had not their eyes been blinded with the splendor
and pomp of this world, and with the love of riches, and such like things.
Which made them readier to follow a man that by the force of arms, and their
assistance, promised to subdue the Roman Legions, than him, who by one word
speaking, they saw could cast out Legions of Devils. Which naughty temper of
mind, is that which still prejudices men against the faith, and makes their
hearts indisposed to receive Christianity. They prefer the world before God,
and love their bodies better than their souls: otherwise they would find
themselves inclined to believe in the name of Christ. If they considered what
God is, what honor is due unto him, and what it is that will make a Soul truly
happy, and desired this above all other things; they would presently see that
none ever glorified God so much as our Savior; none so plainly taught the
world what worship, honor and observance is to be given to him; none ever so
contrived the improvement and happiness of our immortal Spirits: and so they
would be disposed to hearken with due reverence and serious attention, to what
these Witnesses say concerning him. Nay, did they but prudently consult the
good of their bodies only, and had respect not merely to their present
satisfaction, but to their perpetual felicity; it would certainly provoke them
to examine carefully the Testimony which God has given him; because he
promises to change these vile bodies, and make them glorious, by that power
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. And there is not the least
reason to doubt of his power now that he is in Heaven, since it was so
miraculous while he was here upon Earth, that He frequently raised the dead.
Which is the second thing of which I am to speak a few words.

II. And there is nothing of this kind like to that of Lazarus his rising to
life again, after he had been dead four days, and was already so far putrified,
as his friends thought, that they dissuaded our Savior from having his Tomb
opened, lest it should prove offensive and noisome to him. For with this S. John
concludes all that he had to say of our Saviors miraculous works; there being
nothing that could be thought of beyond it. For it never entered into the mind
of any man to think, that a person really dead, as Lazarus undoubtedly was,
could be restored to life by any power but that which gives us life, the power
of Almighty God. And therefore our Lord plainly designed this, as the last
thing he could do for their satisfaction while he was on Earth, to prove that
he was the Son of God. Else Lazarus had not died, but he would have gone and
prevented it, as he did in many other cases. For when he heard that Lazarus was
sick, he would not stir from the place where he was, notwithstanding the love
he had both for him and for his two sisters. So S. John observes when he tells
us, xi. John 5, 6. Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. When he
had heard therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still in the same place
where he was. This is a strange reason for his making no more haste, being at a
great distance also from him. One would think that he should have said,
THEREFORE he began his journey presently into Judea, that he might come time
enough to save him whom he loved. But he resolved the quite contrary, because
the Son of God was to be glorified by this sickness, ver. 4. Therefore he
stayed so long before he would move toward him, that Lazarus might be dead
before he got to Bethany: and He might get more glory by his resurrection, than
he had done by healing so many sicknesses, and casting out such a number of
Devils. For this proved that he had power not only to break, but utterly to
destroy the works of the Devil, and to tread him quite under foot, who had the
power of death.

For which reason he tells his Disciples that he was glad for their sakes that
he was not there when Lazarus died, to the intent they might believe, ver. 15.
Have their faith, that is, more confirmed in him, by seeing such an illustrious
miracle wrought upon Lazarus after he was dead, than it could have been by
healing his sickness, and preserving him from death. They had seen many
desperate diseases cured, but never any man raised to life after he had been so
long dead. Some of the Jews indeed objected this to him, that he ought to have
been so kind, as to have saved his friends life, if he had had the power which
he pretended. Could not this man, say they, which opened the eyes of the blind
have caused that even this man should not have died? ver. 37. They do not by
these words express their Faith, but their unbelief: and upbraid him with
weakness or want of love. The latter could not be imputed to him, for by his
tears, just before mentioned, ver. 35, 36. they all observed how much he loved
him. But from thence some of the company took occasion to disparage his power,
and to ask the rest of their neighbors, how they could believe that he had
opened a blind man's eyes (as was commonly reported, Chap. ix.) when he suffered
one, whom he loved so much, to want his help and perish? If he had done the
former, how easy had it been for him to do the latter? In which he failing,
though his affection could not but move him to do his utmost for his Friend,
they took it to be a demonstration, that he was not such a mighty Man as the
People imagined. This perverse reasoning moved our Savior very much, so that
he groaned again in himself ( v. 38.) to see their deplorable obstinacy and
malice; as much as he had done before ( v. 33.) to hear their pitious
lamentations which they made for the dead. These men's condition was far more
pitious; because he foresaw there was but little hope, that they would be
moved, when they saw their frivolous cavil answered, by the Resurrection of
Lazarus. Which would show there was good reason why he let him dye; that he
might express never the less love to him, but more to them and to all Mankind
by restoring his life, which was a more Divine work by much, than to have saved
him from Death.

To this therefore he immediately applies himself and bids the Sister of the
deceased, whose faith it seems began to stagger, not doubt but she should see
the glory of God, verse. 40. such a stupendous instance, that is, of the power
of God in him, as would move many to give glory to God that sent him. For
wherein could the Majesty of God appear more to their astonishment, than in
such a marvailous work as this? which when he entered upon, he first lift up his
eyes to him and called him Father; on purpose that the People might believe he
came from God and was his Son, when they saw him answer his Prayers in this
manner: verse. 41, 42. Where, if you read the place, you will see he gives this
reason why he made a public acknowledgment to God, for hearing him so often:
not because he doubted of his presence with him now; but merely that the
bystanders might know, by whom he did such miracles, and ascribing them to no
other power but his, might believe that he had sent him. What should they
believe else; when they heard him, after this address to God, commanding
Lazarus with a loud voice (expressing his assurance and authority) to come
forth: and when they beheld him who could not lately move himself in his Bed,
rise up out of his Tomb, and walk about, not only restored to life, but in
perfect health? This struck the hearts of many of the Jews who were there
present so powerfully, that they believed on him, verse. 45. that is, concluded
he was more than a Prophet, no less than the Messiah himself. And those
Cavillers before mentioned, who still persisted to maintain their infidelity by
the absurdest imaginations, were so startled at it; that they went presently
and told some of the Great Sanhedrim what Jesus had done; wishing them, I
suppose, to look to themselves, and not suffer these proceedings, verse. 46. For
they were so alarmed with this news, that a Council forthwith is called, and
they enter into a solemn Debate what course to take with him; seeing plainly
how powerful this Miracle was to win him Proselytes, and draw the People to
him, verse. 47. It had had that effect upon many already, as you have heard: and
they were afraid it would increase the number of his Disciples so much; that it
would prove their utter ruin. For they say, verse. 48. If we let him thus
alone, all men will believe on him; and the Romans shall come and take away
both our place and Nation. That is, the People will proclaim him their King,
and thereby we shall incur the indignation of Caesar; who will send an Army,
and cut us off, till he leave neither root nor branch (as it is, iv. Mal. 1.)
but destroy both us and our Temple. That place they were resolved to preserve,
though it were with his destruction: whose death they now determine, as soon as
ever they could catch him. For so their consultation ended; first they decreed
( v. 53.) that for the public good, as they called it, He should be put to
death; and then that if any knew where he was ( v. 57.) they should give notice
of it, that he might be apprehended in order to his trial. Thus their blind
malice turned the most powerful means of their conversion, into the ground and
reason of his destruction. For because he did so many miracles ( v. 47.) they
did not think it fit to let him live; when as for that very cause they ought to
have believed on him, and thought him worthy to live eternally. For, I think
these Three things are very considerable, wherewith I shall conclude this part
of the SPIRITS testimony.

I. First, this Miracle wrought upon Lazarus, was so evident a token, that he
was the Son of God; that it had in it all the conditions, which the Gentile
King, whom the Jews speak of in the Book COSRI Part. 1. Sect. 8.
, requires in a prodigy, sufficient to persuade men to believe that God speaks
by him that works it. Our mind, says he, cannot be brought to think that God
enters into society with flesh and blood, unless it be by such a miracle,
whereby the nature of things is inverted: so that it appears it could not have
been done by any power, but only by his who is the author of Nature, and made
all the things we see, out of nothing at all. And secondly, this miracle must
not be wrought in secret, but, to gain belief, it must be done before the eyes
of a multitude; who may see it, and be satisfied of the truth of it. And
lastly, diligent inquiry must be made, and it must be examined strictly; that
no doubt may be left in men's minds, but they may be fully satisfied it is no
fancy, nor done by any trick or subtle imposture. Now if we consult this
History of Lazarus, we shall find there is none of these wanting, to settle the
most doubtful mind in the belief of our Saviors Almighty power and authority.
For to raise the Dead is a work that exceeds all natural powers. There is none
that can restore life, as has been said already, but he who at the first gave
it. So much the Jews themselves acknowledge; who have a common saying, that
the Key of the Grave is one of the four keys, which is kept in the hands of the
Lord of the World alone. (...) Neither to Angel, nor to Seraph (as the
Jerusalem Targum speaks upon xxx. Genesis 22.) that is, neither to lowest, nor the
highest of the Celestial Ministers is this power given: but it is reserved to
him only that made them and all things else.

Now that our Savior indeed raised a dead man, there were many witnesses, as
you heard before, from xi. Joh. 45. where it is said, that many of the Jews
which came with Mary, and had seen these things which Jesus did, believed on
him. And the fame of it was so great, that it drew a greater concourse of
People thither to be satisfied of the truth of the report. For he tells us,
xii. 9. that much People (i. e. a multitude) of the Jews came to that place,
not for Jesus his sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had
raised from the dead. Nay, the Pharisees, as I told you, had the news of it
brought to them by some that were present, and had seen the things which Jesus
did (xi. 46.) who were curious enough, no doubt, to inquire into the business;
and had satisfied themselves that indeed he was dead, laid in his Grave, and
continued in that state till according to the course of Nature, he must begin
to turn to corruption and stink. Which was all that needed any proof; for that
he was now alive their eyes were witnesses. And therefore they could not deny
this miracle, verse. 47. But to extinguish the light, and take away the
convincing power of it; they thought it was best to remove Lazarus out of the
way, and to put him to death as well as our Savior. For the sight of him
converted a great many, as you read xii. 10, 11. The chief Priests consulted,
that they might put Lazarus also to death. Because that by reason of him many
of the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus. It was a thing confessed then,
that this wonderful work had been done. There was the testimony of the man
himself, and of his Sisters, and of our Savior's Disciples, and of MANY of the
Jews, who were come to comfort Martha and Mary concerning their Brother, xi.
19. In so much that not long after, our Savior coming to the Feast of the
Passover at Jerusalem, Much people went forth to meet him, and brought him in
with a triumph due only to so great a Person, saying, Hosanna, blessed is the
KING of Israel, that comes in the Name of the Lord, xii. 12. And if you would
know what excited them to meet him; it was the fame of this miracle, which the
eyewitnesses of it had brought to them; as you read there, ver. 17, 18. The
people therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of his grave, and
raised him from the dead, BARE RECORD. For this cause the people also met him,
for that they heard that he had done this miracle.

Here, it is visible, were two Troops or Companies, both called much people:
one of which went from Jerusalem to Bethany to see Lazarus whom Jesus had
raised from the dead, ver. 9. The other met Jesus the next day as he was coming
from Bethany to Jerusalem, ver. 12, 13. For they had been informed by those who
were present at the time when it was done, that for certain Lazarus was raised
from his grave by the word of Jesus; and now they were confirmed in this belief
by the company that went to Bethany the day before to enquire of it, who
testified to these that came to meet him, that they found it to be an undoubted
truth, that he had been really dead and now was alive again, by no other means
but those words of his, Lazarus, come forth, which might well make them all
acknowledge him to be their KING, who was come unto them in the name of the
Lord, as appeared by this miraculous work which none but the hand of Heaven
could effect. What heart would not be moved to bow to him, who had such power
over quick and dead? who could think him to be less than the Lord of all, who
they saw was the Lord of life? None but proud ambitious Pharisees, who were
afraid they should lose as much authority as he got. These were more startled
than ever to see such crowds of people flock after him to do him honor; and to
hear them applaud him as the great Son of David, and follow him with their
Hosanna's in the highest. This made them despair of blasting his fame, and
discrediting him with the people, as long as he lived; and therefore they grew
the more resolved to hasten the execution of their decree against him, that he
should be put to death. For they said among themselves, as you read in the
following words, ver. 19. Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? behold, the world
(that is, vast multitudes) is gone after him: followed him, that is, as their
KING, notwithstanding all that had been done to disparage him. They are forced
here to speak more truth than they were aware of, that it was in vain to oppose
him. For even when they had killed him, they perceived presently that they
prevailed nothing: but found this literally true, that indeed the world went
after him. Men of all Nations, and not the Jews only, followed him zealously,
and became his Disciples; notwithstanding the scandal of the Cross, which they
had cast in their way to discourage them. Of which there immediately follows in
this story, an illustrious presage. For some Gentiles desiring to see our
Savior ( ver. 20.) there came a voice from Heaven, upon his prayer that God
would glorify his own Name, saying, I have both glorified it, and will
glorify it again, ver. 28. The glory of God, that is, had appeared lately (as
I have explained it before) in the raising of Lazarus, which had drawn many of
the Jews to him; and he promises shortly to make it appear more brightly by
raising up Jesus from the dead, which would draw also many such Gentiles as
these to believe on his name.

To conclude this, that which the above named Jewish writer pretends in favor
of Moses, that he appeared and did his wonders in an age when the world was
full of wisdom and knowledge, is a great deal truer of our blessed Savior. For
as he rightly notes Sepher Cosri Par. 1. Sect. 63.
that Learning still went along with the Monarchies; so it never was at a
greater height than in the greatest Empire, that of the Romans; and in the
highest pitch of that Empire, when our Savior appeared. Upon which account
there cannot be any suspicion of fraud in this or the rest of our Saviors
miracles, which were not wrought in an ignorant age, nor in an obscure and
barbarous Nation, nor in some blind corner of the Country; but openly, near a
famous City, (for Bethany was hard by Jerusalem) where there were professors of
wisdom; and in a time when men could easily distinguish between a real miracle
and a mere delusion. This therefore ought to have opened their eyes to see who
he was, whose miraculous works they could not but see. And it is justly
mentioned to their eternal reproach, in the conclusion of this story, xii. John
37. that though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not
on him. For they could not with any color ascribe them to any power but that
of Gods; who hereby told them what the voice from Heaven told him, that this
was his beloved Son in whom he was well pleased.

II. And truly there can no good reason be given (which is the second thing
that I told you should be considered) why the Apostles should spend so great a
part of the short History they have left of his Life, in relating his
miraculous works, if they had not both known them to be evident and notorious
things, which all the Country could witness, and likewise esteemed them mighty
demonstrations, that he was the Son of God. Why else are they so large in
describing his cures of several sorts, with the manner of them; if they were
not sure that they could not be contradicted; and if they did not desire they
should be carefully heeded; and concluded likewise that if they were, men would
acknowledge him to be the CHRIST, whom God had sanctified and sent into the
world to declare his will to them? Which belief, if it were once rooted deeply
in their hearts, the Apostles knew very well would irresistibly constrain them,
to be obedient to him in every thing. This is that which gives his words such
authority, which makes them sink into our hearts, and possesses them of our
very Souls, and turns all other opinions and persuasions, which are
inconsistent with them, out of doors; a belief that our Creator speaks unto us
by his mouth.

They were well aware, that it was no easy thing to persuade the world of
this, but that men might justly doubt of so strange a report. For there is such
a vast distance between God and us (as the Jews make that Gentile King Cosar
discourse, in the forementioned Book called after his Name) that a man will be
apt to think the Majesty of Heaven will not enter into such familiarity and
friendship with flesh and blood, as to talk with them. Before we can believe
this, says He, we must see prodigies, and miracles, and behold the course of
nature inverted, by such astonishing works, as can be done by none but him that
created all things. And it is well, if after all this, the mind of man will
rest satisfied, that the Lord of the World, the Lord of the Sun, and Moon, and
Stars, the Lord of Angels as well as all inferior Creatures, will have society
with such vile clay, such contemptible dirt as we are. And therefore as the Jew
in that Discourse with him declares how God demonstrated his presence with
Moses by mighty miracles, seen by all the people, and by their enemies too;
which were the fittest argument for God to use, far beyond the little
reasonings and disputings of Philosophers: even so the Apostles prove to us
that God was in our Savior, and that we ought to believe what he says of
himself, or concerning us, by enumerating many of the mighty wonders which he
did in the midst of the people; wonders that amazed all beholders, and of which
they could give no account, but that God was with him, and spoke by him as his
Son; else he could not have done those things which so much exceeded all the
power of Creatures, nay, all that his own power had wrought for the honor of
his servant Moses. It was unreasonable that they should in those days ask any
greater tokens of a Divine authority; and when they did, our Savior told them
they should have none but the sign of the Prophet Jonas, that is, his
Resurrection, of which I shall speak presently. And it is as unreasonable in us
now, to expect any thing should be better attested than this truth, That our
Savior did all those things which the Apostles have recorded. We have them
reported from those that saw them, and that had all opportunities to examine
them, from those that beheld more of them than they could number; men of great
fidelity and admirable virtue; men that had no interest so great as this, to
declare the truth for the good of mankind, whatsoever they lost by it. Unless
we will demand that Christ should come again in every Age, and also work his
wonders in every Nation, in every place, before every particular man's eyes; we
can have no better assurance than we have of these things. Now how absurdly
unreasonable is he who will not be satisfied without such a new descent of our
blessed Savior from Heaven continually repeated; and unless he may see him
crucified afresh before his eyes? For men may as well disbelieve that part of
the story as all the rest, and require that they may see all those barbarous
cruelties and indignities which we read of, acted over again upon our Savior
perpetually, to the end of the World. The very mention of which as it is
horrible, so should it be done, it would destroy the very nature of faith:
which is the receiving of something upon report. And that is one sure way of
conveying the notice of things to us, which we could not otherwise know. And
things so made known, if the Witnesses be good, are accounted by all mankind to
be as sufficient a ground to proceed upon, in the most considerable actions of
humane life, as the knowledge of them by seeing, feeling, and by the rest of
our senses is.

Let us therefore receive the Testimony of the Apostles of our Lord; seeing
there is no exception (as you may hear more before I have done) that lies
against their persons, with any shadow or color of reason. Let us persuade our
selves that this is a true History which they have written, and then we have no
faculty of discoursing, if we cannot conclude who our Savior was. He could not
possibly have done such things, as the blind man well argued, when his eyes
were opened by him, ix. John 31, 33. if he had been a sinner: that is, a
deceiver, and not authorized by God to come in his Name. If he had been a mere
pretender to this dignity, God would not have honored him on this fashion, nor
have given countenance to a lie, by as great miracles as can be wrought for the
proof of any Truth. He would not have deprived himself of all means to declare
his will to us, as he must have done, if he had suffered such a vast number of
miracles to be wrought by a deceiver for three years together, and given the
most honest-hearted men no means to discover the cheat. We cannot believe him
to be wise, and to have a care to preserve his own authority, and to support
his government, and not think that he would some way or other have controuled
the designs of a person of such high pretenses, if he had opposed Him, and
come without his consent, as his only begotten Son, into the world. In brief,
if all these things be true which are reported, then our Savior was God
manifested in our flesh; and you know what regard and reverence is due to such
a person: And that they are true, we have not the least reason to doubt, being
reported by eye witnesses of his majesty and power; who were so convinced of
his Divine authority that they ventured their fortunes and lives in his
service, merely to promote his honor. And as that whereby they persuaded
others to believe in him was the power of the SPIRIT working so many miracles
by their hands, and the power of the HOLY GHOST in diverse other wonderful
gifts: so it was the same SPIRIT that first convinced them, and made them
confidently conclude, that he was the Son of God. For the first time that we
find they made a solemn acknowledgment of him, was upon the working of a great
miracle, before S. Peter, James and John heard the voice from Heaven, when they
were with him in the holy Mount. He had fed, you read xiv. Matthew. 19, etc. five
thousand men, beside women and children, with five Loaves and two Fishes. And
as soon as he had done, straightway constrained his Disciples to get into a
ship, and go before him unto the other side ( ver. 22.) lest they should join
with the multitude in the design which he saw they had in hand (vi. John 15.)
to take him by force and make him a King. When he had dismissed the multitude,
and spent the rest of the day in prayer, he overtook his Disciples in the midst
of the Sea, in the fourth watch of the night, and found them tossed with the
waves, because the wind was contrary, xiv. Matthew. 24, 25. They were afraid at
the first sight of him, and imagined it had been a Ghost: who perhaps they
thought had raised that storm. But when he spoke to them, and bad them be of
cheer, and said, It is I, be not afraid; Peter was desirous, if it were he,
that he would call him to him, and enable him to walk upon the water with him.
And so he did, as if it had been firm land, till his heart began to fail him,
when he saw the wind boisterous. But then our Lord put forth his hand and kept
him from sinking: and both brought him safe to the ship, and made a calm. Upon
this, They that were in the ship (that is, the rest of the Disciples) came and
worshipped him, saying, Of a truth thou art the Son of God, ver. 33. The sudden
ceasing of the wind, that is, his coming to them upon the water, his bearing up
Peter, and making him walk along with him, and that when the surface of the
water was not plain, but very rough by the crossness of the wind, and his
feasting also great multitudes with little provision; made them conclude
without any more ado, that he was greater than any man ever was. Their minds
were overcome by this mighty power of God in him, which subdued their
understandings perfectly to the faith, and so bowed and inclined their hearts,
that they could not but prostrate themselves at his feet, and acknowledge him
to be the anointed of God. They believed no doubt before that he was a great
Prophet, and a teacher sent of God (as Nicodemus did) nay, had some beginnings
of faith that he was the Messiah (i. John 41, 45.) But it was not till now that
they were sure of it, and did him honor as, of a truth, or certainly, the Son
of God. And they were no easy People, that believed lightly and foolishly,
only out of love of novelty, or some such vain humor: but were convinced and
overpowred by the hand of God, which was stretched out to work such wonders as
these, whenever Jesus pleased.

III. And therefore he had great reason (which is the third and last
consideration) when any disputed or doubted of his authority, to refer them, as
he does very often, to his miraculous works for a proof of it: and he appeals
to them as one of his Witnesses, according as S. John here calls them, when he
says the SPIRIT bears witness. So you read in several places of his Gospel;
where you find that when the Jews incircled him, as if they would not let him
stir till he told them plainly whether he was the CHRIST or not, x. Joh. 24. He
answered them, I told you, and ye believed not: the works that I do in my
Fathers name, they bear WITNESS of me. As if he had said, I have no more for
the present to tell you, than I have told you often by my works. If you can see
nothing in these to convince you that I am the CHRIST, all my telling you so in
words will be to no purpose, but for the present you must remain in unbelief.
To the same effect he discourses again in the same Chapter, verse. 37, 38. If I
do not the works of my Father, believe me not (though I should say never so
often, I am his Son) But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the WORKS:
that ye may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in him. And thus
he reasons with S. Philip, xiv. Joh. 10, 11. Believe thou not that I am in
the Father, and the Father in me? The words that I speak unto you I speak not
of my self: But the Father that dwells in me, he does the WORKS. (a clear
sign he spoke not of himself, and that he was most nearly one with the Father)
Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me
for the very WORKS sake. And so he tells all his Apostles, that the Jews were
inexcusable upon this account, because they did not acknowledge him for the Son
of God, though he did such miracles as Moses and all the Prophets never did,
xv. Joh. 24. If I had not done among them the WORKS which none other man did,
they had not had sin: (in not receiving him as their Messiah, the Son of God)
but now they have both seen (by those WORKS which he did) and (yet) hated both
me and my Father. They could not endure such a Messiah as he was, though so
divinely empowered; and consequently had no love to God, who had set such plain
marks and characters of his approbation upon him. Of which his Divine works
were the chief; for he alleges these (as S. John here in his Epistle does) as
the last witness and evidence to him upon Earth, v. Joh. 36. But I have a
greater witness than that of John; for the WORKS which the Father has given me
to finish, the same WORKS that I do, bear WITNESS of me, that the Father has
sent me. Yea, when John himself sent his Disciples to know of him whether he
was the CHRIST, he plainly shows that he looked on this as a greater testimony
to him than that of their Master; which they had received already: and
therefore gives them no other answer but this; Go, and show John again those
things which ye do hear and see: the blind receive their sight, and the lame
walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and
the poor have the Gospel preached to them, xi. Matthew. 4, 5. Where though he
mention his heavenly doctrine, yet he chiefly insists upon the Witness of the
SPIRIT, as most apt to affect them: and in that very hour, when they came to be
resolved, as S. Luke tells us, vii. 21. He cured many of their infirmities and
plagues, and of evil spirits, and unto many that were blind he gave sight.

This he thought could not but satisfy them, if they would believe their eyes;
especially if they would believe also what they heard, that he raised up the
dead. He could not now give them a clearer and fuller testimony of his
Divinity: and he relied so much upon this evidence, that when he had cured a
Man sick of the Palsy, he told the Scribes that he loosed him from the chain of
his sins; and restored him to health, and bad him arise and walk, now that he
was pardoned, on purpose that they might know the Son of Man has power on
EARTH to forgive sins, ix. Matthew. 6. That is, to take away all temporal
punishment that is due to sin; as after his death and resurrection, when he
came to HEAVEN, he had power to take away the Eternal, and to give life
Immortal. Now who could have such a power but God only, as the Scribes say very
well upon this occasion? ii. Mark 7. Who could grapple with the Devil, the
Prince the God of this World (xii. Joh. 31. 2 Cor. iv. 4.) but only He who is
God blessed for ever, as Jesus appeared by these miraculous works to be? And
indeed it is very remarkable that He wrought his miracles frequently, just as
God Almighty brings things to pass. God, says Moses, said, Let there be Light,
and there was light. He spoke, as the Psalmists words are, and it was done, he
commanded and it stood fast. In like manner did our Savior say to the Leper,
viii. Matthew. 3. Be thou clean: and immediately his Leprosy was cleansed. And
to the foul spirit, ix. Mark 25. Come out, I charge thee, thou dumb and deaf
spirit: and the spirit cried and came out. And to Lazarus, Come forth; and he
that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with grave-clothes. Which was a
notable evidence that indeed he was the Son of God; since he acted so like to
the Father Almighty. This was so well known that when the Centurion came and
besought him for a sick Servant of his, who lay in grievous torments, and our
Savior promised to come and heal him; He modestly declines the acceptance of
that favor, in a sense of his unworthiness to have him come under his roof,
and desires him that he would SPEAK THE WORD ONLY, and he believed his Servant
should be healed, viii. Matthew. 8. The first Cure that we read particularly
related being that of the Leper aforementioned ( v. 3.) and wrought by a Word;
He hoped, it is like, that his Servant might be cured as easily, without giving
our Savior the trouble of coming to his House, and laying his hands on him for
his recovery. Though, by the way, we may note; that herein appeared also his
great power, that as he could heal (if he pleased) without touching, so he
could heal at a great distance. Yea, the Woman that did but touch (not him,
but) the very hem of his Garment (v. Mark 29.) had virtue or power (that is,
something from the SPIRIT that was in him) communicated to her, which restored
her to perfect health. What does all this note, but that he who wrought such
things; so easily, so readily, in any place, and on all occasions, was indeed
the Son of God? He ought to have been honored as the Author, because he was
the Restorer of humane nature. There was great reason to acknowledge so great a
Benefactor to Mankind to be more than a man; for none but God either could or
would bestow such blessings.

It may be said indeed that Moses and some of the Prophets wrought Miracles;
and yet cannot thence be concluded to be persons of such quality. But it may as
easily be answered, that their miracles were nothing comparable, either in
their Multitude or Greatness, to those of the Lord Jesus. For the Multitude,
remember how S. John concludes his Gospel, in which he has recorded some of
them: And there are also many other things, says he, which Jesus did, the which
if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the World it self
could not contain the Books that should be written. For he went about, as has
been often said, doing good, and filled every place with so many miracles of
his mercy; that we cannot imagine into how many Volumes it would have swelled,
if a record of every one of them had been taken. And as for the greatness and
the quality of them, you find some, among those which S. John has set down,
which were never heard of before since the World began, ix. Joh. 32. which
might well make our Savior say, as I noted just now, that he had done among
them the works that no man did, xv. 24. else they had not had sin; that is, he
could not have charged them with the guilt of refusing to believe him to be the
Son of God, because it would not have been sufficiently proved. But this is not
all the reply that may be made to this exception: it is far more considerable,
that Jesus affirmed himself to be the Son of God; to which dignity neither
Moses nor the Prophets ever pretended. The end of miracles, was to prove the
truth of that which the person that wrought them delivered. And therefore as
their miracles demonstrated the truth of that message which Moses and the
Prophets brought from God: So our Savior's evinced the truth of his; which was
that they were only the Servants, but He the Son of God. This was as strongly
attested by what he did; as any thing the Men of God taught in former times,
was by their works. Yea, his miracles bare as fair a proportion in their
bigness and number to this high and great thing which they were to prove, that
he was Gods Son: as the miracles of Moses and the Prophets bare to those lesser
truths which they were brought to establish.

And here for to put a period to this part of my discourse, it will be very
useful to observe the different way of proceeding for the establishing and
promoting a Religion instituted by men, and a Religion whose author is God.
This I find very well noted to my hand in a learned Writer of the Jewish
Nation, whom I have already mentioned Sepher COSRI. Part 1. sect. 80, etc
. When men, says he, make Laws and setle a Religion, whose original is from
their own minds, and devised by themselves; though they may pretend that it
comes from God, yet they are not able to make it take place, without the power
of the Sword, or the countenance and assistance of some Prince who by his
Authority shall cause it to be received. But a Religion that is indeed Divine,
is planted in a Divine manner. When Laws are derived from God, he establishes
them by his power and might, and over-aws men by such wonders, as without any
humane force procure obedience. Thus, says he, our Religion began. When the
Children of Israel were in grievous servitude, and when the Land promised to
their Fathers was in the hand of potent Kings; God sent Moses and Aaron armed
with no power, but that of working miracles, changing the ordinary and usual
course of Nature, and inflicting in a moment grievous plagues upon the Water,
the Earth, the Air, the Plants, the Beasts, and the Bodies of Men, throughout
all the Land of Egypt: whereby the Prince that kept them in bondage was forced
to let them go. And in their Journey they were conducted by the guidance of a
bright Cloud, and they passed through the Sea, and they were fed with Manna in
the Wilderness XL. Years; and saw one Miracle after another, which convinced
them they ought to submit to that Word of the Lord which Moses spoke unto them.
To this purpose that Writer very rationally discourses. Now just as He shows
that Moses proved his Mission from God; so I have briefly related how our
Savior likewise demonstrated that he was the Royal Prophet, whom Moses
foretold God would send into the World. In an Age, when they not only groaned
under the Roman Yoke, but were also superstitiously inthral'd to a number of
Rites and Ceremonies devised by their Elders, superadded to all the burden of
the Law of Moses; and moreover grievously oppressed by the Devil, as all the
rest of the World likewise were, far more than they; God raised up a mighty
Salvation to them out of the house of his servant David. Our Lord, that is, on
a sudden appeared as a Redeemer and Deliverer from the bondage in which they
lay; not with any worldly policy or force, but merely with the Spirit and Power
of God, 1 Cor. ii. 5. who sent an Herald, but without the power of Miracles, to
proclaim his coming. And as soon as he had done crying, his mouth being stopped
by Herod's throwing him into Prison, our Lord presently came forth; shining
most gloriously in the illustrious works that he did every where: which were
such as that time called for, as Moses his miracles were proper to the
occasions and necessities of his days. And some of them were very like those
wrought by Moses, and others bear as great a resemblance to them, as twins are
wont to do to each other, who lie together in the same womb. He healed more
than Moses killed. He turned their water into wine, as Moses did the water of
the River into blood. He walked upon the very surface of the Sea, and called one
of his Disciples to accompany him there. He fed multitudes with a little
quantity of bread, as Moses had fed the Israelites in the Wilderness. This he
did more than once, and that in a Desert too; showing what he was able to do,
if there had been the like need, that there was in former times. Then they
should not have asked what sign show thou (equal to Moses they mean) what
do thou work? vi. John 30. For it was plain enough he could have fed them
forty years in that manner as well as once; which was the thing they seem to
desire, when they say in the next words, ver. 31. Our Fathers did eat. Manna in
the Desert, as it is written, He gave them bread from Heaven to eat. That is,
He did not feed them for one day or two (as thou have done) but a long time,
and that from Heaven; let us see thee do so, that we may leave him and follow
thee. And if he had not done enough already to work faith in them, and they had
lived now always in a Desert, as their Fathers did then, no doubt he would; for
that he could was evident, else how should he have fed them thus miraculously
at all? Many other miracles also declared that he had the same power in the
Air, that he had on the Earth, and could as easily have brought bread from
Heaven, as multiplied the Loaves which had now filled so many of them. The very
Devils were as subject to him as the meanest creature in the World. And He
raised the Dead by his powerful word, which Moses never did. All which is
recorded by the Apostles to show what cause they had to believe in Jesus, and
how his Religion was planted and propagated in the world, as the other wonders
are recorded by Moses, to show with what authority he came, and how he settled
the Israelites in the belief of his Laws. And there is no more cause to
question whether Jesus be the Son of God, the Lord of the World, who came with
such a SPIRIT, than there was then to doubt whether Moses was his servant and
the Lawgiver of that people among whom he did such wonders. Nor so much
neither, for the greater his pretenses were, the greater reason there was that
they should have been discountenanced by such a SPIRIT as was in him, if they
had not been true. It is incredible that God should let the world be abused so
long, by so many miracles, and so great, that never was the like, without any
the least confutation; and abused by a lie of so dangerous a nature, and so
reproachful to his Name, and so directly opposite to his Government, which this
Person (if he were an Impostor, and said he was his Son whom we must worship,
when he was not) sought to overthrow, and take out of his hands. We are secure
that God would not have abetted an Usurper, in so high a manner, against
himself. And as for any unclean Spirits, if they could have done such things as
Jesus wrought, they would not have employed their power, we are sure, to
establish a Doctrine so pure and holy as the Christian Religion teaches, which
utterly destroys all that wickedness in which they delight. There was all the
reason in the World to believe one who came thus by the SPIRIT, when he came by
WATER too; and by his mighty power promoted nothing but the most excellent
Piety, Virtue and Goodness among mankind.

But concerning the miracles of our Savior there will be an occasion to say so
much, in pursuance of what I design, hereafter; that I shall add no more of
them here. Let us now proceed (having heard what the SPIRIT did by him) to
consider what wonderful things it did for him: whereby it proved him to be the
Christ, the Son of God.

II.
And the SPIRIT sure very eminently bare witness of him, when it raised him
from the dead, and not long after advanced him into Heaven, to live for ever
with God. For both these are ascribed to the power of the SPIRIT, in express
texts of Holy Scripture. Of the former you read in the 1 Pet. iii. 18. where
the Apostle says, He was put to death in the flesh (being mortal as we are) but
quickened by the SPIRIT; that is, raised up again from the dead by that Divine
power in him, whereby he had raised up others before he died. It was impossible
that he should be held by the chains of death, who had such a SPIRIT in him. By
this he shook them off more easily, than Samson brake the Withs or the Cords
wherewith he was bound, when the SPIRIT of the Lord came mightily upon him. And
being thus quickened again, the same SPIRIT also presented him to God in the
Heavens, as his dearly beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased; who had given
him full satisfaction, and done his whole will, for which he sent him into the
world. So you read in the ix. Hebr. 14. where the offering which, the Apostle
says, he made of himself to God, through the eternal SPIRIT, was that bloody
sacrifice on the Cross, which after his Resurrection he offered to God, and
continues still to offer in the Heavenly Sanctuary: as the High Priest under
the Law offered the blood of beasts, after they were slain at the Altar, in the
most holy place of the Earthly Sanctuary. And this oblation is said to be made
by the SPIRIT, because that raised him to life after he was slain, translated
him out of his mortal condition, carried him on high, made his body glorious
and immortal; and having thus made him fit to be for ever with God, presented
him unto his Majesty, where he remains, through the power of an endless life, a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek. And this working of the mighty
power of God, which wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set
him at his own right hand in the Heavenly places, far above all principalities
and powers, might and dominion, and every name that is named; was such a
testimony of the SPIRIT to him, that it confounded his adversaries more than
all the miracles which he had wrought by the power of the same SPIRIT in his
lifetime. And therefore the Apostles, I observe, allege this immediately
after the other, as that which completed the testimony of the SPIRIT to him.

Till this was clear and evident, they relied wholly upon the other, as you may
perceive by the discourse of those two Disciples that went with our Savior to
Emaus. Who doubted of his Resurrection after news had been brought them of it,
but acknowledged him to have been a Prophet mighty in deed and word before God
and all the people; and upon that account were much troubled that their Rulers
had crucified him, because they trusted it had been he which should have
redeemed Israel, xxiv. Luke 19, 20. When they were fully persuaded therefore
that he was indeed made alive again (as these very men presently saw) then they
add this as an argument of the greatest force to convince the world, that he
was the Son of God, the Redeemer of mankind. This is the substance, I observe,
of both S. Peter's first Sermons to the Jews and to the Gentiles. He begins
with a relation how great Jesus was in his Life, and then proceeds to show how
much greater God had made him by raising him from the dead. Read but what he
says to his Crucifiers on the day of Pentecost, ii. Acts 22, 23, 24. where he
first tells them that Jesus of Nazareth was a man approved of God among them by
miracles, and wonders, and signs, which God did by him in the midst of them, as
they themselves very well knew: And then, that he being delivered to them, and
by wicked hands crucified and slain, God had raised him up, having loosed the
pains of death, because it was not possible that he should be holden of it. In
like manner he discourses to the first Gentile converts, x. Acts 38, 39, 40.
where he tells Cornelius and his friends, how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth
with the Holy Ghost, and with power; and how he went about doing good, and
healing all that were oppressed of the Devil, of which they were witnesses, who
had seen all that he did both in Judea and in Jerusalem: and then adds that God
raised him up the third day, after he was slain and hanged on a Tree; and
showed him openly, though not to all the people yet, to witnesses chosen before
God, even to him and others, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from
the dead. The Apostle had nothing to add beyond this, which was the greatest
testimony of the SPIRIT to him. Now it spoke with a loud voice in his behalf:
for if he had not been God's Son (as he said he was) He would never have taken
him out of his grave, much less have advanced him into the Heavens. Where it
was manifested he now lived, by the coming of the HOLY GHOST; which fell upon
Cornelius and his friends, while S. Peter was speaking those words. This was
all that could be added to what the Apostle had said; and God sent this to
prove his Resurrection and Exaltation at his right hand. Which was such an
undeniable proof of his authority, that having thus raised him, the SPIRIT, as
I said, finished its testimony to him. For how should it speak plainer or more
convincingly? or who can think that it would have continued to speak for him,
in this manner, after his death, if he had died with a lie in his mouth? The
SPIRIT, which S. John here says, is the TRUTH, openly declared by restoring him
to life, that his Blood was most acceptable to God. It showed that it was no
common thing, but the BLOOD of the Holy one of God. It witnessed to that
WITNESS, and proved that as he did not speak contrary to his knowledge, so he
did not speak contrary to the truth. And if the SPIRIT could not be believed in
this, it would have lost all its credit, and never have been believed more; we
could never have known any thing by the greatest wonders it can work, if such
things had been done for a deceiver, as it is apparent were done for Jesus.

For that he was raised up to life again, we are assured by the testimony of
the Apostles, and by the testimony of the Holy Ghost; of which none can
reasonably doubt, as it were easy to show, if it were not my present business
rather to demonstrate that this was an irrefragable testimony of the SPIRIT to
him, a most powerful means to beget faith and assurance in men's minds that
Jesus is the Son of God. It was for this very end, that S. John wrote the
History of his Resurrection, and the several signs and tokens they had of it,
as he tells us in those words, xx. John 30, 31. Many other signs truly did
Jesus in the presence of his Disciples, which are not written in this Book. But
these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of
God, and that believing ye might have life through his Name. For this plainly
reversed the sentence of condemnation which the Jews had passed upon him. It
showed that he was acquitted in a far higher Court than that, which judged him
worthy of death. Whose decree it rescinded, and openly declared that he was no
Blasphemer, when he said he was the Son of God. If he had, God would have been
more concerned than they to have kept him fast in his grave for ever: that
there, so great a lie might have been buried together with himself.

For the further clearing of which, it will be fit to consider briefly these
three things. First, that before he died, he promised his Apostles that he
would rise again, and gave this also as a sign to all the people, whereby they
should know that he was the Christ. And, secondly, that he declared this to be
the greatest sign he had to give of it. And, thirdly, that his very enemies
confess it is a sufficient sign and satisfactory testimony of any truth.

I. For the first of these, that it was a sign promised to his Apostles, and
predicted to the people; there is nothing more easy to be observed in the
Gospel story. For he tells his Apostles very often that they should see him
betrayed and killed, but on the third day he would rise again. No sooner had S.
Peter confessed that he was the CHRIST, but from that time forth Jesus began to
show them, how that he must go to Jerusalem, and there suffer many things, and
be killed, and be raised again the third day, xvi. Matthew. 21. For he would not
have them expect a Christ that should reign here on Earth, but in Heaven. And
till he went thither, he would not have them so much as preach that he was the
CHRIST, ver. 20. And what he had said here at Caesarea, he repeats again when
they were in Galilee, xvii. Matthew. 22, 23. And again when they were going up to
Jerusalem, xx. 19. And not many hours before he was apprehended, he said again,
A little while and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while and ye shall
see me, because I go to the Father, xvi. John 16. At which words they were
greatly troubled, because they minded more what he said about his death, than
they regarded his resurrection which was to follow. But the greater their
trouble was then, the greater their satisfaction was afterward, when they saw
him alive again. The less disposed they were to believe it, the more confident
they grew when they saw such a wonder. They wept and lamented when he was gone,
as he told them they would ( ver. 20.) But when he came to see them again,
their heart rejoiced with such a joy, as none could dispoil them of, ver. 22.
The ground of which joy, you shall see presently, when I have also remembered
you how he foretold his Resurrection to the people, as a testimony that he was
the CHRIST. It was their wont in all Ages, and with great reason, to ask for a
sign that a man was sent of God. And therefore now that Jesus came with such
authority, as to redress many abuses among them, and to reform that Nation and
Temple, they ask him what sign show thou unto us, seeing that thou do
these things? ii. Joh. 18. He had given them signs enough already, and
therefore makes no other answer but this (to let them know what should be the
last sign.) Destroy this Temple (pointing to his own body) and in three days I
will raise it up, verse. 19.

From whence we may safely argue, that Jesus having given this as a sign and
token whereby it should evidently appear, more than by all his miracles, that
he was the Son of God; the Almighty would never have fulfilled this promise and
prediction, if He had usurped his authority, and taken upon him to be his
ANOINTED, without his leave. Nothing was more easy than to quash all his
pretenses, which relied upon his Resurrection; without which his Apostles, as I
told you, had no authority to Preach that he was the Christ. It had been but
letting him rot in his grave, as all men naturally do, when they are dead; and
all the World would have been of the mind of the Pharisees, that he was a
Deceiver. And God sure has not so little care of the World, as to deny them
such ready and obvious means of satisfaction, about the most important truth.
We ought to think rather, that he would have concerned himself to see, that
this Temple, which he spoke of, should lie for ever in its ruins, and be
turned to dust and ashes. He, who alone could do it, would have been so far
from rearing it up again, that he would have provided, it should be profaned,
and made the vilest rubbish in the World. But there being very good proofs,
many infallible proofs (as S. Luke speaks, i. Act. 3.) that it was quite
otherwise, and that indeed it was raised after three days, as he had told the
People; it was a Testimony from God most high, that He dwelt in that Temple,
and that it was his Holy place, where he manifested his glory. He declared to
them by this that Jesus was no Deceiver, but that they ought to believe he was
the Christ of God. For that a man should be raised from the dead, by any other
power than that of God's; all the World concludes is impossible. If any of
those lying spirits, which love to cheat and abuse the world, could do such
feats; why do we not see this frequently happen: that so they might break the
force of this testimony, and overthrow our belief? Above all things they should
be concerned, one would think, to work this wonder; for then we should be
forced to confess, that there is nothing so eminent and singular in this thing,
as to move us to give credit unto Jesus. But since it never has been done, but
only in this instance; and it was also a fulfilling of his word, when he gave
it as a token of this truth; we have reason to conclude as S. Paul did after he
had seen him alive, that this is very CHRIST. Upon this ground it was that the
Apostles so much rejoiced, when they saw him again; for now, as S. John tells
us, ii. 22. when he was risen from the dead, they remembered that he had said
this unto them (concerning the raising up the Temple of his Body) and they
believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had said. Now they were
assured they had not been deluded, and yielded their assent, all this while, to
a fancy. They saw clearly that he was their KING, though he had been vilely
disgraced and crucified. And therefore, when they parted with him again, after
his Resurrection, they did not lament and mourn as they had done before; but
worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem, with great joy: and were continually
in the Temple, praising and blessing God, xxiv. Luke 52, 53.

II. But it is time to add, that as it was a sign, which he gave them
beforehand of this Truth, so he told them, it was the greatest sign which he
had to give. He had done many things in his life time to persuade the Jews,
that he was the CHRIST: But still they were so perverse, as to ask for more
signs of it. Though he had done more miracles than ever Moses, or all the
Prophets had done from the beginning; yet the Pharisees continue to say,
Master, we would see a sign from thee, xii. Matthew. 38. One would think they had
a mind to learn of him, since they call him Master; but it was only a
complement, as S. Luke informs us, xi. 16. And therefore our Savior calls
them, an evil and adulterous generation, who were degenerated from the manners
of their pious ancestors; for they were contented with less proofs of that
which God required them to believe, and would have been ashamed to seek after a
sign, as these men did, after such evident tokens of a Divine presence in him,
as they beheld. Why should he gratify men of so naughty a humor, whom nothing
would satisfy, but a sign from Heaven, which S. Luke says they demanded? nor
would be convinced then neither, he clearly discerned by their frivolous cavils
at all that he had already done. Therefore he tells them, no sign shall be
given them, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas (which was not a sign from
Heaven, but from the bowels of the Earth) For as Jonas was three days and three
nights in the Whales belly: so shall the Son of man be three days and three
nights in the heart of the Earth, verse. 39, 40. Which was as much as to say, It
is in vain to attempt the conviction of such corrupt and depraved minds as
yours are, by such means as these. And therefore, I must tell you, all that is
remaining for the opening your eyes and conquering your perverseness, is my
Resurrection. As Jonas was miraculously restored again to live upon the earth,
after he had been swallowed up by a Whale in the Sea, and layn there three
days; which was a notable sign that he was a Prophet, and could not but obtain
him credit with the Ninevites, when they came to the knowledge of this wonder:
So will I be restored again to life, after you have killed me, and I have layn
three days in the bowels of the earth; and if this will not satiffie you, there
is no other sign to follow this for your conviction. But let me tell you (as he
adds, verse. 41.) if you still persist in unbelief when this is fulfilled, the
men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with you and condemn you; for they
repented at Jonas his preaching, and behold, a greater than Jonas is here. That
is, though Jonas was not really dead, but only had his life wonderfully
preserved, yet the report of it wrought faith and the fruits of faith,
repentance and amendment, in the hearts of the Ninevites; and what a
condemnation will it prove to you, if after you have seen me actually dead, and
it be demonstrated to you that I am raised to life again, you will not believe
on me?

The very same thing is repeated again, xvi. Matthew. 4. where, they having once
more demanded a sign from Heaven, ver. 1. He answers them, that they should
have none but this of Jonas: and he left them, and departed. As if he had said,
I have nothing more to say to you now: all that remains, is that I dye and rise
again, which is the last and greatest token that I am the CHRIST. And indeed
this was a sign so great, that it gave force and strength, to the other signs
which had been given of this Truth. For in the next Chapter ( Matthew. xvii. 9.)
we read, that Three Apostles having been confirmed in this belief by a voice
from Heaven, which said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; hear
ye him; Jesus charges them, saying, Tell the Vision to no man, until the Son of
man be risen again from the dead. Till He had taken possession of his Kingdom
and was set upon his Throne and thence sent the Holy Ghost, He saw it would be
to no purpose for the Apostles to publish this testimony of God the Father to
him. For they had already slighted the testimony of John Baptist, who heard the
like Voice from Heaven at his Baptism, and thereupon bare witness that Jesus
was the Christ: And therefore it was not likely, that they would listen to the
Apostles, when they came and testified that the same words were spoken in their
hearing; until their testimony should be justified by the authority of such a
proof as this, that he was risen from the dead. This would mightily back all
that they said; and make it undeniable by any, but those who would still deny
his Resurrection: which was wilfully and without any reason, not only to call
them liars, but to affront the Holy Ghost, who witnessed together with them,
that he was risen from the dead. Which being a proof of such strength that our
Savior relied upon it above all other, it is manifest to common reason, that
if there be a God (as we are sure there is) who loves sincerity and truth; he
should above all things, have taken order, that this should not have had such
evidence as it has, if indeed Jesus was not his Son. Though he had suffered
wonders to be done by him, and voices from Heaven had been heard, yet still he
gained not much belief in the most considerable part of the Jewish Nation: and
therefore appealing in conclusion to this Grand Testimony, sure there is no
providence, or else it would have taken care, in case he had been a deceiver,
that it should have been as evident that he did not rise from the dead, as now
it is that he did. Though the World had been amused a long time with discourses
about him, and with strange things which he was thought to do; yet here had
been a nick of time at one stroke to have broken the force of all these
arguments, and blasted his credit, and undeceived the People, had there been
nothing of God in it. But since this last and greatest token did come to pass,
as was proved by witnesses of unquestionable truth, it justified his pretenses,
and added strength to all the former testimonies which had been given to him:
demonstrating him plainly to have been a man approved of God among them, by
miracles, wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of them, as they
themselves knew.

III. And this truly was so great a sign, that his very Enemies could not but
confess it was satisfactory; and a sufficient evidence of any truth. Which may
be clearly discerned from hence, that they never, to this day, went about to
show that though he was raised again, yet it was not a proof that he was the
CHRIST: but all their endeavor has been to persuade the People, that he was
not raised again. They had no other way but to deny this, that so they might
not confess the other. They were utterly undone, they knew, and must lose all
their reputation with the People, if he was raised from the dead (because it
would effectually prove what they denied) and therefore they hired the
Souliders to say, that his Disciples stole him away while they slept. A story
so sillily contrived (as I hope to show in another place) that it it is a very
great evidence, they shut their eyes against this light, for fear it should
show them that they had been the Murderers of their CHRIST. They could not but
say, that if he was raised again, he was the CHRIST; and therefore were
resolved to say any thing, though never so absurd, rather than grant that he
was raised to life again, which must strike them dead. He was not a King for
their purpose; and therefore they hated him and endeavored by any means to
obscure whatsoever tended to prove his authority. He never made any show of
worldly greatness, or gave them any hope he would fight their battles against
the Romans; and therefore they entered into a league against him, to make
perpetual war with him: and sought by all the lies they could invent, to
suppress his growing Name, and by all the cruelties they had power to use, to
dishearten his followers from professing their belief in it. But the Apostles
of our Lord knowing the truth of this better than they could do, and that it
was a mere calumny which they spread abroad concerning their stealing his Body
out of the Sepulcher; could not be deterred by any punishment, which they or
all the power on earth could inflict, from preaching Jesus and the
Resurrection. For on the one hand they saw it was confessed by malice it self,
that if he was raised from the dead, it could not be denied that he was the
CHRIST; and on the other hand they saw, with their own eyes, that he was raised
from the dead, and knew it was a malicious slander which the Pharisees had
divulged, of their breaking open the Monument of the dead. This both confirmed
their faith, and inflamed their zeal. If they had any doubts remaining, this
very tale helped to disperse them. But they were soon past all doubt by the
coming of the Holy Ghost, which he sent them, to witness the Resurrection
together with them. Then it was impossible they should doubt of his being
alive, when they felt his mighty power in their hearts. This dissipated all the
mists and vapors, which had gathered about them, and darkened their
understandings. By this Jesus brake forth upon them in a fresh luster: and like
the Sun, rending all the Clouds in pieces, illuminated not only them, but the
whole World, in a short space, with the beams of his Glory.

How should he do otherways, after such a proof as this; which is so great that
they could never wish for a greater? It is not above six hundred years ago,
since a Jew called EL DAVID, gave out that he was the Christ, and drew a great
many followers after him. Upon which he was apprehended and brought before an
Arabian Prince, who asked him; What miracle, what prodigy do thou show that
we may believe? To which he answered, Sir, cut off my head, and I will live
again. This he said craftily, to avoid greater torments which he foresaw would
be inflicted on him, for affirming that which he could not prove. But observe
the Princes reply, (as it is related by Maimonides, in a letter of his to the
Jews at Marseilles, about this very business:) Thou can not give us a
greater sign than this. And if it fall out so, that thou do rise again to
life after I have cut off thy head, I, and all my People (nay all the World
sure) will believe what thou say is true; and that our Forefathers inherited
nothing but vanity and lies, which did not profit them. And presently the
experiment was made; He commanded him to be beheaded, and there was an end of
his cheat. And so likewise there had been of this business which we are
treating of, if Jesus had not risen. For he said just as this El David did,
Kill me, if you please; I will live again. Which sign coming to pass, as we
have the greatest reason to believe, we ought to follow the resolution of the
Prince now mentioned, by submitting our selves to him, and heartily
acknowledging him to be the Lord. When he was upon his Cross, the Chief
Priests, with the Scribes and Elders, said, He saved others, let him save
himself. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the Cross, and
we will believe him: xxvii. Matthew. 41, 42. If our Lord had taken them at their
word, we cannot tell what they would have done. But it is plain, he intended to
give them a better ground of Faith than that. If they had demanded a greater
thing, they should have had greater satisfaction. If they had said, He raised
others from the dead, let him raise up himself, after we have crucified him;
let him come out of his Grave, if he be the KING of Israel; and then have used
all the care in the World, to see whether he rose again, or no: they had been
convinced and persuaded to believe on his Name. It was not fit to do the other,
because he was to Dye for the Sins of the People: But this he did, though they
did not ask it, to fulfill his own promise, and to show that he was the Person
promised to their Fathers. And it is so much greater than the other, as it is a
greater thing, to be made alive again after Death, than to save a Man's self
from dying.

I hope then I may conclude with the Apostle S. Paul, that this piece of the
Mystery of Godliness is without controversy, God was manifest in the flesh,
Justified, (...), in or by the SPIRIT. The SPIRIT which did such mighty things
by Jesus, and at last raised him from the dead, warranted him to be God
manifested in our flesh. It cleared him from all the envious and malicious
accusations of his adversaries, while he was alive, by the many miraculous
works which it wrought: and it purged him from all suspicion of blasphemy,
which was charged against him, and took away his life, by raising from the
dead, and presenting him in Heaven a pure oblation to God. It has acquitted
him fully in all impartial men's thoughts, wiped off all the guilt which was
cast upon him, set him before the eyes of all the world as a person innocent
and just; and made him glorious and great even in his blood (as those words may
be rendered, xiii. Hebr. 20.) wherewithal he is gone into the Heavenly places,
there to appear before God for us: which he would not have been able, nor ever
dared to do, if he were not fully justified, and perfectly a righteous person.
This is that witness which our Savior himself promises to Nathanael, as higher
than that, which he had already received, i. John 50, 51. He was convinced of
the Authority of Jesus, and acknowledged him to be the King of Israel, because
he could search into the secrets of the hearts, and know men at a distance: But
our Lord tells him he should see greater things than these, even, behold the
Heavens opened, and the Angels of God, ascending and descending upon the Son of
man. That is, He should have the witness of the SPIRIT, sending the Angels to
minister unto him, when he was raised from the dead, and when he was exalted
unto Gods right hand in the Heavens.

The Ascension and Descension of Angels is but an Hebrew form of speech,
whereby they express the ministry and service of Angels to the Divine Majesty.
A servant first goes to his Master to receive his orders, before he can be sent
by him; and therefore ascending is put before descending: and by both is
nothing else meant, but the ministry of those Heavenly Creatures, that wait
upon the Throne of God, and do his Commandments, hearkening to the voice of his
Word. From thence they were sent to attend on Jesus at his Resurrection, and at
his Ascension, as his Disciples witnessed and Nathanael among the rest; for he
is mentioned as a person present when Jesus showed himself to his Disciples
after his Resurrection (xxi. John 2.) and is thought by many to be the same
with S. Bartholomew. As Israel saw in a dream the Angels ascend and descend
upon a Ladder reaching from Earth to Heaven (xxviii. Genesis 12.) So this true
Israelite (who, as Greg. Nyssen Homil. 15. in Cantic.
expresses it, showed (...), etc. the pure character or mark of that Patriarch
upon him, in his honesty and uprightness of heart) beheld the like vision of
Angels, but in a more apparent manner, when he was awake: that he might hereby
be confirmed in the faith of Jesus, as Jacob was by his vision in the belief of
God's providence. And indeed this was a great confirmation to his and to our
faith. For I conceive that this phrase (...), upon the Son of man, is the same
with that where it is said the Holy Ghost came (...), upon him. Which as it
signifies that he was made partaker, or rather was possessed of the Holy Ghost,
and it became His: so this other like phrase of the Angels ascending and
descending upon him, denotes, by the same reason, that he was made the Lord of
them; and had them given to him as his ministers and attendants, to be employed
in his service. And so it was remarkably fulfilled which our Savior said, that
he should see GREATER things than those he mentioned before: For hereby he
knew, not only that he was the King of Israel, as he had confessed, ver. 50.
but that he was the King of Angels, the Lord of Lords. Yea, hereby it appeared
that he has the power of God, because just as the Angels are represented doing
their service to his Majesty (in that xxviii. of Genesis) so our Lord foretells
with the greatest certainty, they should see them waiting upon him. And so they
did, as you read in the first of the Acts of the Apostles, ver. 9, 10, 11.
which proved him to be indeed the heir of all things.

Now to show a little more fully the greatness of this Testimony of the SPIRIT,
and that it was greater (as Jesus here says to Nathanael) than the gift of
discerning Spirits, which I called a gift of the Holy Ghost, to distinguish it
from the Spirit; let us consider a little that speech of our Saviors, xii.
Matthew. 31, 32. Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy, shall
be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy of the Holy Ghost, shall not be
forgiven unto men, etc. Which heavy doom S. Mark tells us was pronounced upon
them, because they said, he had an unclean Spirit, iii. 30. This shows what the
blasphemy was, in which if they continued there was no hope of pardon. For if
he by the SPIRIT of God cast out Devils (as he tells them, ver. 28.) then it
was rank blasphemy, the highest degree of evil speaking and calumny, to impute
these very cures and wonderful works to the power of the Devil, which were
wrought by that Divine power. And this sin was therefore unpardonable, which
shows how great this testimony of the SPIRIT is, because there were no means
left to convince them that Jesus was the Son of God (without which belief their
sins could not be forgiven) if they persisted not only in denying the authority
of the SPIRIT, but were so bold as to blaspheme it. For what could work upon
their hard hearts, if this proved ineffectual? might they not better deny the
voices from Heaven, which they did not hear, than these wonderful works, which
they beheld every where with their own eyes? Or might they not as well say that
those were delusions, as call these works diabolical operations? Might they not
in like manner slight his power of knowing secrets, and impute it to some other
skill? What is there in which they might not shuffle and resist the light, if
in so clear a case as this, Jesus his opposition to the Devil, casting him out
of possession, and that on purpose to establish an holy doctrine, quite
contrary to his interest, and in a number of other miraculous works, they would
be so obstinate as to say, the Devil himself had the principal hand. There is
no question to be made, but they who were so perverse as not to see this finger
of God, but continued blinder than the Egyptian Magicians, when it did so many
wonders, would shut their eyes against any other means of conviction, which
could not be expected (it must also be remembered) because God himself had no
higher evidence to give them, than this of his SPIRIT.

But then you must not understand this speech of our Savior, as if he meant
that those persons, to whom he spoke these words, had run themselves at that
instant, into this unpardonable sin: but that if they still proceeded to
blaspheme it, when the SPIRIT had finished its testimony (that is, done all
those things which still were behind, for their conviction) then they would
fall into it, and remain in it irrecoverably. For you must remember that under
the word SPIRIT is comprehended the power that raised Christ from the dead, and
presented him to God in the Heavens; that he might receive of him the promise
of the Holy Ghost, which he shed upon the Apostles abundantly, as a witness of
his Resurrection and glorious Exaltation. If after this, that Jesus was risen
again from the dead, ascended into Heaven, and showed himself to be there by
sending the Holy Ghost upon his Apostles, they did not believe, but still
blasphemed the holy name of Jesus, and the SPIRIT of God, saying, That they
were drunk who were filled with the Holy Ghost, as here they said Jesus had a
Devil; then they were incapable of obtaining remission of sin, because there
was nothing more to be done for their conversion, but they must be abandoned to
the hardness and impenitence of their hearts. This I am sure must be the
meaning, because our Lord himself, after he had pronounced the Pharisees
unpardonable, who spoke against the SPIRIT, whereby he cast out Devils, tells
them expressly that there was one sign more remaining to convince them (which is
a demonstration they had not yet sinned incurably, nor could not till that sign
was past) and that was the sign, as you heard, of the Prophet Jonas, ver. 39,
40. which he grants them again, xvi. 4. should not be denied them. Now every
body understands by this, His Death, and Resurrection, with those things that
followed upon it, the sending of the Holy Ghost to enable his Apostle to go and
teach all Nations, as Jonas went, after he came, as we may say, out of his
grave, and preached to the great City Nineveh. But then this was still the
SPIRIT, that was thus continued to them (by that our Lord being raised, and it
working wonders also at his Death) which if they continued to resist, when it
had fully done the whole office of a witness, and was all poured forth, then
they were under the absolute sentence of condemnation. In brief, To blaspheme
the SPIRIT in this comprehensive sense of the Word (including the Resurrection,
and that which followed to prove it) was the unpardonable sin and none else.
And thus our Savior's meaning is to be expounded; if one should speak a word
against the Son of man, (that is Him) despising him because of his poor
Parentage, and calling him the Son of a Carpenter, or some such name; this,
though blameable, might be pardoned, propter corporis vilitatem, as S. Hierom
speaks, because of the meanness of his outward appearance. Nay, if a man
proceeded so far as to call him a glutton, a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans
and sinners; this also might find pardon, because he did not hitherto speak
evil of the works proper to a God, but only of those belonging to a man. And
more than this, should he call him deceiver or seducer, when he heard him teach
the people; it would not be unpardonable, because no man is to be believed
merely upon his own word. But if when these men saw the mighty works of the
SPIRIT justifying his preaching to be Divine, they still continued to speak
evil of him; this was a very dangerous blasphemy: because they could not after
this call him a seducer or false Teacher, but they must reproach the holy
SPIRIT as well as him, and call that the work of the Devil, which was performed
by the power of the Spirit of God. And if when the HOLY GHOST was come from
Heaven upon the Apostles, witnessing that he was quickened by the SPIRIT, and by
the same SPIRIT presented to God in the Heavens, they still went on to speak
evil of him, then there was no hope of remission, because they blasphemed the
last remedy for their recovery, which was the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven
to persuade them to repent and believe on his name.

And that we must take our Savior in this sense, is further apparent from the
name of the HOLY GHOST, which he uses when he speaks of this unpardonable sin,
never calling it the blasphemy against the SPIRIT, but always the blasphemy
against the HOLY GHOST: which you know was not as yet given, when our Savior
spoke these words. In the beginning of this discourse, xii. Matthew. 28. he
mentions only the SPIRIT. But then coming to describe the danger of blaspheming
it, he does not say that the blasphemy of the SPIRIT simply, that is, of those
present works of his was unpardonable: but that the blasphemy against the HOLY
GHOST, when it was come, should never be forgiven. Which must needs be
understood, as I have already argued, concerning the contempt and reproachful
usage of those following witnesses, the Resurrection, Ascension, and the
preaching of the Apostles endowed with power from on high; because though the
SPIRIT now wrought among them, yet the HOLY GHOST was not come to be his
ADVOCATE and plead his cause; and therefore could not as yet be blasphemed by
them. By HOLY GHOST then in our Savior's language here, I suppose is meant all
that was left still to be done for his Justification; and that it is so wide a
word in this place, as to include in it the SPIRIT also. For he was speaking
before of the SPIRIT, and therefore when he alters the phrase, he does not
leave out the testimony of that, but embraces it within the compass of a larger
word: which it was necessary to use, that he might show when that sin, which
they had begun in a desperate manner, would be so complete, that it could never
be undone. And that was when the HOLY GHOST had consecrated the Apostles to
their great office (which supposes his Resurrection) and filled them with all
Divine gifts: among which, you know, was a power (xiv. John 12.) to do greater
works than these, which our Savior is here speaking of (called the SPIRIT:)
Then if they did not believe there was no remedy; but they must perish in their
infidelity. But till then they, to whom our Savior speaks, were not arrived at
this hopeless condition, because they had hitherto only blasphemed the SPIRIT,
not the HOLY GHOST, which was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet
glorified. But when it was given, and they reproached that, as they had done
the SPIRIT, then they were under irrecoverable condemnation: there being
nothing more to be done for the opening their eyes, and persuading them, that
Jesus was the Son of God. They had made a fair step to it in our Savior's
lifetime, by resisting the mighty power of the Spirit; but it was possible
they might see their error, because there was still a more mighty power behind,
which first raised up and glorified Jesus, and then enabled his Apostles to do
more wonderful things, than he had done when he was on Earth.

And therefore I observe that afterward the word HOLY GHOST is sometimes used
in this large sense, for all the Power that was given the Apostles, whether of
Prophecy, and Languages, or of healing and casting out Devils (which last are
sometimes peculiarly called the SPIRIT) and so not to be distinguished from the
other, which it incloses. Thus the word HOLY GHOST in ii. Hebr. 4. may be
referred not only to gifts immediately preceding, but to signs, wonders and
miracles, before mentioned. And after S. Peter and John had cured a lame man,
they say the HOLY GHOST was a witness to Jesus, v. Acts 31. But though this
word be so largely used in some places (as SPIRIT also sometimes signifies all
the rest, ii. Acts 4, 17. and sometimes all but that which is called power, 1
Cor. ii. 4.) yet commonly you will find the word HOLY GHOST having a peculiar
reference to those other gifts of Illumination, not of Power, iv. Acts 8. v. 3.
vii. 55. x. 44, 45. and especially xix. 2, 6. where you read that S. Paul found
certain Disciples at Ephesus, who had not so much as heard whether there was
any HOLY GHOST, who had heard no doubt of the miraculous works both of Christ
and his Apostles. Now when these and the HOLY GHOST were both joined together;
when Jesus had given them the witness of his Blood, and of his Resurrection,
and the Gospel came not only in POWER, but in the HOLY GHOST, as S. Paul
speaks, 1 Thessalonians. i. 5. Then they who persist to blaspheme the name of Jesus,
were in an hopeless condition, past all the methods of God to bring them to
forgiveness. All which I have said, as distinctly as I could, to explain that
which has perplexed so many, and to show the strength of this Witness: which
our Savior so much relied upon, that he knew not a greater to convince them,
when once it had said all that it intended in his behalf. To which let this be
added, as an argument of the greatness of this testimony, that they who
apostatized from the Christian Faith, are therefore condemned to a sorer
punishment than they who forsook Moses, not only because they accounted the
BLOOD of Jesus an unholy thing, and despised that witness, but also did despite
to the SPIRIT of Grace, which by raising him from the dead, proved his BLOOD to
be the Blood of the Son of God, x. Hebr. 29. This is set down last of all in
that place, because it filled up the measure of their sin. This made them
incapable of the benefit of any sacrifice for sin (as it is, ver. 26.) that
they so slighted, yea, vilified and reproached, carried themselves
contumeliously (as the word imports) toward the SPIRIT of God, which was the
greatest Testimony on Earth that our Savior had, and was followed with the
HOLY GHOST sent down from Heaven. And they must needs be guilty of such
disgraceful usage of the SPIRIT, yea, of the SPIRIT of Grace, that Spirit which
God had so graciously poured, not only upon Jesus, but upon the Apostles, and
perhaps upon themselves, if they did deny Jesus, and renounce his Religion:
because this was in effect to tell the world, that this was not the Spirit of
God, but of the Devil, and that it did not prove his Resurrection from the
dead, but, whatsoever it said, He was a blasphemer, when he called himself the
Son of God.

Thus I have done now with this last Witness on Earth, the SPIRIT: which you
see concurs and agrees with all the former in this Truth. There is not the
smallest difference between them, nothing to make us suspect them to be false
witnesses; for they are all found (to speak in our vulgar phrase) in the very
same story, punctually, and in terms affirming this, that Jesus is the Son of
God. This he preached, who never did any sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth; This John Baptist likewise proclaimed with a loud voice; The Blood of
Jesus attested this before all the people; this was the very Title over his
Cross, that he was KING OF THE JEWS; and this the SPIRIT said; it was the
language of every one of his wonderful works; and of his Resurrection also and
his Inthronization (of which the Holy Ghost gave assurance) which conspired to
testify this, and expressly justified it to all the World. And therefore how
can we choose but think this a sure word [that he is the Son of God] which is
established out of the mouth not of two or three, but of twice three witnesses,
of unquestionable credit. And these three last treated of, challenge from us a
very careful consideration, and we ought the more duly to weigh what they say,
because they were on Earth: and upon that account, nearer to us, as I told you,
more evident at first sight, more strongly attested by innumerable witnesses,
that they might serve for a greater confirmation, even of the truth of the
rest. The Testimony of the FATHER is certain, because it was heard by several
excellent persons; yea, once by a multitude of people. That of the WORD also is
infallible, and we cannot with any reason doubt whether there was such
evidence, because S. Steven, S. Paul, S. John were persons of unspotted
reputation, who heard it, and also did and suffered the hardest things upon the
credit of it. That the HOLY GHOST also fell upon him at his Baptism, a great
Prophet so confidently affirmed, that it was profaneness to deny it. But yet,
excepting the Testimony of the Holy Ghost after his Ascension, there were none
of those Witnesses in Heaven heard by so many, as these three last mentioned,
who, as S. John says, bare witness in Earth.

It was a notorious thing to all the Country (which Jesus traveled) that he
led a most holy life. No man could fasten the suspicion of any crime upon him,
but the cry of the people was, like that when he opened a blind man's eyes, He
has done all things well, vii. Mark 37. And yet he lived not a retired life;
he did not hide himself in corners, nor shut up himself in private houses: but
conversed so freely, that they found fault with him (though unjustly) for being
too familiar, and keeping company with Publicans and sinners. And as for his
BLOOD, the second Witness on Earth, that was shed in the face of the Sun, at a
great feast, when from foreign Countries they were assembled at Jerusalem. All
the accidents, which we say attended his death, were things that never have
been contradicted. No man then had the impudence to deny the Eclipse of the
Sun, the Earthquake, the rending of the veil of the Temple, and the rest of the
astonishing things that then happened. The first of them is mentioned by a
Pagan-writer; and though the Apostles published both that and all the other
continually, yet there is no book either of Jew or Gentile (who were enemies
great enough to his Religion) that goes about to disprove them. And as for his
miraculous works, they were generally done openly, at Feasts, in the
Synagogues, on the highways; and were so commonly talked of, that the Rulers
feared all the world would run after him, xii. John 19. Therefore the Apostles
could not falsify in the report of these things, but they might be easily
confuted. Which no man ever attempted, but both Jews and Gentiles acknowledged
that he wrought Miracles; for his Apostles also wrought them every where, and
so did their Successors in some Ages after. To these the Ancient Christians
appeal, as an undoubted testimony to their Faith: which they could not be so
silly as to mention, were there any dispute whether there had been Miracles
wrought or no. His Resurrection also was attested by Five hundred people, who
saw him together at once; and it was proved beyond contradiction by the strange
descent of those miraculous gifts upon his Apostles, according to his promise.
Which came upon them also at a Feast, when all the Nation, though living in far
distant Countries, were assembled together, and a great company of Proselytes
also, and devout people were present, to be witnesses of it. Yea, the Apostles
themselves, as is notoriously known, went over all the world, and openly showed
the power of Jesus which was in them.

Now if all these be true Witnesses, or rather if you grant there were such
Witnesses, which no sober man can deny (they being visible here on Earth, in
the company of so much people) there can be no doubt remaining of this, that
Jesus is the Son of God. They proclaim this so loudly with one voice, that S.
John had reason to say, We beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten
of the Father. They beheld it in his Preaching and Life; they beheld it in his
bloody Death, but especially in the power of his SPIRIT both before he died,
and in raising him up from the dead: and they beheld it also, when they were
with him in the holy Mount, and had the Testimony of the rest of the Heavenly
Witnesses. Which were heard on Earth, though they were in Heaven; as men of
high quality, and of unblemished integrity, with the hazard of all they had,
did constantly affirm. And though some of those Heavenly Witnesses might not be
believed so much at the first (which is the cause, I suppose, that our Savior
bids his Apostles, as you have heard, not declare what the voice from Heaven
said, till after his Resurrection, xvii. Matthew. 9.) yet when they had received
such great testimony, that they were good men, and men of God, by having the
Holy Ghost bestowed on them, to bestow upon others also; and when by this they
were able to demonstrate his Resurrection; then all the rest that they
alleged, as a proof that he was the Son of God, did highly merit belief also,
and there was no reason to suspect the truth of such reports, as were verified
in so authentic a manner. For with great power gave the Apostles witness of
the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, iv. Acts 33. And the Resurrection of the
Lord Jesus was a powerful Witness, that there was nothing so great said of him,
by the voices from Heaven, but it ought to be received as the undoubted truth
of God. Who at sundry times, and in diverse manners testified to his Son Jesus,
that by some means or other the most obstinate hearts might be convinced, and
those tongues which blasphemed him, might confess him to be the Lord.

A PRAYER.
ALL thy works praise thee, O holy Jesus, they all show the greatness of thy
power, and declare thee to be the Lord. All thy Saints therefore ought to bless
thee, and to speak good of thy Name: who did manifest forth thy glory in such
miraculous works upon Earth, and art now crowned with such glory and honor in
the Heavens. Great was the glory of that Almighty love, which gave health to
the sick, feet to the lame, eyes to the blind, and life to the dead. How
gloriously did thou triumph over the Devil and all the powers of darkness:
declaring thy self to be the Redeemer of the World, by delivering those who
were oppressed by him? Great was thy Majesty, and therefore greatly to be
praised. Those triumphs ought to have been attended with the most joyful shouts
of Praise and Thanksgiving to thee, as the Savior of men, and the Lord of Men
and Angels. All that saw thy wonderful works, ought with never-ceasing love, to
have glorified thee, the great Lover of mankind, the Repairer of our ruins,
the Restorer of our happiness, our mighty Deliverer from all our Enemies, and
the inexhaustible Fountain of life and all other good things, which thou every
where dispensedst to them.

How ought all our hearts now to overflow with love to thee, the blessings of
whose goodness so overflowed in all places, that none can tell the number of
them? Especially when we remember how by the mighty working of the same Spirit
which glorified thee so on Earth; thou art raised from the dead, carried to
Heaven, set at the right hand of God, and made the King of glory. This is the
Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. This is the sovereign Balsam of
all our wounds. This is our solace and comfort in the greatest troubles. This
raises our Spirits when they are oppressed, and gives us life in death it self.
Be thou honored and acknowledged by me and by all mankind, with the humblest,
the most hearty and affectionate devotion to thy service. Be thou ever praised,
as much as thou wast reproached and blasphemed. Let thy Name be sweet, and
mentioned with delight and joy throughout all the World. Live, O blessed Jesus,
in the glory wherein thou art inthroned. Sit and reign there, till all thine
Enemies become thy footstool. For among the Gods there is none like unto thee,
O Lord: neither are there any works like unto thy works. All Nations whom thou
have made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord; and shall glorify thy
Name. For thou art great, and have done wondrous things: Thou art Lord alone.

O give unto the Lord, ye kindreds of the people, give unto the Lord glory and
strength. Ascribe unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: O worship him in
the beauty of holiness. Say among the Heathen, the Lord reigns: who was dead,
but is alive again, and lives for evermore. O sing unto the Lord a new song,
sing unto the Lord all the Earth. Yea, sing unto the Lord a new song, and
worship him all ye Gods. For thou Lord art high above all the Earth, thou art
exalted far above all Gods.

Blessed is the people that know this joyful sound: they shall walk, O Lord, in
the light of thy countenance. In thy name shall they rejoice all the day; and
in thy righteousness shall they be exalted. For thou art the glory of their
strength, and by thy favor shall we be highly honored. For thou have a mighty
arm, strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand. I know that thou can do
every thing, and that no thought of thine can be hindered. Thou can break the
chains of death, and raise our dust and ashes to immortal life. Thou can
tread Satan under our feet, and send thy Angels for our security and defense.
By thee we shall run through the greatest dangers, and surmount all the
difficulties that are in our way to thee. Who shall separate us from thy love,
O Christ: who diedst for us, yea rather art risen again, who art even at the
right hand of God, who also make intercession for us? O live thou for ever in
my mind and heart: and be the daily delightful subject of my thoughts. Direct
and guide me in all my ways: and lead me safe unto thy self. Still let my
meditations of thee be sweet: and my joy exceeding great in thy salvation.
Still fix mine eyes on things above, where thou art at Gods right hand. Lord,
still increase my Faith, that it growing in strength may work by a more
vigorous love. Let me feel the power of thy holy Spirit perpetually in my
heart: that being led by the Spirit, and mortifying thereby the deeds of the
body; He that raised thee up from the dead, may also quicken my mortal body, by
his Spirit that dwells in me: Now unto him that is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that wrought
such wonders, unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all
ages, world without end. Amen.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Witness of the Holy APOSTLES of our Lord.
I Know not what remains to be done for the full explication of these words of
the Apostle, unless it be sit to note that our Savior is said to COME not only
in his own Person, but likewise in his Apostles and Evangelists. I need name
but one place to prove this, ii. Ephesians. 17. And CAME, and preached peace to you
which were afar off, and to them that were nigh. It is well known that Jesus
(of whom he there speaks) was not SENT save to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel: and therefore in his own Person was not to go to those who were afar
off (such Gentiles as these Ephesians were) to whom notwithstanding he is said
here to COME. He came unto his own (says this very Disciple) and though his
own received him not, yet he kept himself within the confines of their Country;
and charged his Disciples, during his life, not to go into any City of the
Samaritans: to whom he never went, but only in his passage from one part of the
Jews Country to another. We can give no account then of his COMING to them that
were afar off, as well as unto the Jews who were nigh, but only this; that by
the Apostles whom he sent, and who were his Ambassadors to preach the glad
tidings of Salvation, he was made known to the Gentiles; even as the Father is
said to come to the Jews and to speak to them, when he sent him, his Son, to
declare his mind and will among them.

Now it is possible that S. John might have some respect to his sending them
(as the Father sent him) to prove him to be the Son of God; when he says that
Jesus CAME by WATER and by BLOOD and by the SPIRIT, and that these three were
his WITNESSES on Earth. For first the Apostles were his WITNESSES; as they are
called in many places, both by him and by themselves. Ye shall be WITNESSES
unto me, both in Jerusalem and in Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the
uttermost parts of the Earth, says our Savior, just before his Ascension, i.
Act. 8. The same he said to S. Paul, to whom he appeared afterward, xxvi. 16.
xxii. 15. And in the same style S. Peter speaks of himself, I exhort you, who
am an Elder, and a WITNESS of the sufferings of Christ, i. Pet. v. 1. And as
they were witnesses of his sufferings; so they were of all that he did (as you
shall hear presently) and of all that was done for him to prove that he was the
Son of God, and the King of Glory. That is, they were witnesses that there
appeared such witnesses both in Heaven and Earth for him, as we have examined.
And (2.) witnesses they were of very great credit, worthy of all belief. For
they were WITNESSES chosen of God, x. Act. 41. select Men, picked out by Heaven,
some of them in an extraordinary manner, for this purpose. And they spoke
nothing by hearsay, but upon their own certain knowledge; being eyewitnesses
of his Majesty, as ye have heard before from S. Peter, 2. i. 16. And S. John
says the same in this Epistle, iv. 14. We have seen, and do testify, that the
Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the World. First they saw, and then
bare witness: Or as he expresses himself more largely in the beginning of the
Epistle, That which they had heard, and seen with their eyes, and looked upon,
and which their hands had handled of the Word of life (for it was manifest, and
they saw it and bare WITNESS) that (he repeats it again) which they had seen
and heard, they declared unto the World. Why should not such witnesses be
believed; who spoke nothing but what all their senses, that could be employed
in this case, gave them full assurance was undoubtedly true? They were Men sure
of common capacity; and they had opportunity also to see and hear and feel and
examine every thing, which Jesus did, or was done in honor of him. For
therefore our Savior chose them to be his witnesses, because they were thus
qualified. xv. Joh. 26, 27. When the Comforter is come, even the Spirit of
Truth, which proceeds from the Father, He shall testify of me: And ye also
shall bear WITNESS, because ye have been with me from the BEGINNING. That is,
because you are abundantly informed, how all things have passed, from my very
first entering into the World to preach the Gospel; therefore you shall be
employed to testify all things that you have seen and heard and felt, as the
fittest persons to be believed. For which reason, when they wanted one of their
Number, by the apostasy of Judas, they were very careful, according to this
Rule of their Master, to choose such an one to succeed him, as had been a
constant follower of Jesus, and had taken notice of every thing they were to
witness. i. Act. 21, 22. Wherefore says S. Peter, of those men which have
companied with us, all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
beginning from the Baptism of John unto that same day that he was taken up from
us, must one be ordained to be a WITNESS with us of his Resurrection. See here
how exact they were in their choice, that there might be no exception taken
against their testimony, if any one should ask them; Did you your self see, or
did you hear this, which you report? They would have none to take a part with
them in this chief Ministry of the Gospel, but such an one as had been with
them from first to last, and was able to answer to such a question upon his own
certain knowledge, that all was true which he preached. From them the
Evangelists received their Lesson; who could say that they had these things
which they reported, from those very Men who were present when they were spoken
or done: And some of the Evangelists who were of the LXX. Disciples chosen by
our Savior (x. Luke 1.) could affirm all upon the credit of their own sight or
hearing. But the other was sufficient, as S. Luke thought; who undertaking to
write the History of our Savior's Life and Death and Resurrection (though he
was none of the XII. Apostles) says, that he intended to declare those things
which were most surely believed among them, even as they were delivered to him,
by those Persons, who from the beginning, were EYEWITNESSES and Ministers of
the Word. i. 1, 2. Where it is observable, that as he would trust only such
persons as had been eyewitnesses, so none but those who had been such
witnesses from the beginning. And (3.) what it was that they witnessed (which
is to be next considered) I have already told you in their own words, all that
Jesus did from the beginning, and particularly his Resurrection which concluded
all. This you may observe they testified to the Jews, ii. Act. 22.32. how God
had honored him by Miracles, wonders and signs which he wrought by him in the
very midst of them, as they could not deny: and this Jesus, says S. Peter,
has God raised up, whereof we are all WITNESSES. And so he preached to the
Gentiles, as I have noted before, x. 39.41. We are WITNESSES of all things
which he did, etc. whom they slew and hanged on a Tree: Him God raised up the
third day and showed him openly unto WITNESSES chosen before of God, even unto
us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead. And so does S.
Paul, xiii. 30, 31. But God raised him from the dead, and he was seen many days
of them which came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his WITNESSES
unto the People. He alleges their testimony, I suppose, rather than his own
(though he also had seen the Lord, 1 Cor. xv. 8.) because they had been with
him from the beginning, which he had not: but was born out of due time, or was
an abortive, as the word is well rendered in the Margin of that place now
quoted. He was not formed, that is, and fashioned as the rest of the Apostles
were under our Savior's discipline, nor grew by leisurely instruction in the
Christian Religion to the dignity of an Apostle; as Children come by degrees to
perfection and maturity in their Mothers womb: but was thrust into the Church
on a sudden, and by an heavenly violence, not in a regular way, made an Apostle
when he was not at all disposed for it. Being born an Apostle therefore thus
late (after Christ's ascension) and thus hastily (before he was informed by any
Teacher of Christianity) he could not say that he had seen all the wonderful
works of Christ when he was alive, or heard his Sermons, or received the
history of them from eye and ear witnesses. But all this was supplied by this
one wonderful work of his conversion, in such a manner as I formerly described,
and by those instructions which he received immediately from Jesus himself.
This was so strange a thing that it made him one of his prime Ministers;
because the Gospel which he preached, He neither received it of man, neither
was he taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. Who so fully satisfied
and informed him; that there was no need to consult any mortal Creature, nor to
go for instructions or authority to those who were Apostles before him: but
immediately he went about his business, and became his WHNESS to all men, of
what he had seen and heard: as you may read, i. Gal. 12.16, 17. xxii. Act. 15.
And both He and the rest (which is the chief thing to be considered) asserted
that which they preached, that is, proved Jesus to be the Son of God with
Power, all these ways by which S. John says our Savior came, by WATER, by
BLOOD, and by the SPIRIT: as will be evident, if I give you but a brief account
of every one of these.

1. And as for the Holiness and purity of their Doctrine, I have given you an
abstract of it before. By which it is apparent, they taught nothing but such a
love of God, as made those that learnt it the greatest and most virtuous lovers
of all Mankind. Whom they pursued with kindnesses, even when they hated them;
and prayed for and blessed, when they persecuted them and drove them away, and
would no longer receive any of their other kindnesses. For they were instructed
by the Apostles to bear all injuries with perfect patience; to be contented
with the present, and trust God for the future; to live peaceably with the
worst natured people, and to exercise the divinest Friendship with those who
were good. Whom they taught to be all of one mind, as much as the best Husbands
and Wives are, to have compassion one of another, to be loving, pitiful and
courteous; as you may read in 1. Pet. iii. 7, 8.

The rest of their Precepts were like these; and their Lives were
correspondent: as all the World knew, who could never charge them with any
fault but this (as they accounted it) that they preached Jesus. There was
nothing appeared that could give the smallest suspicion of any base or unworthy
design, which they hid under pious and holy words. But their conversation had
been very innocent and unblameable in the places where they lived, when they
were private men. None could charge them with forgery, theft, covetousness, or
any other crime. But S. Paul, for instance, a most eminent Person among them,
was of such strictness, during the time he was a Jew, that he was blameless, as
to the righteousness which their Law required. And when they were drawn out of
their obscure privacy, and sent as public persons, to preach and act in the
Name of Jesus, they were so far from serving any worldly ends, that they took
nothing for all their pains, nor demanded one farthing for any of their Cures.
They were able not only to challenge all the world, as that great Prophet
Samuel had done his Nation, that the man would come forth and witness against
them, and say, if he could, whom they had wronged; but of whom they had
expected any gratuity for all their kindness to them. That was all that Samuel
said, Whose Ox or Ass have I taken? whom have I defrauded? whom have I
oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe? and I will restore it
you: 1. xii. 3. And Moses, in that great rebellion against him, xvi. Number. 15.
thinks it sufficient to purge himself in the same manner, saying, I have not
taken one Ass from them, nor hurt one of them. But S. Paul makes a more noble
protestation, saying, I have COVETED no man's silver, or gold, or apparel. Yea,
you your selves know, that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and
to them that were with me, xx. Act. 33, 34. Here was Virtue; which made him so
far even from desiring any thing of others, that he chose by his own hard
labor to be both his own benefactor, and his Families. And what he affirms of
himself, he also tells us was the pious inclination of several of his
Companions; such as Silvanus, and Timotheus. Whose exhortation, the
Thessalonians knew, was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor of guile; for
they studied not to please men, but God. Unto whom they appeal as their
Witness, that they never used any flattering words, nor sought to enrich
themselves, or to advance their own glory, as you read, 1 Thessalonians. ii. 3, 4, 5.
And they were witnesses, he adds, verse. 10. as well as God, how holily, and
justly and unblameably, yea, how lovingly (as it follows verse. 11.) they
behaved themselves among them.

Now what should tempt such pious Men, who so much despised worldly goods, and
sought not to get any credit to themselves, to preach that Jesus was the Son of
God; if they had not been very sure of this truth, which was the constant
matter of their Sermons, throughout the World? Is it likely that such Men
should feign a story of things, which they never heard nor saw? that all their
talk of voices from Heaven, and Miracles, and appearances of Jesus to them
after he was dead, were only devices and contrivances of their own brain? For
what end, I beseech you, should they invent them? If their tongues were so well
hung, and they were so eloquent as to hope to persuade the world to be of their
mind, it had been wisdom to have employed them more for their own gain and
advantage; and not to have preached such a strange and unprofitable Doctrine as
this of the crucified Jesus. There were far easier tasks to undertake than
this, and which would have turned to a better account here on earth: and
therefore they who had so much with as to invent, would have let this alone;
had they not known it to be both sure and undoubted, and also worthy of all
their pains to reveal it, that this crucified Jesus was the Son of God.

But besides this it ought to be considered, that from the very beginning our
Savior had taught them to be content with a mean and poor kind of life, when
he sent them forth to preach in Judaea. Go, says he, x. Matthew. 7.9, 10. preach
and say, the Kingdom of God is at hand. Freely you have received, freely give.
Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor so much as a brass token in your purses;
nor scrip for your Journey; neither two Coats; neither shoes, nor yet staves.
For the Workman is worthy of his Meat: and eat such things as they set before
you. That is, be not curious; and, doubt not of it, God will provide for you.
Was it likely that men thus bred, to so great plainness, simplicity,
contentedness, and dependence on God, should go about to abuse the world with
false stories? Nay, before they came to him, their education and way of life
was so low and poor; that they were the unfittest men in the world to devise
and make Romances, if they should have had a mind to it. This was the very
thing, the Heathens objected to them, that they were illiterate, not trained up
in study, but got their living many of them, Piscatorio artificio, as they
speak in Lactantius, by the trade and labor of fishing. Of which He makes this
advantage very justly, in his reply to them, Abfuit ergo ab his fingendi
voluntas Lib. 3. Inslit. c. 3.
, etc. You must needs confess therefore that these Men had not the inclination,
nor the craft to contrive and feign such a story as this; because they were so
rude. Or what unlearned Man is there, that can devise things so coherent, and
that suit so well one with another? since even the most excellent of all your
Philosophers, as we see plainly, have involved themselves in many
contradictions; and spoken things contrary and repugnant to what they have
elsewhere delivered. For this is the nature of lies, that they never hang well
together. One end of the tale, is wont to discover the falseness of the other.
But what they deliver, undique quadrat, perfectly agrees with it self from top
to bottom, because it is true, and no device of their own. And then he adds
(which is the greatest evidence that can be of their honesty) they could not
invent this for the sake of any thing in this world, (and without some such
respect what should incline them to invent it) for as much as they both taught
and followed that course of life which regarded not sensual pleasures, and
undervalued those things, which the world admires and cries up for goods; and
likewise they dyed for the Faith, which was not the effect of a rash and sudden
fit of zeal, for they knew very well and foretold they should dye upon this
account; and they also resolvedly suffered the most cruel and sharpest torments
that could be devised before they dyed; and they took it all patiently, nay
gave God thanks that they were counted worthy to suffer for the Name of Jesus.

But this belongs to the Testimony of their BLOOD. To which before I proceed,
let me observe that the Apostles were not only men of great knowledge in the
things of God, and very innocent and holy in their lives; but they were men
extraordinarily qualified in both those regards: and therefore are the more to
be believed, in what they say they saw or heard. For what Philosopher ever
spoke so plainly and clearly of all things that concern the amendment of
Mankind, or gave them such hopes in the World to come, without which it was not
likely they should amend, as these poor Fishermen did? They wanted nothing but
their eloquence, which they purposely avoided; because they would have naked
truth prevail by its own force and by the power of God; and not by those
ornaments and dressings, which had been so often employed to commend falsehood
to the World. Setting this aside, there was no comparison between the Doctrine
of the Apostles, and that which had been formerly published. They comprehended
in a few plain and simple words, more than all that could be found here and
there scattered in the vast Volumes of the Philosophers. Nay, they advanced the
sense of the Law of Moses. They called Men to the noblest degree of purity. For
they cleansed and scowred them from all filthiness, not only of the flesh, but
also of the spirit. They advanced the business of holy living to such a pitch,
that some said it was impossible to be so good. And what did they do now? How
did they overcome this objection? This is the greatest marvel of all, and gave
their testimony a mighty force: they showed by their own example that it was
possible. This, says Lactantius, made the Philosophers miscarry in their
design, that though they spoke well, yet they did not live as they taught. For
men had rather have examples than words: Because it is easy to talk, and hard
to do. Our Savior therefore and his Apostles convinced men by their actions;
that if they would not follow one that taught them, they might follow one that
went before them. They guided them by their feet and not only by their tongues;
they led their hearers the way, in all manner of virtuous and godly living.
Nay, they refused sometimes, to do those things which they might lawfully, that
all men might see their upright meaning, and that they had no worldly design in
their head. So S. Paul tells the Corinthians, that whereas he might have lived
upon the Gospel and expected maintenance from them; yet he chose to preach
freely, and make the Gospel without charge, that it might have an easier
passage into their hearts, 1 Cor. ix. 12.18. And thus he did at Thessalonica
also, where he wrought with labor and travel Night and Day, that he might not
be chargeable to any of them: Not because he had not power to do otherwise, but
to make himself an example unto them to follow him, 2 Thessalonians. iii. 8, 9. And
such was his practice, you heard before, at Ephesus, xx. Act. 34. So that one
would think he had taken up this generous resolution, at the very first, which
he continued every where, not to make the smallest advantage by the Gospel of
which he was a Minister. It might have been sufficient, one would think that he
labored in the Gospel, and took pains to convert souls: He needed not have
labored also for his living, but expected food from those whom he fed with the
bread of life. But to make his Ministry unexceptionable, and to show he
intended nothing in the World, but to bring men to this belief in Jesus; he
would not so much as support himself by their contributions, but by the labor
of his own hands provided both for himself and for others too, as he tells the
Ephesian Elders, who were instruments with him of their Salvation. Can there be
any suspicion of the sincerity of such a Man as this? What could he have in his
mind but this one thing, to win Disciples to his Master? And could he doubt,
think you, of his power to reward him for all his labor? He was no fool it is
plain, but understood himself as well as the wisest of us all. What should make
him then neglect all other interests, and bend his mind wholly to serve Jesus?
Such noble spirits as his were the unlikeliest of all other to cheat and
deceive, whose only business it was to take pains, that they might give to
others. And men of such wisdom would not have taken all that pains, for no
other end, but merely to persuade others to believe in Jesus, if they had not
been as sure that he was the Son of God, as it was that they should get nothing
by preaching it, but stripes, imprisonments, infamy, reproaches, and perhaps
lose their lives to the bargain. And what should make men so prodigal of their
blood think you?

II. That Is now fit to be considered in the next place; their sharp sufferings,
the BLOOD whereby our Savior CAME, (that is, was proved to be the Christ) when
he was preached by their Ministry. No sooner did they appear, but all the
world with its whole power armed it self against them. As the Jews under
pretense of Religion opposed and persecuted them; so when they fled into other
Countries, the Philosophers upon the same score, set their wits against them,
and summoned all their Learning and their Arts of reasoning to dispute this new
Doctrine out of doors. To whose assistance came the Sophisters and
Rhetoricians, who employed all their quirks and their eloquence to make it seem
ridiculous. Nor did the Magicians and Juglers, with all the Demons, the then
Lords of the world, forget to oppose it with all their might. But excited
Kings, and Presidents, and Magistrates to exercise all kind of cruelties, not
only against the preachers of this Religion, but against their followers. The
Edicts of Princes thundered out nothing but confiscations, proscriptions,
banishments, imprisonments, rods, axes, strapadoes, crosses, fire, wild-Beasts:
so that we may say of them all, as it was said of S. Paul and Barnabas, who
were men that hazarded their lives for the name of the Lord Jesus, xv. Acts.
26. Men set forth, appointed unto death (as those that fought with wild-Beasts)
and made a spectacle unto the World, and to Angels and Men, 1 Cor. iv. 9. Even
unto this present hour (says S. Paul in the following verses) we both hunger
and thirst, and are naked, and are buffetted, and have no certain dwelling
place; and labor working with our own hands: being reviled we bless: being
persecuted, we suffer it: being defamed, we entreat (God for them:) we are made
as the filth of the World, and are the offscouring of all things unto this
day. And as they were long thus vilely used and destined to death, so at last
every one of them, together with other great servants of Jesus Christ, actually
suffered death in justification of this truth, that he was the Son of God. S.
Steven led the way, who is called the Martyr of Jesus, having shed his Blood
for him, xxii. Acts 20. And he that calls him so, protests that he was ready
not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for his name, xxi. 13. Nay,
when he speaks of the Martyrdom of S. Steven, he was in the hands of his
enraged enemies, who were ready to stone him too, and began to prepare
themselves for it, as you may read there xxii. 23. And both before and after
this he was persecuted with such violent and bitter zeal, that his whole life
was a kind of death, which he suffered over and over again for his Masters
cause. Which makes him say, when he gives a large catalogue of his sufferings,
that he was in deaths often, 2 Cor. xi. 23, 25. and protest, in another place,
that he died daily, 1 Cor. xv. 31. and in another, that he was always delivered
unto death for Jesus's sake, and that death wrought in him, that he might make
others live, 2 Cor. iv. 11, 12. More than this you find in xvii. Rev. 5, 6.
that the mother of harlots, that one City Babylon, was even drunk with the
BLOOD of the Saints, and with the BLOOD of the MARTYRS of Jesus. A Sea of BLOOD
flowed from their veins, to cover the Earth with the knowledge of the glory of
the Lord; for whose cause they suffered themselves to be slain, as so many
innocent sheep that make no resistance. This gave them the name of MARTYRS, in
English WITNESSES, because they were beheaded for the WITNESS of Jesus, and for
the Word of God, xx. Rev. 4. that is, they constantly affirmed him to be the
LORD, and chose rather to die and seal it with their BLOOD, than not preach
this Truth; for which S. John also was now an Exile in a desolate place, 1 Rev.
9.

What was it, think you, that made them thus hot and eager to be the most
miserable of all mankind? to despoil themselves of all the comforts of life,
and to endure perpetually the pains of death? From what cause was it, that
their blood thus boiled in their veins, and they were so zealously forward to
have it let out? It could be nothing but only this, that they loved Jesus
ardently, and were extremely desirous, if he th^ught it best to die in his
service: knowing that he would hear the cry of their blood, and reward them
abundantly for all their sufferings. S John beheld the Souls of those who were
slain for the Word of ^od, and the TESTIMONY which they held, under the Al^ar,
vi. Rev. 9. which signifies that they were sacrifices to God, when they
witnessed thus unto Jesus. For by Souls in the language of the old Scriptures,
is often meant the Blood, i. e. the life, which here was represented at the
foo^ of the Altar where the blood of the acrifice used to be poured out. They
died in an holy cause, they were very well assured, and should be an offering
well pleasing, and of a sweet savor unto God; else they would never have thus
willingly offered their throats to the sacrificing knife of their bloody
persecutors. No, when it came to that, they would have confessed the truth sure,
if they had not preached it before. A few of their sufferings would have taught
them more wit than to lose their heads for the testimony of Jesus; if they had
not been verily persuaded they were in the right, and ought to be his WITNESSES
even with their blood. The scoffs of the Heathen would have been very
reasonable, if they had not dealt sincerely, and been certain their Testimony
was the Truth. Who were wont to say, as we read in Minutius, Nec resurgitis
miseri, nec interim vivitis, Miserable wretches! you do but fancy you shall
rise again, and in the mean time you do not live. You are hungry, and pale, and
enjoy none of the pleasures of life; and have no hope of being better you are
dead. To which, he replies, after a long demonstration of the evidence they had
of what they believed, Ita beati resurgimus, and futuri contemplatione jam
vivimus, So you see we shall rise again to blessedness, and we live now in the
blissful contemplation of it. Yea, they not only lived, but they rejoiced: and
more than that, they gloried in tribulations. Which they could not have done,
had not their integrity been as great as this confidence, and their sincere
intentions upheld and supported their boldness. Which was the greater, you may
be sure, because as they bare witness to Jesus, so God bare WITNESS to them, as
you read expressly, ii. Heb. 4. both with signs and wonders, and with diverse
miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his will: whereby he
testified to them that they were honest men, and did not cunningly follow
devised fables, when they made known to men the power and coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, but were, as the professed, eyewitnesses of his Majesty. Which
is the next thing to be considered.

III. Hitherto I have only proved that they had all things necessary to make
them credible witnesses, being void of guile, and such as could not be
reasonably supposed to be mere inventors of what they preached. Men who both
knew what they said, and did not speak contrary to their knowledge. Nay, men of
eminent knowledge, sanctity and zeal, which made them more than common
witnesses. But still they were only humane Witnesses, not divine: nor could all
this put it quite out of doubt, and give a full assurance, that what they said
was true; but only that they thought it to be true, and were not likely to be
deceived. And therefore that they and those who heard their testimony, might be
sure, and have infallible proofs (as S. Lukes words are) that they were not
deceived; and that the faith which relied upon their testimony might be Divine:
there followed the Witness of the SPIRIT, which accompanied them, as it had
done our Savior; together with the Witness of the HOLY GHOST, which he had
promised to send them, that they might be his Witnesses in all the world. This
was an undoubted evidence that they were men sent of God upon this message, to
preach Jesus, and testify that he was the Lord of all. This made the faith of
those who heard and believed them, to be more than an humane persuasion,
because it relied not only on the word of men, but upon the testimony of the
Spirit of God. It might have been a very strong faith without this, because the
men who reported it were persons of great virtue, void of all fraud, or worldly
design: but it could not have been Divine, had not this Witness come and joined
its testimony with theirs. For they would but have received the testimony of
very pious and good men: it was no more, till the testimony of God himself
came, in such signs, wonders, miracles and various gifts, as you have heard
already, and as you read of in many other places. They went forth (says S.
Mark, speaking of all the Apostles) and preached every where, the Lord working
with them, and confirming the Word (which they preached) with signs following,
xvi. 20. All places were filled with wonder, as they were with the HOLY GHOST.
At Jerusalem, for instance, S. Steven as well as the Apostles, full of faith
and power, did great wonders and miracles among the people, vi. Acts 8. In
Samaria S. Philip preached Christ, and the people with one accord gave heed to
the things which he spoke, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did; for
unclean Spirits crying with a loud voice, came out of many that were possessed
with them, and many taken with palsies, and that were lame were healed, viii.
6, 7. And at Thessalonica S. Paul tells them that his Gospel came not in word
only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance. And at
Iconium both he and Barnabas stayed a long time, speaking boldly in the Lord,
who gave testimony unto the Word of his grace, and granted signs and wonders to
be done by their hands, xiv. 3. And in the same manner, at Corinth, Colosse,
Philippi, and all other places, the Divine power wrought in them mightily, i.
Colos. 29. upon which account they call themselves, with great reason,
Witnesses OF GOD, 1 Cor. xv. 14, 15. If Christ be not risen, our preaching is
vain, yea, and we are found false witnesses of God (which had been a most
horrible thing) because we have testified OF GOD, that he raised up Christ.
They testified every where what God had done by Jesus and for him; particularly
that he had raised him from the dead. Now that they did not take upon them to
be Gods Witnesses, when they had received no authority from him, nor were
guilty of belying God (as the phrase (...) imports) the Spirit that wrought in
them evidently proved, by the gifts of Languages, of Prophecy, of Wisdom and
Knowledge, of Miracles, and healing all manner of Diseases. Which made the
Angel say, when S. John was going to worship him, by no means, see thou do it
not: I am but thy fellow servant, one of thy Brethren that bears witness to
Jesus as thou do: For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, xix.
Rev. 10. that is, those gifts which the Apostles were endued withal, showed
whose ministers they were, and that being the servants of the most High God, as
well as the Angels, they owed no such respect to them as S. John was about to
give: and by those Divine gifts they gave a testimony to Jesus, and proved he
was the Son of God; wherein they were equal to the Angels, who could no more
than testify to him, and be his ministers to report the glory wherein he was.
Upon which errand not only this, but many other Angels appeared to S. John,
who, together with the rest of the Apostles, bare record of the Word of God, as
I have noted before, and of the testimony of Jesus, and of all things that he
saw, i. Rev. 3. And herein they were laborers together with God, (1 Cor. iii.
9.) who testified the same, and wrought as effectually in S. Peter among the
Jews, as he was mighty in S. Paul toward the Gentiles, ii. Gal. 8. For God
wrought special miracles by his hands, xix. Acts 11. and made the Gentiles
obedient, by word and deed, through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of
the SPIRIT of God, xv. Romans 18, 19. So that the Faith of that Age, it is plain,
did not stand in the wisdom of men (as S. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. ii. 5.) but in
the power of God. They that believed saw evidently that God was with the
Apostles: nay, they felt, many of them, the power of God in themselves, as you
have heard before; when the Apostles communicated this virtue to others, which
they had received from Jesus Christ. Which was such a Testimony to him, as no
counterfeit or false witness could ever imitate.

For it has been a constant observation, that they who by Magic astonished
the People by wonderful feats, not only did them for their own gain and
reputation, rather than for any benefit to the World; but also kept this secret
to themselves, and would not communicate their power to others. That would have
spoiled their trade, and made them less admired, or at least, less rich than
they designed. But our Lord, on the contrary, had promised his Disciples, that
what he did when he was in the world, they should do also, after he was gone.
Nay, more than that, he tells them, Greater things shall ye do. And which is
still more, he promises that not only they, but others also should do those
works, if they believed on him. xiv. Joh. 11, 12. Believe me for the very works
sake. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me, the works that I
do, shall he do also, and greater works than these shall he do; because I go to
my Father. Now thus it came to pass, as our Savior foretold. Not only the
Apostles, but others also who believed through their word, received the Holy
Ghost. For as S. Peter confidently invited his Crucifiers, to come and repent
of what they had done, and be baptized every one of them in his Name, and they
should receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, ii. Act. 38. So it proved, that they
who gladly received his word, were baptized, ( ver. 41.) and were all filled
with the Holy Ghost: iv. 31. This was the thing that amazed that famous
Sorcerer Simon Magus, whom the Samaritans admired as the great power of God,
till S. Philip came thither, and persuaded even him, by the miracles and signs
which he did, to believe in Jesus, as a greater power of God than himself. But
when the Apostles also came, and by laying on of their hands the Holy Ghost was
given to several persons; He plainly saw that he was no body, and would have
given any Money for such a power, as he had not the least shadow of. viii. Act.
10, 11, etc.

But all that I shall say of this matter, shall be out of one of the ancient
defenders of the Christian cause: who thought he might challenge all the world
to show him any thing like that which our Savior did; or give an account how
it might be done, if he was not the Son of God most high. It is Arnobius I
mean, who in his first Book against the Gentiles, having delivered in a
Catalogue of our Savior's miracles, and shown they could not be the effect of
Magic; at last concludes with this great demonstration, the substance of which
I shall briefly relate. All these wonders which I have summed up, though not as
the greatness of them required, Jesus not only performed himself; but, which is
a greater miracle, gave many others power to do them in his Name. For he
foreseeing there would be endeavors to detract from the glory of his famous
actions, that he might leave no suspicion in the minds of those that heard of
him, as if he were a Sorcerer, chose out of that vast multitude of People that
followed him with no small admiration, certain Fishermen, poor Laborers, and
other Country People; who going through all Nations might, without any tricks,
false colors, or invoking the assistance of Spirits, work all those miracles
over again, which they said he had wrought himself. As He commanded Devils to
come out with a word of his mouth; in the same manner did they lay their
commands upon them, and they obeyed. As He did but put forth his hand and touch
a Leper, or bid him be clean, and his flesh was restored like a little Child's;
in the same manner did they smooth the skins of such loathsome persons, and
restore them to the welcome society of their friends and neighbors. It would
be too tedious to number all things particularly that they did; and which is
more (I may add) gave power to other Christians to do in their Master's Name.
They stopped the progress of cruel eating Cancers; they closed up Ulcera oris
immensi, wide and very gaping Ulcers; they gave feet to the lame, eyes to the
blind, and life to the dead. Nor was there any thing, that astonished all
beholders, done by him; which he did not subject to the power of these infants,
these rusticks, and gave them authority to do it. What say you now, O ye
incredulous, ye hard, ye obstinate hearts? Did your Jupiter himself ever give
any mortal man such power? Did he ever so much as bestow upon his High Priest,
upon the most sacred of all his Highpriests, I will not say the power to raise
a dead man, or make a blind man see; but so much as to make a wheal or a pimple
sink down and lie even with the skin, by speaking a word; or cure a little
cleft, which a loose skin sometimes makes in the fingers end, only by touching
it, or bidding it be angry no longer? And was it an humane power then from
which such great things as I have told you of, proceeded? Sure it was sacred,
sure it was Divine: or if you will admit any more superlative expression, it
was more than Divine, more than Sacred. For when thou do that which thou art
able to do, and which is proportionable to thy power and strength, there is no
such reason that admiration should cry out: thou did that which thou had
strength to do, and which one might expect from such a power. But now to be
able to transfer thy right and power to another, and to make a frail weak
creature do that, which is proportionable to thy might alone; this is the
effect of a power which is above all, and which contains in it the causes of
all things, and the natures of all faculties. Go then and fetch us Zoroastres,
that great Magician you brag of, through the torrid zone; or go and bring
hither the Armenian that Ctesias writ of; nay summon Apollonius, Damigero,
Dardanus, and all the rest of your most eminent wonder-workers that ever were;
let them be gathered together and join their forces, and let us see them give
but one of the common people power to command by a plain word, a dumb man to
speak, or a man whose arms and legs are withered to work and walk. Or if this
be too difficult a thing, to make another do this, and do it with a simple
command, let us see any of them do it themselves. And let them call in the
assistance of all their Demons, let them gather all the magical herbs which
they can find in the bosom of the Earth, and come with the whole power of
their murmuring words, and with all their charms (we will except none of them,
we forbid them nothing that they can get to aid them) and let them try, if with
the help of all their gods to boot, they can do any such thing as these poor
rustic Christians effected, nudis jussionibus, by their naked and bare
command. Cease, O ye ignorant souls, therefore to scoff and to curse when ye
hear of these things: which cannot hurt him at all, but will bring no small
prejudice to your selves. For the Soul is a precious thing; nothing ought to be
so dear to a Man as that: which is in hazard by blaspheming Christ. Who is no
such contemptible person that you may laugh at him, but, as appears by these
things, Deus ille sublimis, etc. That High God, God of God, God from unknown
Kingdoms, God sent by the most High to be the Savior; whom neither the Sun
himself, nor the brightest Stars, (if they have any sense) nor the
Principalities and Rulers of the World, no, nor your great Gods, or those who
feigning themselves to be Gods terrify all mankind with their formidable
power, could so much as know or suspect whence, or what he was, he is so great.
But now that it is known, and he has demonstrated it to the World by his
Divine works; you had best submit to him, and not imagine he is but one of us.

And that truly is good counsel for us all; to acknowledge Jesus to be the
Lord, and, submitting our selves to his authority, to be governed by his Laws:
which God from Heaven confirmed by the most miraculous operations of the
Spirit, and of the Holy Ghost. It is true we do not see and hear those things,
of which the Apostles and they that lived in their days were spectators and
auditors: but we have the faithful records of those miraculous works and of
their Sermons left by themselves. Registers were delivered under the
unquestionable hands of those divine men, of what they had seen and heard, and
of what they themselves said and did. That is, the Testimony of the Apostles,
and the Testimony of God was preserved and kept in the Holy Books; which spoke
the same to the next Age, which their Fathers had seen with their eyes and
heard with their ears in the Age foregoing. And moreover, for a further
confirmation, that these were the lively Oracles of God (his word transmitted
unto them, on which they might rely) they had a continuance of the gifts of the
Holy Ghost for some Ages following. As Justin Martyr and Tertullian witness for
the second Age after our Savior: And Origin, Minutius, Arnobius and Lactantius
(to name no more in succeeding times) witness for the third and part of the
fourth. How could they doubt of the truth of the reports which they had
received, when they beheld them still verified, as much as was necessary, in
their own days; by the testimony of God himself? And as for the incredulous
Gentiles who stopped their ears to these reports, they pressed them very strongly
in this manner (to use the words that follow in Arnobius) as we may do those
who question or disbelieve the Evangelical History in our own Age. Will you not
believe good witnesses of things that were done, unless you see them done your
selves? Shall Authors of certain credit be rejected; who received such things
themselves and delivered them to their posterity to be belived, with no small
approbation? You will say, who are those? I answer, whole Countries, People,
Nations, all that incredulous race of mankind, are our Witnesses and the
Authors we produce. Who would never have entertained these things, unless they
had been clearer, as we say, than the light. Do you think that the men of that
time were such vain lying fools, such sots, such brutes, that they feigned and
imagined they saw such things as they never saw? and that they childishly
affirmed such things were done, when there was nothing like it? and when they
might have lived with you in good esteem, and contracted alliances and kindred
among you, would choose to become the public hatred, and to make their very
name execrable, without any reason for it? If this story be false, whence comes
all the world to be filled so soon with this Religion? Or how was it brought
about that so many people, in such distant Countries, and of such different
humors, should all conspire and agree together to believe it? Were they drawn
away with mere words? And with the danger of their lives followed a poor
despicable Preacher, when they saw nothing that was wonderful for strange, to
persuade them to this worship? What vain, senseless imaginations are these?
Therefore they believed, and suffered themselves to be torn in pieces rather
than deny it; because they saw all these things done by him, and by his
Preachers: who were sent through the whole world to carry the benefits of our
Father to mankind, and to bestow the gifts of healing both on their Souls and
Bodies.

But our Writers have not set these things down faithfully. They have extolled
small matters, and ambitiously magnified them beyond their just proportions.
Why so, I beseech you? By what reason shall we believe any of your writings, if
this History of ours must be rejected? In which but a few things, of the many
that were done, are recorded by men of truth and honesty. Did any God come down
from Heaven, and write with his own hand, the stories that you believe? Or is
there any thing of that nature writ against ours? Then you believe men, and so
do we. Your Books were writ by men, and so were ours. And whatsoever you will
say of ours, look for the same to be retorted upon your own. Will you have all
things contained in your writings to be true? so are all contained in ours. Do
you say ours are false? the same we say of yours. And how will you help your
selves? You cannot say that you saw the things that you believe, no more than
we: But others saw them, and therefore you believe them, and so do we. But ours
were writ by rude and unlearned men, and therefore not to be believed? Consider
if this be not an advantage to our cause, and a stronger reason to conclude
that these writings are stained with no lies, but delivered with a simple mind,
ignorant how to amplify things, and so set them off with deceitful dresses. As
for that which follows concerning the trivial sordid style, wherein they said
the Apostles writ, it does not in the least render the faithfulness of their
relations suspected: and therefore I pass it over and omit his reply to it;
though I cannot well neglect this pertinent observation of Erasmus in his
Preface to his Paraphrase upon S. Lukes Gospel. The language, says he, of the
Gospel is so simple and rude, that if any body compare it with the History of
Thucydides or Livy, he will want abundance of things, and be offended at as
many. How many things do the Evangelists pass by? How many do they but just
touch in two or three words? In how many places do they disagree in the order
of their Narration; and in how many others do they seem to thwart one another?
These things might make a Reader less like them, and not give such credit to
what he reads. For on the contrary, they that wrote humane Histories, how
solicitous were they about their entrance upon their work? How scrupulously did
they weigh their words? What care did they employ to observe a decent order, to
set down nothing but what was plausible and exactly described? And with what
art do they endeavor to set things lively before our eyes? With what pleasures
do they entice and detain the minds of the Readers, that they may not at all
grow weary of them? And yet these elaborate Monuments, for the greatest part,
are lost; and those that remain are not read with any assurance that they
report nothing but the truth. For who is so credulous, as to believe that Titus
Livius tells never a tale in his History? But there are millions of men found,
who had rather die ten times, than think there is one sentence false in the
Evangelical story? Is it not plain by this, that it is not a business of humane
power and prudence, but conducted by a Divine virtue? What Philosopher is there
that ever had the confidence to propound such Paradoxes as these, with hope to
be believed? That one Jesus was crucified, and by his death saved mankind; that
he was God and Man, born of a Virgin; that he rose again from the dead, and
sits at the right hand of God the Father; that he taught, they were blessed men
who mourned, hungered and thirsted, were afflicted, ill-spoken of, and killed
for the profession of his name; and that one day they should live again, and
see him sit in judgment to give immortality to the pious, and endless pains to
the ungodly. What is there plausible and taking in all this? And yet the humble
low style of the Gospel persuaded men of this, so that thousands, millions,
will rather forsake their lives than this plain truth; which a few private,
unknown, poor, mean disciples of his delivered to the World.

What should move us then to distrust these records of the faithful WITNESSES
of Christ, which are come down to us, through the hands of all Ages since, so
as they were delivered to them? What do we see now, more than our Forefathers
did in Arnobius his days, or those which succeeded, that gives us any cause to
suspect their truth? Are they altered from what they were? If any company of
men had been so bold as to venture at such a change, they would first have
mended the style no doubt, and placed things in greater order and method,
according to the exactest rules of art. But that they are untained an
uncorrupted, and, in no material passage, vary from what they were in former
Ages, appears by what all Christian Writers have transcribed out of them into
their Books, which agrees with that which we now read. They are the same now
that ever they were. They contain a relation of those things, which converted,
as Arnobius says, the incredulous world: who did not want wit nor learning no
more than we; but saw great reason to renounce all the fables which had been
told of their Gods, and to believe what they read here concerning Jesus. For it
is the testimony of God Almighty, they evidently perceived, that is recorded in
those Books. Which when we receive, our faith will not be less divine than
theirs in the first Age: because we both receive the Witness of God, only they
saw or heard it, and we read the record of what they saw and heard. Which makes
no considerable difference (...) the nature of the testimony. For the (...)
^^ny of any man standing upon a^^^^ed record, is as good an evidence, (...) he
were alive in person to give it. No man loses his cause when his Witnesses die,
if they have already given their evidence in any Court of Record. And therefore
there is no reason that our Lord Jesus should lose his authority among us,
because the Apostles his WITNESSES have left the world, and so has the WITNESS
of the Spirit and the Holy Ghost: since that which they testified to mankind
stands upon authentic record, in the holy Gospel, which cannot with any show
of reason be questioned: For if we do not allow this way of conveying down a
testimony to future times, we can know nothing of what was done before us. And
by denying all credit to these writings, we shall only teach posterity how
little credit is due to any of ours. Nay, we shall shake all men's titles to
their estates: and Kings will not be able to keep their Crowns fast upon their
heads. Nothing will be certain, but it may be questioned whether all the
Records in the Tower, and the public Acts of former Kings and Parliaments be
not mere Forgeries.

Besides, no body in those days ever went about to disprove what these
Witnesses of Christ preached and have writ. Neither Jew nor Gentile undertook
to show that these things were only devised for his credit. There were too
great Testimonies from Heaven still remaining in the Church for several Ages,
to confute such a slander. And therefore all that the Devil himself could think
of to shake men's belief, was to set up some wonder-workers of his own, to
confront Jesus: and as it were to vie miracles with him and his Disciples. But
all were so soon scattered, like mists before the Sun, that they appeared to be
but thin shadows in comparison with the living SPIRIT of God, that was in the
Church, which baffled and overcame them all. Insomuch that Origin assures the
Heathen, and they never went about to confute him, that there were not above
thirty of Simon Magus his followers then to be found in the world; though he
had made diligent enquiry after them, by travel into all parts. They were all
vanished, though he made a great noise for a time, whilst the followers of
Jesus multiplied and increased, even by their persecutions. Nor could
Apollonius afterward gain any Proselytes, that continued; but his fame soon
died together with himself. Whereas the authority of Jesus bare up it self
against all the opposition of the Roman Empire, and not only was supported, but
advanced, and prevailed more and more: their barbarous cruelties only making it
grow the faster. For herein, as Lactantius observes, the faith and constancy of
Christians was bravely displayed. Men thought they did not without cause abhor
the Heathenish superstition, when they saw them rather die than do that, which
others doing, lived and enjoyed the greatest worldly prosperity. It made them
enquire what that good was, which they defended even unto death: which was
dearer than all the pleasures and glory of this world. The people heard them in
the midst of torments, glory in Christ Jesus. And whilst they enquired who he
was, the truth of the Gospel was divulged and spread abroad among them. Their
sufferings brought many to see their Martyrdom; and there they saw that which
moved their enquiry; and by their enquiry they were satisfied, and learnt to
believe in Jesus as those Martyrs did.

But it is time to put an end to this Chapter, which I shall conclude with a
few remarks upon some places of the holy Books, relating to the testimony of
the Apostles, or those that followed them. The first is in the 2 Cor. vi. 4, 5,
6, etc. where you read how the Apostles approved themselves as the ministers of
God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in
stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings,
by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost,
by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, etc. In which words, if they be well
considered, you will find every one of these three WITNESSES, which S. John
says, gave testimony to our Savior on Earth: so that he might be said to come
in the ministry of the Apostles, by Water, and Blood, and the Spirit. They
expressed the Holiness of his life, by their pureness, by their long-suffering,
by their kindness, by love unfeigned, by the armor of righteousness on the
right hand and on the left; that is, they were every way appointed and armed
with integrity against all calumnies; there was none that could touch their
reputation, and say that these men had any worldly design. And as they
witnessed to him thus in their holy lives, so they did in their holy doctrine,
by knowledge, and by the word of truth, preaching the Gospel sincerely, as
those that studied not to please men, but God who tries the hearts. And they
were made conformable also to his death, and thereby continued the witness of
the BLOOD, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in
imprisonments, and all the rest of the hardships here mentioned, which I need
not transcribe again. And lastly, He forgets not to remember them of the
Witness of the SPIRIT which they brought along with them: For he says they
approved themselves as ministers of God, by the Holy Ghost, and by the power of
God. That is, beside all the other Divine gifts wherewith they appeared, they
confirmed their doctrine by many miraculous works, which could not be done but
by the power of God. Thus they became not only his witnesses, as our Savior
said they should, xxiv. Luke 48. but they witnessed to him after the very same
manner, that he had taught in his example; by Water, by Blood, and by the
Spirit. And therefore when he exhorts Timothy to preach the Gospel, and to be
strong in the grace of Jesus Christ, and to commit the charge of preaching also
to other faithful persons, He enforces his persuasion by this argument; that
the things he was to deliver were only such as he had heard of him among or by
MANY WITNESSES, 2 Timothy ii. 2. He learnt them by so many good evidences which S.
Paul had given him, that he need not fear to speak them to any man, much less
doubt to commend them to other faithful preachers (upon the same account that
he had received them) that they might be able to instruct posterity.

Such, one would think from what has been said, were those TWO WITNESSES
mentioned in xi. Rev. 3. men of an Apostolical spirit, whom Jesus raised up,
after his prime Witnesses had left the world, to justify still by all manner
of arguments that great Truth, which they had preached and sealed with their
Blood, and God had sealed by the testimony of the Spirit. The next words indeed
seem to import that the whole body of Christians, whom they instructed, joined
with them in this testimony: But still these great ministers of Jesus Christ,
the guides and leaders of those Christians (whosoever they were, and in what
times soever they lived, I meddle not with such difficulties) were his most
eminent Witnesses. Who preached the Gospel with such power, that it excited
against them the fury of unbelievers, who could not endure that such Witnesses
should speak for Jesus. For they testified to him these three ways here
mentioned (which is all that I allege this place for, not taking upon me to
interpose in the controversies there are about the explanation of this Vision)
by Water, Blood and the Spirit. First by Water, if we understand thereby, their
holy preaching and living. For it is said, ver. 3. that they had power to
prophecy: which signifies that they were endowed with extraordinary gifts (for
Prophets were next to Apostles in the Church) to interpret and expound the holy
writings; and prove out of Moses and the Prophets (as our Savior did, xxiv.
Luke 27.) all things that concerned him, both his sufferings and his glory. And
this they did clothed in sackcloth; that is, in the habit of mourners: for the
abominations, I suppose, which they saw committed, and the provoking infidelity
of those to whom they preached. Which was a notable mark of their great piety
and charity, as you may learn from ix. Ezekiel. 4. and v. Matthew. 4. They are said
also to be the two Olive Trees, ver. 4. that is, like Zerubbabel and Joshua,
(two famous persons among the Jews after the captivity, who were represented by
this Emblem, iv. Zach. 3.) King and Priests unto God; men endowed with great
authority and illumination from above, and with as great purity. For they had
so much of the oil of gladness, that they imparted it to others: to the
Candlesticks; that is, the Churches wherein they shined. For so S. John teaches
us, in the beginning of this Book, to interpret Candlesticks: which is a great
argument of the excellency of these men, who by the witness of their life and
doctrine, made all those who were under their care, to testify, some way or
other, to the same truth that they did. At least by their lives; for they are
said to stand before the God of the Earth. Which is an Hebrew phrase,
signifying to minister unto God, to be employed in his worship and service, as
the Priests and People were at the Temple: and therefore sets forth the piety
and devotion of these persons, whose business it was to serve God, even then
when it was most dangerous so to do.

And as by Water, so by Blood also they bare witness of him. For they had war
made against them, and in the fight, since they would not yield, they were
killed, ver. 7. Nay, it was notorious to all, that their persecutors had not
only drawn the sword against them, but that they had resisted unto blood: for
their dead bodies lay in the street of the great City, ver. 8. and they would
not suffer them to be put in graves, ver. 9. which shows the enraged malice
which they bare to these zealous WITNESSES: who had tormented them ( ver. 10.)
by the sharpness of their arguments, and by their constant reproofs of their
infidelity and wickedness.

Nor was the Witness of the SPIRIT wanting: for they approved themselves as
Ministers of God, to speak in S. Paul's language, and Witnesses of Christ by
wonders and miracles so great, that they might be compared to the two great
Prophets Moses and Elias, who appeared with our Savior on the holy Mount. For
they sent fire out of their mouths ( ver. 5.) and had power to shut up Heaven
that it should not rain, ( ver. 6.) both which were the known works of Elias.
They had power likewise over the Waters, to turn them to blood, and to smite
the Earth with all plagues, as often as they pleased, ver. 6. which is the
plain description of men like to Moses: who brought such plagues on the
Egyptians as these had power to do upon those who were like them; both in
hardness of heart and in oppression of the faithful servants of God. And
therefore I suppose they are described with a power to hurt and destroy, rather
than with that healing and saving virtue wherewith the first Witnesses of
Christ principally came, to signify that their rebellious enemies should be
punished for their rejecting Jesus, and doing despite to the SPIRIT of grace:
which once came to them in a more healthful and salutary manner, casting out
Devils, turning Water into Wine, healing all manner of Plagues and Diseases,
and that as often as they themselves pleased to desire. And more than this you
read ( ver. 11.) that after the time appointed by God for it, he restored these
Prophets to life again: and thereby made their testimony something like that of
his Son's. That is, men animated with the very same spirit stood up in their
place, to the amazement of all their opposers. Who were so far from being able
to hurt them, that they were as safe as if they had been in Heaven. The
presence of God was with them, as in the cloud which preserved the Israelites
from all danger: And he advanced them to great honor, by the Heavenly gifts
wherewith they were adorned. As Elias is said to come though he did not appear
in person, but another in his spirit and power; and David is said to be raised
up to reign over the Jews (xxx. Jer. 9.) because his Son, that is, Christ was
set upon his Throne: so did the Spirit of life from God enter into these
witnesses, and they stood upon their feet, when he raised up other Apostolical
persons in their stead, who were not less eminent than those who were dead, but
full of the same spirit of wisdom, holiness, burning zeal, and might and power
also from God. This frighted all their enemies, as well it might, when they saw
the Christian Cause would not die, do what they could. But if they killed some,
others started up in their room to witness unto Jesus, and assert the same
truth; by wonders, by their admirable preaching, by their holy life, and by
death it self; if nothing else would satisfy them.

For thus all the MARTYRS testified to him. Whose BLOOD witnessed not only that
they believed his Religion, and that they valued the favor of Jesus more than
their lives; but that they had very good reason so to do: or else men of such
wisdom would not have endured such torments as they freely exposed themselves
unto, with so much cheerfulness, as we find they did. For as S. Hilary tells
us, Some gloried in the chains which they wore in prison; others being beaten
till they died, did nothing but give thanks; others readily laid down their
necks to be cut off: and more ran to those piles, which they saw built to burn
them; and, with a devout haste, leapt into those fires, at which the ministers
of their torments trembled; and there were those who were thrown into the Sea,
not as if they were to be drowned, but went to partake of the refreshment of
eternal bliss. So he writes upon those words of the Psalmist, lxv. 10, 12. Thou
have tried us, as silver is tried: we went through fire and water, etc. The
fruit of which was, that thereby many were converted unto Christ. Their death
gave life to others, who seeing their zeal, their constancy, their meekness,
their patience, and their charity, became Proselytes to that faith for which
they suffered. A new race of illustrious Martyrs rose up in their stead, in
whom they yet lived. For there was no other cause (as that Father adds upon the
following Verse) why they gave themselves as whole burnt offerings to Christ,
but that by the example of their Faith and Martyrdom, they might instruct many
more to be Martyrs. Nay, their BLOOD did not only water many young plants, and
made them grow to their perfection; but He tells us a little after, in his
exposition of the same Psalm, Plures scimus, etc. We know many who were wholly
ignorant of the Divine Sacraments ( i. e. the Christian Religion) that by the
example of the Martyrs run to Martyrdom. No wonder then, that these above all
others have been called the WITNESSES of Jesus (for that is the interpretation
of the word MARTYR) and that Christians were forward even to kiss their wounds,
and to embrace their dead bodies, as the remains of those who had done most
eminent service to our Lord. Who himself therefore witnessed to them after they
were dead, and declared that their blood was very dear and precious in his
sight, and that it had sealed nothing but the truth. For there can no other
reason be given but this, why at the Monuments of these MARTYRS or WITNESSES
our Savior was pleased to have so many miracles wrought afterward, and before
such a number of people, that Porphyry himself (as we learn both from S. Cyril
and S. Hierom) though an avowed enemy of our Religion, could not but
acknowledge them. They still spoke and bare Witness to Jesus by these wonderful
works, when they were dead; or rather Jesus spoke for them, as I said, and
declared from Heaven that these were his faithful Witnesses, whose word ought
to be believed, whereby they had declared him to be the Lord.

A PRAYER.
WHO would not believe on thee, O Lord? who would not magnify thy Name? For
great and mavelous are thy works, just and true are thy ways, thou King of
Saints. All Nations ought to come and worship before thee, whose Majesty and
Glory is so many ways made manifest. Thou have raised poor and ignorant men to
be mighty Ministers of thy Grace, and Witnesses of thy Resurrection, and
co-workers with thee for the illumination and conversion of the world. Blessed
be thy name, for all the glorious Lights which have been in thy Church in every
Age; by whom thy holy Faith has been preserved and propagated to our days.
Blessed be thy name, for all the Martyrs who sealed it with their Blood: and
for all the Confessors who freely acknowledged thee, with the danger of their
lives. Great was thy glory which shone in their most exemplary holiness,
fortitude, patience, love unseigned both to friends and enemies; and in that
mighty power whereby they approved themselves as the Ministers of God.

Thanks be to thee, O God, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, for the comfort of thy
holy Scriptures, wherein we read the story of our Saviors wondrous love; and
of that most miraculous power which appeared in him, to testify unto him, and
at last raised him from the dead, and advanced him to the throne of Glory. From
whence he sent the Holy Ghost, to endue his Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors and Teachers, with power from on high; that they might be his
Witnesses, and commit that which they had received to faithful men, who should
be able to teach others also. O God, I cannot but again adore thy
incomprehensible love, which can never be sufficiently praised. Who can
understand the exceeding riches of thy grace, that thou whose naked glory is
too bright for our weak minds to fix their eyes upon, would be pleased in
most admirable condescending love, to manifest thy self and visit us in our
flesh? Thou art infinitely above the greatest of us; who are far less worthy to
approach thee than the lowest creature in this world is fit for our friendship
and society. So much the more mavelous is thy unheard of love, that thou
would admit us to such a near relation unto thee. So much the greater is our
happiness, that in Christ Jesus thou have made thy self our portion, and
designed us to be eternally blessed with thee. Great was his care and kindness
all the days of his flesh, toward the most miserable wretches: who received
the greatest tokens of his love. I rejoice now to think with what tenderness he
received the poor, fed the hungry, visited the sick, cured the diseased; and
when he had left the world, communicated the same power unto others, that they
might exercise the same charity that he had done. I see both the power and
goodness of our Lord, in all those works of wonder which he did. I see that his
mercy endures for ever, which has preserved a faithful record of these
things, that we through patience and comfort of the holy Scriptures might have
hope.

Now the God of all grace inspire me and all other Christian Souls, with the
same faith, love and ardent zeal, which was in those burning and shining
Lights, the Witnesses of Christ. That we may be followers of them, as they were
of him: and acknowledging the same Lord, being members of the same body,
partaking of the same Sacraments, and living upon the same Heavenly food; we
may lead the same holy lives, in hope to shine one day with them in the same
celestial glory. Help us to continue in the things which we have learnt, and
have been assured of, knowing of whom we have learnt them; that we may not at
any time let them slip. For how shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed
unto us by them that heard him; thou, O God, also bearing them witness both
with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost,
according to thine own will? May we always carefully lay up and preserve these
sacred truths in our heart, which were in so glorious a manner delivered to us!
May they work there perpetually with great power, and be reverenced as the holy
Oracles of God! May they be the spring of all our motions, throughout the whole
course of our life! That with an even steady pace, whatsoever dangers come in
our way, we may walk on toward that happy place, where those holy ones rejoice
for ever with our Lord. To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be given by
us, and by those glorified Spirits, and by all the Angels in Heaven,
everlasting Praises. Amen.

CHAP. IX. The Use we are to make of their Testimony.
IT is time now to bring this Discourse to an issue: and, having examined all
these Divine Witnesses, taken their proofs and depositions, and found their
testimony, upon due enquiry, to be good and legal, to consider with our selves
what we have to do, and what judgment we will pass now that we have heard their
evidence. God the Father of all, says that Jesus is his Son; the Word himself
appeared often to justify this Truth; the Holy Ghost came down from Heaven to
attest it; the Prophet of the Highest proclaimed it; the holy life of our
Savior spoke as much; and his Bloody Death sealed it; to which the Spirit set
its seal also, and undeniably witnessed that blood was sacred which he shed,
for a testimony, upon the Cross. All these have done their part, all that
Witnesses by their office are to do, for the making of this good, that Jesus is
the Son of God. That which remains is our task: who are bound to consider, and
seriously ponder, and impartially judge, and then faithfully improve their
sacred Testimony, that Jesus may have the glory that is due unto him, and we
may have that benefit, which God by him designs to bestow upon us.

I.
And first of all let us consider awhile the great weight and importance of
this Truth, that Jesus is Gods Son. If the whole frame of Christian Religion
did not rely upon it; there would not have been such care taken to settle it,
and lay it deep in our hearts, by so much labor and strength of argument. It
is equally blameable to be laborious about a trifle, and to be superficial and
slight in things of greatest moment. No man of sense will, with a great deal of
diligence, summon together a number of Witnesses, to make good that which, when
it is proved, it is indifferent (as to any thing that depends upon it) whether
it be true or false. No question there is a considerable interest of ours,
which is concerned in this truth; else the Holy men of God would not have
called HEAVEN AND EARTH TO WITNESS and bear their testimony to it. The Father,
the Word, the Holy Ghost would not have concurred with the Water, the Blood and
the Spirit to assert and maintain it; but that all is little enough to justify
it, and that it is a thing of which we cannot but desire the greatest
assurance. It is (1.) the Foundation of all other Truths in the Christian
Religion, as you may read, 1 Cor. iii. 11. xvi. Matthew. 17, 18. It is the Rock
on which the Church is built; the Ground that supports the whole Fabric: which
if it be infirm and rotten, all falls to rubbish and confusion. And therefore
(2.) the Devil labored to undermine this Truth above all others. Like a
subtle Enemy, when the Apostles as wise Masterbuilders had laid this
foundation, he employed false Teachers and counterfeit Apostles, as so many
Pioneers, to work under this, and lay their trains to blow it up: which he knew
was a nearer way to ruin all, than to plant his Batteries against the building
only. The History of the first times afford too plentiful instances of this.
For we find there arose many Antichrists, 1 John ii. 18. and many false
Prophets went out into the World: iv. 1. And the very spirit of Antichrist, as
he tells us, verse. 3. was this, to deny that Jesus, who came in flesh (in a
mortal condition and subject to our miseries) was Christ. They would not have
it thought that any one who suffered so vilely, was the great KING that had
been so long expected. Or if they believed Jesus to be a great Prophet, and
that he was raised from the dead, and rewarded for his labors in Heaven, as
other Prophets were; yet they denied that he was made LORD OF ALL, the Head of
the Church and of all Principalities and Powers; who was to be honored by all
Men, even as they honor the Father. And therefore (3.) the Apostles employed
as great care and earnest endeavor for to strengthen and support this weighty
truth, as the Enemies of Religion labored might and main, as we say, to weaken
and overthrow the belief of it. This was the thing they every where preached,
as you read in the History of the Acts of the Apostles. And for this very end
S. John wrote this Epistle, to confirm his Disciples in this Faith, against all
the subtle opposition of their adversaries; as you may collect from many
passages beside that which I have expounded. And it was the thing aimed at also
in his second Epistle, where he rejoices to hear that they walked in the truth,
verse. 3. and cautions them against those deceivers and Antichrists, verse. 7.
And indeed (4.) it was the great note of difference between the true Prophets
and the false, as you may see, 1 Cor. xii. 3. and in the place now mentioned in
this Epistle, iv. 1, 2. which also (5.) makes him command his Disciples, that
if any one pretending to the Spirit did not acknowledge this; they should not
use the common civility to him, of bidding him God speed, ii. Epist. 10. And if
any man apostatized from this faith (which is the last thing I shall mention)
S. Paul pronounces a most dreadful curse upon him, and wishes or predicts the
Lord would come and speedily execute it, 1 Corinthians. xvi. 22. For whosoever
transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of CHRIST, has not God: 2.
epist. of S. Joh. 9.

This being a truth therefore of so great moment, as appears by these
considerations, and by the many Witnesses to which S. John here appeals for the
proof of it; let us be sure to settle a sense of its concernment to us, in our
hearts; and then to think often of it, and study it so thoroughly, that we may
perceive both the truth and importance of it: or else we shall prove our selves
despisers of God, who do as bad as say, that it was a needless pains which he
bestowed, in giving so many evidences of that, for which we have no regard, or
no list to bring to trial and examination. And that truly, I doubt, is the
temper of most Christian People at this day. They think all discourses on this
subject useless or little worth; because they prove that which they believe
already. Heathens might reap some profit by them, but what, say they, have we
to do with them? But while such thoughts as these have too long possessed the
drowsy Christian world, they remain, alas! in the very dregs of Heathenism,
with a little smack or taste of Christianity. It is a sad thing to consider,
but so it is, that they who cannot endure to think upon what ground their
belief stands (because they would not put themselves to the trouble of
understanding it) are of that base temper which is the mother of Idolatry, of
Mahometism, and of all spurious Religions in the World. For what is it makes
Men worship the Sun, Moon and Stars, or address their services to dead men, nay
to a piece of wood, or a red cloth, or some such paultry thing? what makes
Mahomet so reverenced, by a great part of the World, as the Prophet of the
Highest; but that they have ever been so taught, and it is the custom to
honor him? They examine no further, nor enquire for any other reason; that is,
do not observe that there is no other reason for their belief. Upon the very
same account do many receive Jesus for the Son of God; He has no better
footing in their Souls, nor stands upon firmer grounds, than Mahomet, or the
Sun, or an Idol does, in the opinion of other men. There is no other reason, as
far as they know, but only the common practice of the place where they live,
why they honor him as the great Lord who governs all. Is not this a foul
dishonor to our Savior, to have no better subjects, nor a stronger hold, than
this, of their hearts? How little is he beholden to those, who can justify his
Title, upon no better principles, than others make use of in the behalf of the
Usurpers of Divinity? But it reflects the greatest shame in our own faces, that
we should have such plentiful and good evidence in our Books, and none at all
in our minds. What is that respect worth which we pretend to Religion, if a
false would have been accepted with as much affection as we have for the true;
had it not come too late?

The People would have Christ's Ministers to move their affections; to carry
them away with a torrent of words, and earnest expressions. But to what shall
they carry them? stay a while and answer that question. If it be not to that
which is true, they will do you wrong to hurry them so violently and in such
haste, to that from which you ought rather to run away. Now how shall you know
whether it be to the Truth or no? Must it not be proved by good reasons; must
they not make it evident and clear that they propound something which ought to
be entertained, before they can safely move any man's heart to embrace it? But
to what purpose is all this done, if after all their labor, you will not
consider it? If all this must be passed by as dry stuff, and you will gape only
for the application? Consider, I beseech you, that if the affections you desire
should be stirred, be not grounded on good judgment (which must be settled on
some weighty reason) they are so far from being so good as they ought; that
they may soon prove very hurtful and bad. They dispose a man to be an empty
Enthusiast; to be rapt away with any passionate, though idle, story; and to be
set on fire by zealous expressions for any plausible though dangerous error. In
short, such affections are indifferent to be either good or bad, as it chances.
Therefore if you would have our Lord commend you for being of his Religion
rather than of any other; if you would have the praise of it; study well such
things as these, which from the Holy writings I have propounded to be
considered in the foregoing Treatise: for you see the very bottom of his
Religion stands upon them. So shall you be satisfied also that your affections
are truly good, when you are moved with love toward him, because you are sure
and know (as S. Peter speaks, vi. Joh. 69.) that he is that CHRIST, the Son of
the living God. Do you not think that many have a very tender melting affection
for the Blessed Virgin Mary; and that they are full of devotion to several
other Saints, and feel a great passion sometimes in their Prayers to them, or
in their commendation of them? Have a care, lest your affections to the Lord
Jesus be no better than these. How can you think that they are of an higher
strain, more than mere natural and imaginative things; if you have no better
reasons to prove that he is to be worshipped, than they have to build their
respect upon to those? If you receive him for the King of Heaven, upon the same
account that she is set up for the Queen (because it is the common opinion,
which you have sucked in with your Mothers milk, etc.) your love to him is just
like their love to her: nothing Divine nor Heavenly, but a natural passion,
which is as ready to spend it self upon any other person, as on himself.

And here it will be fit to add, that we ought to be very cautious what we
believe; because there are so many cheats in the world. And of those above all
others we ought to be well aware, who would have us use no caution; but
greedily swallow, without any chewing, that which they deliver to us upon their
word. God you see would not have us believe without good reasons; and reasons
proportionable to the weight of the thing, which we are to believe. His
Ministers appeal to the testimony of known Witnesses: and where Witnesses offer
themselves to us to prove any thing, it is our duty sure to hear and examine
them. And we ought not to surrender our belief to any thing carelessly; nor,
either out of idleness and sloth, or being over awed by the confidence which
any men assume to themselves, content our selves with an implicit faith:
neglecting to search, and prove, and try all things, which demand to have no
less than our Souls resigned up unto them. For that which commands our
understanding, and has got authority there, has a right to govern our Will
and command the whole man. And therefore we had need take care what we suffer
to seat it self in that throne; for according as our opinions and judgments
are, so will our inclinations be, both in our affections and in our lives. It
is a great commendation which Socrates gives Gebes, that he was careful to
enquire into all things, and duly weigh them, (...), and would not presently
believe that which any body said, though otherwise he had sufficient respect
unto him. That wariness which was in an Heathen sure does as much or more
concern us Christians. Who ought to suspect those who would have us believe
them, without putting our selves to the trouble of much search. It is a sign
they mean to deceive; for if God himself does not expect to be believed, unless
there be good witnesses for that to which his Ambassadors demand assent; why
should men be so presumptuous as to ask us to believe them blindly? Or why
should we be such obedient fools, as to do more for them than God would have us
do for himself? He has given us eyes, and therefore we ought to look about us,
especially when men bid us wink and take any thing upon trust. He has endued
us with Reason, and therefore we ought to sift and try, and examine that which
is propounded to us. And if any body say, do not try nor examine; you are not
able to discern the differences of things; believe as we teach, for we cannot
deceive you: mark that man or company of men, as the greatest Deceivers. Who
intend to impose something upon you, which will not abide the test; and for
which they have no good proof, if their pretenses be examined. You may be sure
if they were well furnished with proofs, they would not fear the trial, but
desire to have all brought to the touchstone, that Truth may be differenced
from its counterfeit. No body refuses to be judged, but he that knows his cause
is naught, and fears he shall be cast. Such men had need do all they can to
lurk in the dark, and put off their stuff when no body can see what it is; who
know it is deceitfully wrought, and will not abide the light. They do wisely
and as cunning Merchants, who make up in words and great assurances of their
honesty, what is wanting in the goodness of their wares. But why we should have
so little wit as to take their words, who can tell? We must answer for this
folly, no doubt, to Almighty God; who has given us more understanding if we
would use it, and taught us by himself to call for good witnesses of that,
which is offered to us for a truth. And the more strictly we examine these
which S. John here alleges, the better we shall be satisfied that they intend
not to deceive us. Which is a mark we should always have much in our eye, when
we are enquiring after Truth. If the more we search, consider and ponder the
proofs which are brought, the better they appear, and the clearer they grow; it
is a very good sign there is nothing wanting to make it fully entertained, but
only longer thoughts, and greater and more serious consideration. As on the
other hand, we have great reason to suspect and turn away from that, which the
longer we weigh its proofs, the lighter they seem: and the propounders of them
also begin to shift and shuffle, till they have put all into a mist, in which
we can see nothing, but that they are at a loss, and are fain to puzzle us,
because they cannot clear that which they were about. Thanks be to God there is
nothing of this in the evidences we give, for the true Christian Religion. They
are plain and perspicuous, and show themselves in a greater brightness, the
more we look upon them, and the better we are acquainted with them. Search and
try what has been said, and the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ will
shine with greater luster in your eyes, and you will confess with S. Peter, 2
i. 3. that he has called us to the knowledge of him, by glory and virtue; that
is, by a most amazing power of God, which declared him to be his only Son, our
Lord.

II.
Let us therefore in the next place, consider seriously, how excellent and
perfectly rational the Faith of Christians is. There is nothing founded upon
such Authority, as our most holy Religion. It is no childish, silly thing, to
be a believer. A man does not betray his weakness and easy credulity, when
upon examination and search he suffers his Soul to be planted with these new
Principles; but demonstrates the strength, the nobleness and ingenuity of his
mind, which can discern and judge aright: for nothing can pretend to so much
reason as they. There are a vast heap of things, which I could here accumulate,
beside those which I have treated of, to make good this assertion. But because
the method of the Apostle which I have followed, is so clear and easy, and the
Witnesses so full and pregnant, that every one of them affords us many
evidences; I will content my self with a brief review of what has been said.
Which will be sufficient to convince us, that our Faith is the highest
improvement of our Reason; and does not debase, but clevate and raise our
understanding, upon the surest grounds of Divine demonstration. For if you
consider what Testimonials they brought along with them, who have pretended to
speak in God's name, you will find there is nothing comparable to the Witness
which God has given of his Son. No, not in that Religion which was really
founded by his Authority; much less in that where there was only the Name of
God pretended, without any Power.

I. Mahomet, I mean (to begin first with the latter of these) took upon him to
be the Apostle and the Prophet of God; greater not only than Moses, but than
Jesus himself. And such was his confident brags of Revelations from God, that
among a company of wild Arabians, whom Algazel acknowledges to have approached
the nearest to Beasts, of all other men, He made some proselytes to his belief.
But what proof did he give, that he was divinely sent? Was it ever heard that
God spoke to him so much as once, as he did often to our Savior? At what time,
or in what place, and in whose audience did God say to him, Thou art my
Prophet? When did a voice from Heaven come to any three, or but one man, and
say, This is the Apostle of God, hear him? It is a mavelous Providence of
God, that this Impostor, who wanted no confidence, should never adventure in
all the relations he has made of himself (quite contrary to our Lord who wrote
nothing of his own life, but left all to his Disciples) to tell any such story
as this, for his greater credit and glory among his followers. We read indeed
of some idle tales which he reports, of an Angel speaking to him; and of his
ascension into Heaven, I know not how many millions of miles: But what witness
was there of these things? what was his name, who saw the Angel appear to him?
or who stood by, when he was transported and carried out of sight, as he
dreamed? Or when and to whom did Moses or any one else appear, and verify it,
that he had been with them in glory? If we must take his own word, which is all
we can hear of to vouch it, then we must not refuse to believe every foolish
fellow, who has impudence enough to pretend to prophecy. But what then will
become of the faith of Mahomet himself, if the sword were out of his hand? Let
us hear such a man as John the Baptist (whose piety and virtue is attested by
those who were no Friends of our Religion) affirm that he heard and saw such
things as he reports; and we will be content to abate them the Apostles, and
such a multitude of people, as heard God say he would Glorify his Name, in our
Savior. And in what Glory has that false Prophet appeared since he left the
World? Whose eyes has he struck out, with the brightness of his countenance?
Nay, by whom has he been so much as seen since he was buried? I need not put
the question about his Resurrection, for they never pretended it. Only the
sottish people would not believe when he died, that he was really dead, but
said he was taken up to Heaven, as Jesus was. And Omar, one of his successors,
threatened death to them that should say he was dead; for he was only gone away
as Moses did into the Mount, and would return again. From whence perhaps arose
that vulgar error among us, that the Mahumedans expect the return of their
Prophet See Poceek. in Gregor. Abul Phar. p. 180. 264.
. But Abu Becri proved to them out of the Alcoran, that He was to die as other
Prophets before him, and so appeased Omar and the multitude.

And was it ever heard that the Holy Ghost sell down upon him, in a visible
shape while he lived? There is not one of his own followers (as the learned Mr.
Pocock assures us) who makes any mention, so much as of the Pigeon, which, as
we commonly tell the tale, was wont to fly to his ear, as if it whispered some
revelation to him. There was not that small imitation, of what is recorded of
our Savior. Much less was there any such glorious body seen descending on him,
as that which came down like a Dove, and crowned our Saviors head. The Heavens
never opened to him; nor was he transfigured in the presence of any of his
disciples. Where are the Books that can tell us of any such thing? or so much
as of any miracles, which he wrought to confirm his Doctrine? He himself says
in his Alcoran more than once, that he was not sent with Miracles, but with
Arms. And though his followers afterward pretended that he did work miracles,
yet they never pretend they were done frequently; and most of them are very
ridiculous and useless; and their learned men do not at all rely upon them, nor
think he proved his Prophecy by this means. There is no news of any blind-mans
eyes that he opened, or of his making the lame to walk, or cleansing a poor
Leper; much less of a dead-mans hearing his voice, and arising out of his
grave, and of such like things done by his followers: which we are sure, from
eyewitnesses, our Lord did, and gave those that testify it power to do the
same wonders. And if we go to enquire of the Witness of Water, in Holiness of
Doctrine and Life; what a sink of dirty stuff is his Alcoran? The pleasures of
the flesh are the highest that he had in his thoughts to propound to his
followers. His Heaven is no better than a sensual Paradise. But as for the joys
of the Holy Ghost, or a taste of any spiritual delights, he seems to have had
no more sense of them than a Swine. How should he, being an impure lascivious
beast himself; who had seventeen Wives, besides Concubines? And not content
with these, took another man's Wife (the wife of his servant Zaid) and pretended
a revelation for it. Which, he had the impudence to say, told him that God was
not only well pleased he should have her, but took it ill he had abstained so
long from her, out of fear what the world would say. Whereas he ought to have
feared God, rather than men. What could be expected from such a Brute, but such
a Book as he has left; a mere heap or dunghill rather of filthy nonsense? And
if we enquire further for the Witness of BLOOD, we can find none but the Blood
of other men, which bears witness that he was a false Prophet. For his business
was to shed the blood of his opposers, rather than to give his own, as a
testimony to the truth. The sword was his principal weapon, to subdue men to
his belief. He did not persuade them by arguments, but compelled them to yield
by force of arms. Go, says he, in the xix. Section of the Alcoran, and kill all
those who will not be converted. He was a Murderer as well as a Liar (like the
first Deceiver of all) so that to save their Bodies rather than their Souls,
his neighbors found it the best way to submit themselves to his yoke. Did our
blessed Savior use any such violence? Did he come with a sword in his hand and
say, Yield your understandings, or your throats? No, he came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them. He would not let his Apostles call for fire from
Heaven to consume any body, though it had been as easy for him to do, as to
send the Holy Ghost in fiery tongues upon them. He never did any miracle to the
hurt of the smallest living creature; though it would have been recompensed by
a multitude of noble cures, that he wrought for their owners. It did not please
him, that one of his servants cut off but the ear of Malchus, though it was in
his defense. He was the good shepherd, who would not kill the sheep, but laid
down his life for them. This we commemorate perpetually, to his eternal praise:
whereas the false Prophet has left no other memory, but that he was more like
a Wolf than a Shepherd; for he came for nothing but to worry and destroy.

But he does not deserve so much regard, as to be thus seriously confuted; were
not all this said, rather to make us sensible of the excellence of our own
Religion, than to disprove that which was taught by him. Whose greatest wisdom
was, that he chose to begin to make his Proselytes and plant his Religion,
among a company of rude People; who were more like Beasts, I told you, than
Men. If they had been Men of any understanding, one cannot imagine how they
should have given credit to such ill contrived tales, as those which he
invented. But we are told by his own followers that the People of Mecca (a
place famous for his Tomb at this day) could neither write nor read, but were
perfectly ignorant. Nay, Mahomet himself was wont to say, that he was sent by
God to an illiterate Nation. Which they expound of the Arabians about Mecca;
who were not People of the Book, as they call the Jews and Christians, but as
ignorant as they came out of their Mothers Womb (says one of their own Authors)
having never learnt the art of writing, or of casting account. Which shows how
vastly different the beginnings of that Religion were, from those of ours;
which was preached to the wisest and politest People upon Earth, as that was to
the most rude and stupid. The Greeks and Romans soon saw their Countries filled
with this new Doctrine. Nor was it in the power of their Philosophers or
Orators to stop its progress. But there were no such Creatures among those wild
Arabians, and those Philosophers who arose afterward of this Sect, were
ashamed, it may be made appear by good proofs, of the Alcoran. So destitute
they are of any thing whereby to support the Religion of that Book, that they
are fain to fly to the Gospel of Christ, from thence to gain some authority to
it. There, says the Saracen, in Theodorus Abucara; Christ wrote these words,
(...), I send you a Prophet called Mahomet; but Christians have blotted it out
of their Books. For He they fancy is the Paraclet whom our Savior promises;
and it is one of the Names they bestow upon this Impostor in their writings:
who pretends our Savior foretold his coming, as many have observed out of the
lxi. Chapter of the Alcoran Hacksp. Dialog. de Passione Domin.
. Which shows how hard they are put to their shifts, when they fly to us for
refuge; and when Ignorance is the greatest security and support to their
Religion at this day. It is very remarkable that as our Religion was propagated
among the wisest and most learned Nations, by the most illiterate men, merely
by the power of the Spirit and the Holy Ghost; so being thus propagated, all
the learned part of the World is of our Religion. They that are of any other,
are ignorant of good learning, as their great enemy. But this fears not to be
tried, because it is sure that knowledge is its Friend, and that wisdom, as
our Savior said, will be justified of her Children. Who clearly see even from
their own Writings that Mahomet, at the best, was but an hot Enthusiast, who
took his own warm thoughts for inspiration. But he had no assurance of what he
said: As the humor wrought he was for new illuminations. It was not his fault
that his Disciples had not another Book, which should have put down the
Alcoran. For as our famous Professor of this Learning Mr. Pocock, Ib. p. 178.
has observed out of Alsharestanius, when he lay sick of the Fever of which he
dyed, he called for Pen and Ink, that he might write them an infallible Book
(it seems as yet he had not done it) to keep them from erring when he was dead.
This Omar looked upon as a frenzy, (though Mahomet took it for an inspiration)
and said, Alas! the sickness of the Apostle of God is very strong: It is
sufficient that we have the Book of God ( i. e. the Alcoran) there needs no
more. But some were of another mind: and while the Company that stood by
contended and strove among themselves, some calling for the Pen and Ink, and
others agreeing with Omar, that he was beside himself, Mahomet cried out, Get
ye gone, it does not become you to dispute before me: and so there was an end.
But some bewail this as a great misfortune, that he did not write them such a
Book, as he then had in his Head: that is, more frenzies and ravings of his
brainsick imagination. -- But it is time to have done with this: which I have
said not merely to show how senceless that Religion is, which has overspread
so great a part of the World; but how happy we are who are taught by our Lord
and Master Christ Jesus. Whose faith relies upon such certain, evident and
divine grounds, that if we did but live according to it; we need not fear but
by its power and force it would overcome and vanquish the other, though
supported by never so numerous followers. The Lord of his infinite mercy
quicken our Faith, that we may outlive them; for it is plain we can so far
out-reason them; that there is no more comparison between our grounds and
theirs, than there is between the wisest man that ever was, and those blocks of
Mecca that could neither write nor read.

II. The only Religion that can come into any competition with ours, is that of
Moses: who indeed was sent of God, and as became a faithful servant of his, in
the House or Family committed to his charge, followed his orders and honestly
testified and reported those things which God commanded him to speak, iii.
Hebr. 5. But if you seriously weigh what has been said, you will find the Jews
had not such weighty Arguments to persuade them to believe on Moses, as we have
to believe in Jesus; who has abrogated a great part of that Religion.

And first for the Witness of the FATHER, the Jews say, ix. Joh. 29. We know
that God spoke to Moses. But how did they know it? What evidence were they able
to give themselves of it? If it had pleased them to lay aside their passion,
and look beyond the prejudices of their education, the proof of it would have
appeared so slender in comparison with the assurances they might have had of
his speaking to Jesus; that they would never have added those scornful words,
which there follow; as for this fellow we know not whence he is. God appeared
indeed to Moses in the Bush; and said to him, iii. Exodus 6. I am the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And bids him say to the
Children of Israel, to whom he ordered him to go, I am has sent me to you,
verse. 14. But which of the Israelites stood by, when God spoke these words to
him? What person was there like John Baptist, to be a Witness of this Voice,
which was his Commission? What Creature was there with him (but the Flock he
was feeding) that could come afterward and say, I was present and heard God
call to him out of the Bush? Does the Voice say any where, I am has sent HIM;
as if it spoke to others besides himself? or what words did he himself hear,
comparable to those which God spoke to our Savior, saying, Thou art my Son, my
well-beloved Son? Nor was the manner alike wherein these two Voices were
delivered. One out of the Bush, the other from Heaven. And the Glory wherewith
this came to Moses, was much inferior to the glorious appearance of the Holy
Ghost descending upon Jesus. An Angel of the Lord you read appeared then to
Moses in a flame of fire, verse. 2. But the flame was in the midst of the Bush,
not upon Moses. Whereas the Holy Ghost, not an Angel of the Lord, came down at
our Savior's Baptism, when he was sent; and not into some distant place, but
lighted upon HIM, and there remained. God therefore is said to DWELL in the
Bush, xxxiii. Deuteronomy. 16. but never to dwell in Moses; and the dwelling of God
there, was only by the Presence and Ministry of an Angel. Whereas now Jesus
himself is the dwelling place of God, as I have proved; and it is God himself,
that dwells in him. The Divine Majesty came upon him, and there it settled its
abode in his Person. Who is God manifested in the flesh; and whose Glory we
behold, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father; which cannot be said
of any other man.

All this is so plain, that Moses himself saw this appearance of God to him
(though sufficient to persuade him that he was sent of God, because he heard
him speak to him out of the Bush) would not prove a demonstration to others;
who did not hear or see any thing to make them believe him, nor had any
credible witnesses to justify this beside himself. He says as much afterward
to him that sent him, Behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken to my
voice; for they will say, the Lord has not appeared unto thee. iv. Exodus 1.
And how could he confute them, when they made this exception? unless he had
some sensible demonstration to give them that God was with him; which God
immediately furnishes him withal ( ver. 2.) though nothing like to the Power
of our Savior, as you shall hear presently. All the miracles he wrought were
as short of our Lords, as His first Commission was; which you see plainly was
nothing so noble, nothing so clear, as that of our blessed Savior's. Moses
himself is sensible of it, and confesses he wanted some Witness that God spoke
to him; and that he knew not what to say, when the Israelites bade him prove
it. But our Lord needed not to call for any Witness; John the Baptist a great
Prophet, as they themselves allowed, was ready of himself (for it was his
office) to declare openly that he saw the Spirit descending from Heaven, like a
Dove, and abiding on him. He saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God:
as the Voice from Heaven, in his audience also, pronounced him. Which a great
many People, if need were, could afterward certify; who concluded that an
Angel spoke to him, as you have heard from S. John's testimony.xii. 29.

2. Now if you proceed further and ask for some Witness of Moses his authority,
like to that of the WORD (the second Witness to our Savior) who can hear any
thing of it? Do we ever read a word of Moses his appearing in such a Glory, as
our Lord Jesus did to his first Martyr S. Steven, and to S. Paul and to his
beloved Disciple? Nay, where are the Witnesses that say he was so much as
transfigured when he was upon the Mount; or does he himself ever affirm it?
When was his Raiment made as white as Snow? or where (as I shall examine more
hereafter) was the bright cloud covering the Mount, which was all clothed with
darkness? we read indeed that when he came down his face shone, but not in so
bright and glorious a manner as our Savior's did when he went up into the Holy
Mount, and especially after he ascended into Heaven. Then S. Steven, as I have
said, saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing at his right hand; an honor
never given to any Angel in Heaven. And the Apostle of the Gentiles saw him
again, in a light greater than that of the Sun at Noonday. And to S. John he
appeared as the KING OF KINGS AND THE LORD OF LORDS, in such a Majesty as he
was not able to bear, but made him fall at his feet as dead. He that weighs
such things as these will see, that all the glory of Moses (to use S. Paul's
words, 2 Cor. iii. 10.) was no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory
that excels.

3. Then if you look for the Testimony of the HOLY GHOST, I have already noted
that it never came down upon him, as it did upon the Founder of our Religion.
Much less did he send it upon some select Men after he was dead, who should do
as great wonders as himself. And still much less did he bestow it upon all the
People, as our Lord did for a while, upon all Believers. There is not the
smallest foot-step of any such Honor or Power that he had. For He did not
communicate a portion of his Spirit to the LXX. Elders, who were chosen to be
his Assistants; but the Lord said to him, I will come down, and take of the
Spirit which is upon thee, and put it upon them, xi. Number. 17. which words do
not signify, it is true, that he had less, but only that they had more of the
Spirit, than before: yet He did not so much as lay his hands upon them that
they might receive it, but God took of the Spirit which was on him, and gave it
to the LXX. Elders; even to those two who were not there present at the
Tabernacle, but remained still in the camp, ver. 25, 26.

4. If you go therefore next to the Testimony of WATER, how transparent is the
Purity of our Saviors Doctrine, above that of Moses. Whose Laws though they
contained nothing dishonest, yet burdened the people, to prevent a greater
mischief of their running into Idolatry, with a number of precepts which in
themselves had no goodness at all to commend them. Nay, the Letter of the very
moral Law laid restraints only upon the outward man, so that they who were
subject to it little regarded the purifying of their spirits, from those
irregular passions and naughty affections, which our Lord expressly prohibits.
There were many things also indulged in those days, which our Lord does not
allow. Whose design was, not only to purge the heart, and make the spirit of
men much better by all his precepts; but to advance them to the noblest degree
of purity and goodness. Where do you read in the Books of Moses, such precepts
of meekness, of mortifying fleshly lusts, of kindness to all, and tender
compassion, of trust in God, of contentedness with the present, and hope of his
mercy in another world, as are frequent and obvious in the Gospel of Christ?
Nay, in what place of the Law do you find so much as one command or exhortation
to Pray, much less to Pray without ceasing, and to Pray (not for riches, and
victory over enemies, and long life, but) for the Divine Grace and favor, for
the Holy Spirit, for remission of sins, and for Eternal Life? And now I mention
that word, I cannot but desire you to consider how low and poor the Promises of
Moses were, compared with those of our Savior, who has brought in a better
Hope. Of which they could see so little (so dim was the light) in the Law of
Moses, that a whole Sect of men who believed in him and received his Law, cast
away all hope of obtaining good things in another life, and denied the
Resurrection of the Dead. And we must add to all this, that Moses was but the
Light of that one Nation; whereas our Lord says, more than once, I am the Light
of the WORLD, viii. John 12. ix. 5. Moses washed the Bodies of the Jews; but
now the hearts of the unclean Gentiles are purified by Faith, xv. Acts 9. And
if you enquire further into the purity of Moses his life, you will find it was
not without flaws and blemishes: for he spoke unadvisedly with his lips, and
could not bring the people to their rest. But our Lord was perfectly free from
all spot, the Lamb of God without blemish: who never spoke the least word
amiss, no not in the midst of such torments as Moses never endured.

5. For if you pass on to consider what sufferings and BLOOD testify; Alas!
what is the Blood of Bulls and of Goats, to the precious Blood of Jesus? Did
Moses seal that Covenant of which he was the Minister, or did he sprinkle the
Book of the Covenant, with his own blood? Did he purge away the sins of the
people by himself, as our Savior, we read, did? 1. Hebr. 3. or sanctify them
by the offering of his own body once for all, as it is, x. Hebr. 10? Did he die
to bear Witness to the Truth? or witness such a good confession before Pharaoh,
as Jesus before Pontius Pilate? Was it ever heard, that by the enduring of a
shameful and cruel death, he declared to all, the certainty of his Prophecy?
Upon what Altar was he offered? And for what cause did he become a sacrifice?
This was peculiar to Jesus, to suffer such things as no man ever did; and for
this very cause, because he said He was the Son of God.

6. Moses then had need to do some miracles to confirm his prophecy, since he
fell short in many other things of giving satisfaction. Such as we have, I
mean, who abound in Witnesses to our belief; and hear even this Witness, on
which the Jews heretofore relied, speak more plainly and powerfully to us than
it did to them. The SPIRIT of the Lord was upon Moses, the people saw by the
wonders he did, which moved them to follow him. Though now they are so
foolishly mad against our Savior, that to rob us of this Argument, the Jews
say Moses his miracles did not prove him to be sent of God, yet it is manifest
by their story, they were, in a manner, his only glory: I am sure the
principal, or that which first induced their forefathers to give any credit to
him. For when he asked of God a sign to give the people (who otherwise he
foresaw would question the apparition of the Angel to him) that they might
believe as much as himself, and acknowledge that God sent him, He granted him a
power of doing such wonders as flesh and blood could not do, which, it seems,
he thought the properest means to convince them. What is that in thy hand,
says the Lord (immediately after the words mentioned before, iv. Exodus 1.) and
he said, a rod. And the Lord said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the
ground, and it became a Serpent, and Moses fled from before it. And the Lord
said unto him again, Put forth thine hand and take it by the tail, and he put
forth his hand and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand; that they may
believe the Lord God of their Fathers has appeared unto thee, ver. 2, 3, 4, 5.
This was the end for which this miracle was to be wrought. To which he adds
another, that if they would not believe him, nor hearken to the voice of the
first, they might be convinced by the second; or if they would believe neither,
he gave him power to do a third, and bade him turn the water of the river into
blood, ver. 7, 8. And accordingly you read, he went and did the signs in the
sight of the people, and the people believed: and when they heard God had
visited them, bowed their heads and worshipped, ver. 30, 31. After this indeed
they disbelieved again, till God drowned their enemies in the red Sea, and then
the people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, and his servant Moses, xiv.
Exodus 31. But were any of these works so wonderful, and so powerful to move
belief, as those which our Savior did? It may deserve a discourse (on a
fitting occasion) on purpose to show how much Moses came behind him in this, as
well as in all the rest. Both the number and greatness of our Savior's works
were as far beyond his, as the strength of a Giant is beyond that of an Infant.
He was cut off in the midst of his days, and yet in that three years and an
half wherein he lived, after the SPIRIT of God came upon him at his Baptism, he
did more wonders than Moses did in forty years; nay, more than had been done
from the beginning of the world to that time. And if you regard the quality of
them, Moses his taking the Serpent by the tail, and turning it into a rod
again, was not comparable to our Savior's casting out Devils, treading upon
the old Serpent, breaking in pieces all his power, by healing all manner of
sickness and disease; and giving his Disciples also the same authority and
power which was visible in himself. Nor was Moses his hand becoming leprous
when he put it into his bosom, and its being restored again by the same means,
any thing like to the miracles of Jesus in curing so many old Lepers of all
forts, both Jews and Samaritans, wheresoever they came to him to implore his
charity. Moses brought a strong East wind, which caused the Sea to go back, and
leave the bottom dry for the Israelites to march through; but this was nothing
so wonderful as our Lord's walking upon the Sea, as it had been dry land, and
commanding Peter to accompany him in the midst of a boisterous wind; and his
laying his commands upon such tempests and raging waves, and the fishes also,
which all obeyed him. Nay, that great miracle of feeding them with Manna, was
not so strange as our Lord's satisfying great multitudes, with five or seven
loaves and two small fishes: which were not proportionable to so many thousand
stomachs as were filled by them; as the quantity of Manna was to the Armies of
the Israelites. Besides that you never read a word of Moses his opening the
eyes of the blind, much less of his raising the dead, which our Lord did sundry
times. I need say no more to show how inferior he was to Jesus even in regard
of his miracles; concerning which the multitude said truly, It never was so
seen in Israel, ix. Matthew. 33. And yet this was the only thing that convinced
that Nation at the first, and made them believe in Moses (as I have proved)
before they heard God speak to them, by an Angel, from mount Sinai, at the
giving of the Law. That was the most amazing thing of all; but was after they
came out of Egypt, and a great while after they had believed Moses was sent of
God, as they saw then more fully: and was nothing comparable neither to Jesus's
speaking himself to some of the Apostles out of Heaven, and sending the Holy
Ghost from thence, with the gift of tongues and diverse others, upon them all.
And after all that has been said of the miracles which the SPIRIT wrought by
him, where are the miracles that it wrought for him? Did Moses prove himself a
true Prophet by rising again, after he was dead and buried? To whom did he
appear? With whom did he eat and drink? Or who can say that he ascended up into
Heaven? To whom did he appear in glory, except it was to our Savior (and some
of his Disciples) in honor of whom, it seems he had then the favor, and not
before, to shine in that luster wherein they beheld him. In short, God gave not
the Spirit by measure unto Jesus, as you have heard before: He had not such a
limited portion of it as Moses had, who appears by these things to have been
only a servant over the house of God, in which our Savior had a power as a
Son, and that over his own house, iii. Hebr. 5, 6.

Thus much has been said to show the great honor God has done us in making
us Christians. Whose Faith, you see, stands upon such well-laid grounds, that
even they who were taught by God had none comparable to them. Herein we have a
felicity above all other men that have ever been, if we be but sensible of it;
that we are not required to receive any thing from God, but upon such reasons,
as far excel those which demanded belief of men in former times, but had not
such strength to enforce it. Blessed be God, should we all say,

A PRAYER.
BLessed be God, who has not done so for any people. He has shown us HIMSELF,
his WORD, and the HOLY GHOST. Israel has not seen his Glory, so as it shines
in our eyes. And as for his Power and Might, they have not known them, no more
than the Promises and the Laws, whereby he now governs us. He has given us a
better Covenant, founded upon a better Blood, which has brought in also a
better Hope, and is confirmed by a more powerful Spirit. Blessed be his
Goodness, that our eyes read, and our ears hear those things, which many
Prophets and righteous men desired to see and hear, but could not see nor hear
them. For it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did
minister the things, which are now reported unto us by them that have preached
the Gospel unto us, which the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, which things
the Angels desire to look into.

O Bless the Lord with us, ye Angels of his that excel in strength; praise him
and magnify him for ever. O all ye Powers of the Lord; bless ye the Lord,
praise him and magnify him for ever. O ye Spirits and Souls of the righteous,
bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever. Praise him all ye
Apostles and Prophets; praise him all ye Martyrs and Confessors; praise him all
ye glorious Lights, who have made the Gospel of Christ to shine throughout the
world. Praise the Father Almighty; praise his Eternal WORD; praise the Holy
Ghost; who have made our Faith to stand, not in the wisdom of men, but in the
mighty Power of God. Praise him for the Incarnation, the Life, the Death, the
Resurrection, the Ascension, and the Glorification of the Lord Jesus: who has
given us strong Consolation, by that sure and steadfast hope, which, throughout
all these means, he has settled in our hearts.

O praise him for his mavelous love to us; whom he has called after a
glorious manner, and by an amazing virtue, to the knowledge of Christ; by whom
his Divine power has given us all things that pertain unto life and godliness.
And make us who are so nearly concerned in this love, to be very sensible how
great it is: which has not only called us to his Heavenly Kingdom, but made us
sure and certain by so many Witnesses, that Jesus is the Lord of all, the King
of infinite Majesty, Power and Glory. Let our Souls never cease to show forth
and publish the virtues and powerful operations of him who has called us into
his mavelous light. Let our mouths be filled with his praise all the day
long, who out of the riches of his mercy has made us who were not his people,
to be a chosen generation, an holy nation, a peculiar people to himself.

O that our Faith may grow exceedingly, and be deeply rooted and grounded in
our hearts. And as it stands upon the surest foundations, so we may be built up
in it with the most assured confidence, and stand unshaken and immovable in it
unto the end. And as thou have differenced us from all other people, in the
clearness of that Light, which lets us see that ours is the most holy Faith: so
help us by thy grace to distinguish our selves from all others, by holding the
mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience, and by the upright actions of an
unblameable life.

O that the light of Christians may so shine before men, that others seeing
their good works may glorify thee our Heavenly Father. O that it may disperse
the darkness, which over-spreads so great a part of the world. That all
impostures may be discovered; and they that live in error may be brought to the
knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus. O that his Dominion may reach from
Sea to Sea, even unto the worlds end. Let them who dwell in the most desert
places kneel before him, and his enemies lick the dust. Let all Kings of the
Earth adore him, and all Nations do him service. Kindle in the hearts of
Princes and Nobles an holy ambition to advance his Glory. Inspire the hearts of
all Bishops and Priests with an ardent zeal for the conversion of Souls. And
dispose the hearts of those who are in error, that they may be apt and ready to
receive thy sacred truth. Plant thy Gospel, where it has not yet been, and
replant it where it has been rooted out: And give us grace who have long been
thine own vineyard, to bring forth plenty of good fruit. That our lives may be
as holy as our faith; and we may convince Jews, Turks, and all other Infidels,
that thou art among us, and that Jesus whom we worship is the Lord. To him with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be Glory and Praise among all mankind, and
throughout all Ages, world without end.

Amen.
CHAP. X. Other necessary Uses we are to make of their Testimony.
THere is no great skill required, to see the difference between that Holy
Religion which we profess; and all others that are entertained in the rest of
the World. Some we must have; and it is as palpable that this is incomparably
the most excellent, as it is that there is any Religion at all. There is no
Nation so barbarous, but pays some respect and ceremony (to use the phrase of
Tully when he defines Religion) to some Superior and more excellent Nature,
which we call Divine. Though they are ignorant what kind of God it becomes them
to have, yet they know a God must be had, and must be worshipped. Their own
mind teaches them this, as soon as they cast their eyes upon the admirable
frame of the World; which all naturally conclude must have had some most wise
and mighty Builder. But what respect and reverence that is, which will be
pleasing to him, they are very uncertain; it is manifest, by the various ways
they have invented to express their Devotion. They all with one consent
acknowledge a necessity of a Revelation to instruct them; for there is no
Nation but pretends to have received some things, by the instinct, inspiration,
or apparition of their Gods. That which pure natural reason dictates, is not to
be found simple and unmixt in any Nation under Heaven. For if we should stand
merely to that, it has ever resolved that the worship of God consists in the
study of Wisdom, Justice and all other Virtues. Which as they are most eminent
in God, so he is best pleased with them in us. And they that addict themselves
to resemble him in this manner, are the men that shall obtain his favor. There
are a number of notable sayings both in Heathen and Christian Writers to this
purpose. But when all this is said and acknowledged, Men will offend against
these Rules of Virtue: and what shall they do then? what will make him
satisfaction, and procure a reconciliation with him (whom they have reason to
think their offenses have made their enemy) is a thing that can never be
certainly resolved without a Revelation. Without which also we can have little
security of the immortality of our Souls, and of the life to come. Which has
inclined all Mankind to listen after a Revelation, and to catch at any thing
which pretends to come from God to them. For as Plato acknowledges (when he
ordains there should be no alterations made in the ancient Customs about
Sacrifices, because) it is not possible for mortal nature to know any thing of
these matters, without it. No, says he, (not long after in the same Book In
Epinom.
) as no body shall ever persuade me that there is any greater Piety, than true
Virtue, and as there is nothing more excellent can be taught, than how those
that honor Virtue should rightly worship God with Sacrifices and other rites
of purifying: So none can teach this, (...), unless God show him the way, and
be his Guide and Leader in so excellent a work. But if we search into all the
records that are in the World, what is there that can stand in competition with
the Christian way of worshipping God, or pretend to come with such authority
from him? I have examined those that have most to say for themselves; and they
can produce no such WITNESSES as Christianity does: No, not that ancient
Revelation made by God to Moses. As for the old Pagan ways, which were very
various, I am ashamed to mention them. It is manifest they suffered themselves
to be cheated by impure Spirits, and took the answers of Demons for the
Oracles of God. But ask now of the days that are past, which were before us,
since the day that God created Man upon the Earth, and ask from the one side of
Heaven unto the other, whether there has been any such thing as this great
thing is, or has been heard like it, that God indeed appeared among Men, and
was manifest in the flesh: as is evident by all the signs and wonders and
mighty deeds, by voices from Heaven, by his Resurrection from the dead, and all
the other Witnesses which have testified this truth to the world. Ask again,
has God ever assured Men of any thing, by so many and such evident
testimonies, as those which I have produced. Unto us it was shown, that we
might know, that Jesus is the Lord, and beside him there is no other (if I may
again allude to the words of Moses, iv. Deuteronomy. 34, 35.) out of Heaven he has
made us hear his voice that he might instruct us; and upon Earth he has shown
us his great wonders, that every tongue might confess Jesus is the Lord, to the
Glory of God the Father.

III.
That now is the next thing I am to press, as a necessary consequence of what
has been said in the foregoing Treatise. Though there were such slender
proofs, in comparison with ours, that God spoke to Moses, and though others, as
I said, were drawn away by the subtilties of evil Angels, yet they all believed
and gave great reverence to that which was delivered to them. Every Nation
gladly received and held fast, that which did but pretend to come from Heaven.
Which must needs extremely reproach us and put us to eternal shame, if we
having better evidences, should not only be Believers, but have a stronger
faith in Jesus. That which Plato thought was to be wished for, is now come to
pass: God is come to be our Guide and Director. The very wisdom of the Father
has appeared to teach us. He that made all the World, is come down hither to
reform us. The WORD IS MADE FLESH, that as he had Principalum in coelis (to use
the words of Irenaeus L. 4. cap. 37.
) the Lordship in Heaven, so he might have Principatum in terra, the same
Sovereignty upon Earth. He has appeared also in wonderful and astonished
brightness; to convince us of his authority, and to make us know assuredly that
he is God blessed for ever. Shall we not then hear his words? shall we not
deliver up our selves to receive his Heavenly instruction, which came with such
powerful demonstration? God forbid that any of us should be so perverse, as
hearing such WITNESSES speak unto us for the Lord Jesus, we should give no
credit to them.

I cannot but believe, as S. Austin L. de vera Relig. cap. 3.
excellently discourses, that if Plato now lived, and would vouchsafe to answer
my Questions; or rather if any Scholar of his, being persuaded that truth is
not to be seen with corporeal eyes, but by a pure mind; and that nothing
hinders the sight more than a life addicted to lust, and false Images of
sensible things, which, impressed on us, beget various errors, and that
therefore the mind is to be purified, that it may behold that unchangeable
beauty, which is always the same, and always like it self; If, I say, a Scholar
of his thus taught by him, should ask him, whether in case there should be a
Man, Great and Divine, that should persuade the People at least to believe such
things, though they could not perceive them (or if they did perceive them, were
so engaged in vulgar errors that they durst not or could not oppose them) He
would not judge him worthy of Divine honor: I believe he would Answer, that
this could not be done by Man; unless perhaps the very power and wisdom of God
should honor some person (who was not taught of men, but from the Cradle
illuminated by the most intimate knowledge of things) with so great a grace,
and strengthen him with such resolution, and bear him up with such a majesty,
that contemning all things that evil Men desire, and enduring all things that
they dread, and doing all things that they admire, he should convert Mankind,
with equal kindness and authority, to so wholesome a Faith. And he would add,
that it was to no purpose to ask him what the Honors are which ought to be
given to such a person, when it is easy to be discerned, what honor is due to
the wisdom of God: by the guidance and governance of which, he would
singularly deserve of Mankind, and do some thing for their Salvation, proper
only to himself, and which was above Men to do. Now if these things, which I
have supposed, be really done, if there be good records of them, if from a
Country, in which alone One God was worshipped, and where such a person was to
be born, there came chosen men, who by their Virtues and their Sermons have
kindled in Men's breasts the flame of the Divine love, and have left the
enlightened Earth under a most wholesome Discipline, if every where it is
preached, that in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God, if to the perceiving and embracing this, (that the Soul may
be cured, and recover strength to entertain so great a light) the covetous hear
such words as these, Lay not up your treasures upon Earth, and the luxurious
are told, that he who sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption,
and the proud are told, that he who exalts himself shall be abased, the angry
are exhorted when one cheek is smitten to turn the other, they that live in
discord are taught, to love their enemies, the superstitious are instructed,
that the Kingdom of God is within us, to the curious it is said continually,
look not at the things that are seen, but to those which are not seen, and
lastly it is said to all, Love not the world, nor the things that are in the
world; if these things are read throughout the world, if they be cheerfully
heard with great veneration, if after so much blood, such fires, so many
crucifixions of Martyrs, the Church is grown more fertile, and has propagated
it self to the most barbarous Nations, (and to omit the rest) if men are every
where so converted to God, that every day all mankind answers almost with one
voice, LIFT UP YOUR HEARTS UNTO THE LORD; why should we drowsily still continue
in a sottish unbelief?

There is nothing can be said in the excuse of such Souls, as having received
notice of such a mavelous Love of God to mankind, and such evident proofs
that it is no fancy; will not be persuaded to entertain the belief of it. But
when light is come into the world, choose to remain in darkness; and will be
guided merely by themselves, when there is a revelation come from God. Which
ought to be entertained with the greatest joy, as the thing which the world
wanted and wished for: and without which they could meet with no resolution of
their doubts, nor certain directions how to please God, whom they had so highly
offended. In this the Christian Religion gives us full satisfaction, and
propounds nothing to our practice, but what the wisest men ever said was best
to be done, and took for the most excellent piety. As for that which it
propounds to our belief, it is all made credible by this one great Truth, which
is proved by a number of Witnesses, that Jesus is the Son of God. We ought to
receive that which such a person taught, either with his own mouth, or by those
whom he inspired, and sent in the same manner, as the Father sent him. For if
it be so reasonable, as I have demonstrated, to be a Believer, then it is as
unreasonable to be an Unbeliever: and no man will be able to open his mouth to
justify such a sin, against so many Witnesses as will appear to testify, that
they called him to the faith by the clearest and the most powerful evidences
that ever were. For if the Jews were bound to believe in Moses, having no more
testimony from God than you have heard; we are much more bound to believe in
Jesus, who has more and greater Witnesses that he not only came from God, but
is gone to God, and has all things given into his hands, whether in Heaven or
in Earth. As it was said of them therefore (xiv. Exodus ult.) that they believed
the Lord and his servant Moses, so let it be said of every one now, that we
believe the Lord and his Son Jesus. For this very end were these words written
by S. John, that we may believe on his Name, ver. 13. And this is the sum of
what God would have us to do, the Commandment he has given us; That we should
believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, iii. 23. If
we do the former, we shall see an evident consequence of the latter. For when
we are persuaded that He is the Son of God, we cannot but see that we ought to
receive every word that he says, with affectionate reverence, and to let every
thing that is said concerning him into our very hearts; so that we fear him,
and love him, and become obedient to him, and depend upon his word, and, as he
himself has taught us, honor him as we do the Father Almighty.

For we are assured by those who heard him, and were with him from the
beginning, and were witnesses of his Resurrection, and received the Holy Ghost
from him, that He was the WORD MADE FLESH; and that the Word was God, and all
things were made by him, and is the Son of God not by office only, but in his
nature and essence, and having assumed our Flesh, therein reigns Lord of all
for ever. For what reason should we refuse to receive that, which is so
credibly witnessed to be the very Truth of God? They that report these things
were so pious, as I have proved, that they cannot be suspected to have invented
them; nay, the very end for which they published them, quits them from all
suspicion of fraud and forgery. For they aimed at nothing, but by making man
sensible of his great Dignity, and the high honor God has put upon him; to
possess his heart with an ardent love to God and to his Neighbor, and to make
him perfectly subject unto his will. And is there not great reason, if we
believe what these Witnesses say, that we should apply our best endeavors to
please him; by living soberly, righteously, and godly, and by abstaining from
the least appearance of evil? Think what Jesus was, and then resolve with your
selves what regard is due to his Word. Will not the wicked man tremble, when he
hears him say, that none shall go to Heaven but they that do the will of his
Father which is in Heaven? Then he does not believe that these are the words of
the Son of God, or does not mind what he reads. Who can with any face call him
Lord, Lord, and not acknowledge that he ought to do the things that he says?
And to acknowledge this, and not do those things, what a madness is that; if we
believe our Lord is able to call us to a severe account for our neglect of his
will? What is there that can recommend chastity and purity of heart to our
affection, together with mercifulness, meekness, peaceableness, poverty or
contentedness of spirit, the humility of little children, says in God's
providence, and such like virtues, if this will not; that the Son of God has
preached them to the world as the most amiable qualities in the eyes of God,
without which we shall never see him, nor inherit his Heavenly Kingdom? Are not
these his words? Do not his Sermons teach us these Lessons? And if we do these
things, does he not say we shall have everlasting life, and enter into his joy,
and see the glory which God has given him? For what cause do we question
whether this be the way to happiness? Do not the same Witnesses which tell us
that he is the Son of God, testify withal that he came to teach us Gods will,
and that this is his will, which by the Gospel is declared unto us? Why do we
not seriously believe it then, let me ask again? Are not the Witnesses good,
who affirm that Jesus is the Son of God? Have we not examined them, and find no
cause why we should reject them? Or will you receive nothing upon the credit of
a Witness? That Is a very strange obstinacy; which rejects so certain a way of
knowing many things, that cannot be otherways known.

For the notices of things do not come to us all one way, but by diverse means,
either by our Senses, or by our Reason and Discourse, or by Report. By all
these ways the knowledge of things is conveyed to our Mind: And if we refuse to
be informed by any of them, there are a great number of things, certainly true
and of great consequence to us, of which we must remain ignorant. That there
are other Countries far distant from this where we live, and that such and such
things are there to be had, and have been there done, most Men can know by no
means but only by report; for there are but few that can go and see. And he
that will not receive the testimony of another in this case, deprives himself
of a considerable piece of knowledge, whereof others partake; and which might
be as useful to him as it proves to them. But if for this wilful loss he shall
pretend to assign a just cause; saying, that he cannot believe any thing unless
it be demonstrated to him by clear and evident consequences from Principles of
known reason, he will become ridiculous. For it is absurd to expect the
knowledge of any thing in any other way, but that which is proper for its
conveyance to us. To demand a proof of a matter of reason, from our senses; or
for what we discern by our senses, from our reason; is equally ridiculous: and
so it is to demand an evidence for things of Faith (which we know by report
only) either from our Senses or our Reason. That there are some things come to
our notice only by Faith, is plain from what passes every day. And it is as
plain, that they must be proved to be true in their proper way; that is, by the
soundness of the Testimony upon which we receive them: As no man requires a
reason for what he sees and feels, nor asks that he may see with his eyes that
of which he reasons and discourses: so he ought not to seek for a testimony of
sense or reason, for that which he can know by no way but by report. As for
example; no Man demands a reason to prove that the Sun shines; In this his
sense gives him satisfaction; and if he were born blind, no reason could prove
to him that it was not Night. Nor does any man, that is in his wits, require
that he may behold God with his eyes, whom he knows by discourse and the reason
of his mind; and knows him also by that to be invisible. In like manner it is
altogether preposterous, when a man comes and reports that such a person dyed
on such a day; to ask for a reason to prove it, or to demand that he may see
it; for it is impossible to see him dye again upon that day. That is not a
thing to be known either of those ways, by sense or reason, but only by the
testimony of others who were present at that time, and are, we think, worthy of
belief. Why do we ask then for any other proof, that Jesus was born of a Virgin
at such a time, did such wonderful works, preached such an holy Doctrine, was
crucified, dead and buried, rose again from the dead, ascended to Heaven, and
sent from thence the Holy Ghost? These are not things now to be seen or felt,
nor can we gather them from the mere discourse of our own reason, which tells
us nothing of them: But we have them by report from a great many Witnesses, who
say they saw and heard and felt all that which they would have us believe.
There is no other use of reason in this case, but only to examine and judge
whether this report be credible, and founded in the testimony of God. Now that
is evident to any impartial enquirer, from what has been said concerning these
Witnesses, whose report there is no reason to suspect, as it is certain it can
never be disproved. Why should we then be so much our own enemies, as to
deprive our selves of this saving knowledge of Jesus Christ? That is, why do we
not give credit to the report of these Witnesses concerning Jesus; since, by
the only proper means, whereby such things can be proved, I have made it good
that the Father declared him to be his Son; and He appeared in Glory to testify
to himself; and the Holy Ghost demonstrated he could be no less; and his Life,
Death, Resurrection, and all the rest (of which there were so many upright
Witnesses) assure us that it is a certain truth. Would we be so difficult to be
persuaded to go to a Man or a Place, where several honest neighbors informed
us, upon their word, nay upon their life, we should be promoted to great honor,
or be possessed of a fair estate? Do we not believe one another in our daily
traffic? and drive considerable bargains, merely upon the credit we give to
some persons, who inform us of the advantage we may make by them? Do not men
undertake long journeys, and more dangerous voyages, merely because they are
told that such an one is dead to whom they are heir, or that such rich
commodities are to be had in exchange for meaner goods? Who is there that does
not desire his Witnesses may be accepted and their testimony taken for good
proof, either to clear his innocence, or to settle his estate? Now, says the
Apostle (immediately after the alleging of all these Witnesses in Heaven and
in Earth, to prove the truth of Christianity) If we receive the Witness of men,
the Witness of God is greater: for this is the Witness of God, which he has
testified of his Son.

The meaning of which is this; If men whose honesty you cannot impeach, give
their testimony in a Court of Judicature, it is never disallowed, nor can you
be permitted to set it by, and make nothing of it; but it is necessarily
admitted, for an end of strife. The weightiest causes are decided, all matters
depending are determined and judged, according to the evidence that is given by
witnesses of unblemished faith. In the mouth of two or three witnesses (as the
known saying was) every word (or rather, matter) is established. That is,
brought to an issue and concluded, if any controversy have arose to unsettle
it. Nay, the testimony of one man, if we have no reason to suspect his credit,
is in our own private thoughts, though not in Law, satisfaction great enough to
assure us of the truth of what he says: And we think it such a reproach to give
him the lie, that we cannot but believe him; finding a desire in the same case
to be believed our selves. Now if things stand thus between us and our
neighbors, will we not allow God (says the Apostle) as much as we yield to
them? Shall not his word determine and conclude us? When he gives evidence of a
thing, shall we still dispute it with him? That, besides the undutifulness of
it, is too great a stubborness. We may rather be taught how to behave our
selves toward him, by the measure men expect from us, and we from them: Yea,
God does more deserve credit than any man; for, as he adds, the witness of God
is GREATER, i. e. is of far more validity and certainty; it may more securely
be relied on, than the witness of any men whatsoever. God is not only greater
than men, but his Witness also or Testimony is greater (which must be carefully
noted) it is of more force and strength to support any conclusion; we may more
undoubtedly found our faith upon it; because it is not liable to any of those
exceptions which may prejudice the best testimony of men. Two things there are
that lessen the testimony of men, if we compare it with God's, and make it to
be of a nature more weak and infirm. The one is, that though a man be reputed
honest, and therefore we cannot legally except against his Testimony, yet it is
possible he may be a deceiver, and we cannot look into his heart to know
whether he be or no. We may not be able to prove the least deceit by him, in
what he says or ever has said or done; and it is possible he never delivered
any thing contrary to truth, or did any thing contrary to justice: but yet we
can never free our mind from this thought, since we know not his inward man,
that there is a possibility also, it may be otherwise with him. But then
secondly, suppose him perfectly honest, and that it is impossible he should put
a cheat upon us; yet it will be always possible that he may be cheated himself,
because all men are fallible and may be mistaken. The greatest integrity in the
world cannot secure a man, but the weakness of his understanding, and the
subtilty of others may sometimes impose upon him: so that though he thinks what
he says to be true, it may be otherwise in it self than it is in his thoughts.
Herein therefore the Testimony of God is GREATER than the testimony of men,
that it is not liable to either of these suspicions; it being utterly
impossible that he should either be deceived himself, or that he should deceive
us. He can neither lead us into an error (which we all acknowledge to be
contrary to his Goodness and Truth) nor fall into one himself, which is as
contrary to the perfection of his understanding, and his Omnipresent being. The
testimony of God then being so indubitable, that it is above the testimony of
any men, it ought with all reverence to be received when he declares that Jesus
is his Son: for if it were but equal to humane testimony, it ought not to be
refused. Now this is the WITNESS OF GOD, says the Apostle, which he has
testified of his Son. That is, It being granted to be most rational that we
should receive the testimony of God, nay, give it greater respect than we bear
to that of men; I assure you that the evidence which we give you concerning
Jesus is the very testimony of God; and therefore do not slight it. It is not
we that bear witness to him, so much as God. We do not desire you to hear
merely what we say, but what God himself has said, who has given many
assurances of this truth. If there were but two of them, they might, by your
own rules, very well expect to find entertainment; but there are no less than
six witnesses, every one of them Divine, they all speak from God, and therefore
you cannot deny your assent to what they prove. For the first witness, is God
the Father himself, who called Jesus his well-beloved Son. And the second, is
the Word of God, upon which account, whatsoever he says, is God's testimony
also. The Holy Ghost, which is the third, that proceeds from the Father, and
came on purpose to bear witness to his Son. As for the fourth (Water) the
Doctrine was of GOD, his life was the life of GOD, John's Baptism was from
Heaven, and he is called (i. John 6.) a man sent from GOD. Then, for the Blood
which is the fifth witness, it is called GOD's own Blood, xx. Acts 28. And it
appeared to be his, by his gathering it up again after it was shed, and taking
it into the Heavens, where he appears with it in the presence of God for us.
And the last of these witnesses is expressly called the Spirit of GOD, xii.
Matthew. 28. So that it is GOD, you see, who so many ways bears witness of his
Son; there is something Divine in every one of these Witnesses, in those on
Earth as well as in those in Heaven; and therefore we cannot without an affront
to GOD reject their testimony. For then He would have worse measure from us
than men have, and we should give less respect to six Witnesses of his, than to
two or three of our neighbors. If Jesus came not with clear demonstrations,
with fullness of proof, then deny him any admittance; but if God has so many
ways justified him to be his Son, if his Life was so excellent, his Blood so
holy, his Spirit so Divine, then we shall never be able to justify it before
any knowing man, much less before God, if we do not believe him: and that
heartily and fully, in every thing; no more doubting of the truth of what he
says, than we do of those things which our eyes and our ears report to us, or
of those, which are delivered unto us, upon the faith of the whole world.

For which end it should be our endeavor, that our Faith may rest upon a sure
and strong foundation; and be laid on such grounds, that it may stand the
faster, in a time of temptation. The ignorant man's Faith indeed may be as
strong, as his that knows most, and what he has learnt by Education, may be so
confirmed by Custom, that he will never stir from it: but is only the effect of
Nature, which produces the same resolutions in those who are of other
Religions. The Christian way of obtaining a strong Faith, is first to see the
Son, and then to believe on him to everlasting life, as our Savior himself
teaches us, vi. John 40. To see him is to perceive and discern by evident
tokens that he is the Son of God, the true way to life: upon which sight and
plain demonstrations we ought to believe in him, and submit unto him, as our
Lord. That Is the true Christian Faith, which flows from knowledge, and is
founded upon the understanding of what such Witnesses as these say concerning
Jesus. It relies upon the testimony of the Father, of the Word, and of the Holy
Ghost, is wrought by the Spirit, and confirmed by Water and Blood. And
therefore we ought to study this place of holy Scripture, and have it much in
our thoughts, that so our Faith may stand in the Power of God. For otherwise,
how shall we be able to follow the Apostolical Precept, which would have us,
when we are questioned, to render a reason of the hope that is in us, 1 Pet.
iii. 15. We may be able to stand our ground though we be ignorant of the true
causes of belief; but the enemies of it will look upon it as a foolish
obstinacy, if we have not so much understanding as to give some other account
of our Faith, than they give for theirs. Suppose they should say, Why are you a
Christian? whence is it that you look for a Resurrection, a Glorious body, and
Eternal life in another world? Would they not think us very stupid, if we could
say nothing to them but that so we have been always taught, and are resolved to
believe? Would not this be as good a reason for them as it is for us; and make
us unworthy of the name of Christians, who know our Books no better, which bid
us give, and furnish us with, a reasonable account? Consider therefore what
Answer you would shape to them, that should make such a demand. The Apostle
says it is fit they should have a reason, what is the best that you can offer
for their satisfaction? shall I tell you? The plain Answer is this, That Jesus,
whose Religion we follow, was the Son of God; and therefore we believe these
things because the Son of God taught us so, who cannot deceive us; and we will
not exchange this for any other persuasion though we should die for it. It is
certain enough that every body who hears this, will presently consent to us,
that he is a fool who does not stoop to him and comply with us, if it be
certain that Jesus is the Son of God. But how do you prove that, will be the
next question. Here is the labor, this is our work; and whence will you fetch
convincing Arguments, to make them yield to you this weighty point? There is no
such Compendious Abridgment of them any where, that I know of, as in this place
of S. John, which furnishes us with reasons both many and mighty to persuade us
and others that Jesus is the Son of God. You may tell them that the Father
Almighty said so, by voices from Heaven, in the audience of credible persons;
and that the Word said so, as they may be informed of S. Paul, who had no
reason greater than this to force him to leave all, and with the daily hazard
of his life to follow Jesus. You may allege the testimony of the Holy Ghost,
both at his Baptism and afterward; the mavelous sanctity of his Doctrine and
Life; the Confession he made at his bloody Death; the Glory of his Miraculous
works; his Resurrection from the Dead; the Power of the same Spirit in his
Apostles, after he was gone to Heaven; all the Miracles which were wrought long
after their times, in the places where the holy Martyrs of Jesus suffered;
together with the wonderful success of these Witnesses, who persuaded
innumerable People in all Countries, to become the subjects of this crucified
King, Christ Jesus.

Study this place therefore, I say again, very well, that you may be able to
oppress any gain-sayer, with the great weight of those reasons, which you
render of your faith. And study it likewise, till you feel the faith of Jesus
doing something in your hearts; till that faith which has so good a cause,
have suitable effects: that is, till it change you, as it is ever apt to do,
into the nature of that cause from whence it flows. It comes from God; see that
it carry you to him, and change you into his likeness. It relies on his
Testimony, be sure that it make you perfectly of his mind. It comes with the
authority from the Word of God it self, and from the Holy Ghost, let it
mightily inspire you with devotion to him, and set your affections on things
above, where Christ is now at God's right hand. It relies upon the Purity of
his holy Doctrine and Life; and therefore ought to purify our hearts, that we
may behave our selves in all holy conversation and godliness. It is founded on
his Blood, on which we can never look, but it will deaden our affections to
this World, and make us crucify the flesh, with its passions and lusts. It
stands upon the power of God, and should therefore make us strong in the Lord
and in the power of his might. It grows, as you see, upon sundry roots, and
flows from several heads; and therefore should dispose those in whose hearts it
is planted, to be abundant in the work of the Lord, and to bring forth much
fruit: that we may be known to be indeed the Disciples of Jesus, whose faith is
supported by such numerous Witnesses. And this now will lead me to the next
thing, which S. John here makes to be the necessary consequent of this faith;
and therefore ought not to be omitted.

IV.
If there be such great, such abundant reason to believe that Jesus is the Son
of God, then there is as great a necessity lying upon us to be obedient unto
him, and punctually to observe all his commands. This Faith both requires our
submission and obedience to him, and also gives us power and ability to perform
it. It is a mere trick of the Devil, another piece of his Sophistry, when He
cannot dig up the foundation of Christianity (which I told you was his first
endeavor) to hinder all superstructure upon it: by persuading Christian
People, that Faith and Obedience are no necessary Companions; but that they may
be good believers, and yet not keep Christ's Precepts. Some think they need
not; and others, which is the same cheat in another shape, think they cannot.
But I appeal to every Man's conscience if he be a believer, whether he do not
perceive his heart overawed, and his will inclined to reverence and subjection,
and all his powers mightily moved to tender their service; when he seriously
thinks that Jesus is the Lord, to whom God the Father has committed all
Judgment, and will render to every Man according to his works? Do you not feel
this faith carrying a great authority with it? Nay, is there not an
irresistible energy and virtue in it, while you attend to it, pressing you to
conformity with his holy will? Who can gainsay this? And who can say then,
that his Faith does not both engage and enable him to be obedient to his
Savior, if he do but mind what he believes? He never thinks of that, but it
powerfully urges and constrains him, to yield himself to be a faithful Servant
of Jesus; in every thing that he declares to be the mind and will of God. These
uncontrollable inclinations declare to us so plainly the tendency and natural
disposition of Christian Faith, that we cannot but see, it is so far from being
separable from obedience; that this is essentially included in it, and freely
flows from it, if it may be but suffered to have its course, and not be crossed
in its clear intention and design. If you be not convinced of this by what you
feel, you may learn it of S. John, who tells you here what the natural issue of
our faith is, and what duty it exacts: for it is the scope of these words which
I have expounded, to lay such a foundation of belief, as may unavoidably
enforce obedience, unless we forget what our belief is. He begins you know this
Fifth Chapter of his Epistle with this Principle, that every one who believes
Jesus to be the Christ, is born of God: and from thence infers (in that and in
the second Verse) that such a person cannot but love God and all his Brethren:
which Love cannot be discerned by any thing, but by keeping his Commandments.
FOR THIS IS THE LOVE OF GOD (ver. 3.) THAT WE KEEP HIS COMMANDMENTS. Here is
the natural fruit of Faith; This is its Progress, if you do not stop its
motions. It begets in our heart a great Love; and Love, is to be Obedient; and
that to all God's Commandments, which respect either our duty to him, or to our
Neighbor. It is in vain to say we believe in Jesus, if we do not heartily love
God who sent him to us. And it is in vain to pretend love to God, if we keep
not his Commandments. And it is as vain to say we have a dutiful respect to his
Commandments, if our neighbor have any cause to complain of us. For he that
loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen? And this Commandment we have from him, that he who loves God, love his
Brother also. iv. 20, 21.

Here now, they who have less understanding of the grounds of Faith, may make
up what is wanting in their knowledge, by the heartiness of their Devotion to
God, and the unfeignedness of their love to all their Brethren. If they be
mightily affected with what they believe, and out of an honest love in their
hearts to his holy Precepts, be very diligent in their obedience; it will
supply the defect that is in their understanding of the Reasons why they
believe in Jesus. For if a small argument in a weak and dull understanding,
does the same work with a strong argument in a quick and piercing, where lies
the difference; but only that the One can serve Religion more with his mind and
discourse, the other merely with his good will and his pious life? But will any
man presume to be so impious, as to employ his will to find out ways to excuse
his Obedience to him, whom he acknowledges for his Lord? He should rather
consider seriously how reasonable and how necessary it is, that he who knows so
well what Jesus is, and how he came, should above all other Men do him the most
faithful and zealous service. For if we do but observe how many arguments here
are to persuade us to this Faith in Jesus, with what Authority he was sent, and
with what power he came to us; we shall think it was for some very great work:
and fell it impossible, while we are sensible of this, not to do what he
requires, though now perhaps it seem impossible to be done. He is not come of
himself; but has the mark and stamp of the Supreme Lord upon him. He evidently
shows that he has a Commission from God; and brings (as I may say) the
Broad-seal of Heaven with him, to warrant what he demands, though it be never
so great a tribute of Obedience. Here are Witnesses to him above all exception;
and they all bid us behave our selves submissively toward him, and not deny to
do any thing that he would have us. Him has God the Father sealed, as he tells
us, vi. Joh. 27. and by his Voice from Heaven commands us to HEAR HIM. Which
was as if he had said, If you will believe him that cannot lie, then Jesus is
the TRUTH: to every word of whose mouth we ought to hearken; that is,
faithfully obey and observe. For as God is said to hear us, when he grants our
desires; so we hear him or his Son, when we fulfill his pleasure. The WORD
likewise (2.) when he appeared to S. Paul, made him an Apostle, for obedience
to the faith among all Nations, i. Romans 5. And told him expressly that he
appeared to him for this end, that he might send him to the Gentiles, to turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. xxvi. Act.
16, 18. The HOLY GHOST likewise (3.) is a Witness of this, which was given to
those that obeyed him. v. Act. 32. But looked upon all wickedness as an high
affront to it; at which it was grieved, and by which it was quenched; nay,
forced to depart, as not enduring to dwell in the same House with filthiness
and impurity. Unto which the Water (4.) or the Holy life and purity of our
Savior in all his actions as well as his Doctrine, was directly opposite. And
tells us that we must be obedient, if there were no other reason for it but
this alone, that the Son of God himself was so in every thing. Did God exact
obedience of him, that he might demand none of us? Will he set us free from
that duty and service, to which his dearly beloved Son was strictly tied? He
fulfilled all righteousness, and observed even that Law of Ceremonies, to which
we have no obligation: And do we think to be hereby excused from paying all
those respects which are naturally due from Creatures to the author of their
being, and which we cannot but owe to those who are of the same kind with us?
What is it that has so perverted the understanding of Christian People, as to
possess them with apprehensions quite contrary to common reason? What ailes us
that we cannot see the end of Christ's coming, nay, that we overlook the plain
words of his holy Scriptures, which tell us, that he left us an example, and
expects that we should follow it, and be made conformable to him, and be
renewed after his image, in righteousness and true holiness; without which no
man shall see the Lord? This the Blood (5.) speaks still more effectually. For
he would dye rather than disobey God. He became obedient to death, even the
death of the Cross, ii. Philip. 8. which was the reason why God so highly
exalted him, and gave him that Name which he has above every Name. There was
no other way whereby he could ascend up into Glory: And therefore it is madness
for us to think to leap up thither, and skip over the holy life of Jesus.
Especially since he declares, that his Blood was shed (to which perhaps we
trust for redemption, though we remain in our impurities) that he might redeem
us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. ii. Tit. 14. To the doing of which (6.) he has given us the Spirit for
our helper. Every Miracle that it wrought (to say nothing but what is within
the verge of these words) bids us consider what a Potent Lord we serve: for
whom nothing is too hard. By a Thousand Wonders, by more miraculous works than
we could have had time to read, should they have been all written, did he awake
the sleepy World: commanding them to arise, and go about his work; and he would
be with them, his Power, which nothing can withstand, should aid and succor
them. The obedience, me thinks, which the Winds and the Sea, and the Fishes,
and the Graves, and the Devils themselves paid him, call upon us and tell us
both what we ought to do, and what assistance we may expect from the power of
his might to make us obedient to his Faith. Who can resist the joint
importunity of so many Witnesses? who can hear all these tell us, that the
Son-of-God is come, by whom we must be governed, and yet be so senselesly
obstinate, as to say, We will not have this man to rule over us? O deaf ears! O
hearts harder than the nether Millstone! which will not let such loud voices
sink into them; such mighty arguments penetrate and mollify them, into
compliance with him! What can reduce such Souls and bring them under any
government, who will not be reclaimed by the authority of the Son of God? I may
call Heaven and Earth to Witness, against such obdurate hearts. The Father,
Word and Holy Ghost, these are Witnesses in Heaven, that testify it is our
duty and interest too to submit our selves unto him. The Water, Blood, and the
Spirit, they are Witnesses on Earth, which agree together to persuade us to
take his easy Yoke upon us. Can neither Heaven nor Earth prevail with us? Is
not God the Father Almighty great enough to lay his commands upon us? Is the
WORD of God of less credit, than the common vogue and opinion of the World,
with us? Cannot the Holy Ghost be believed concerning the place from whence it
comes, when it says that no unclean thing shall enter in thither? Do we think
his holy life to be a troublesome folly? and despise his blood? and resist his
spirit? and receive all the grace of God in vain? Hear, O Heavens, and give
ear, O Earth; after God had sent many of his Servants who were disregarded. He
last of all sent his Son into the World, saying, surely they will reverence my
Son; but they have rebelled against him.

I might call for Hell it self to witness against such perverse and disloyal
Creatures. The Devils will not fail to accuse such men hereafter: for they
believe and tremble; they acknowledge this great Truth, that Jesus is the Holy
one of God (iv. Luke 34.) which is the very same that Jesus himself said, when
he tells us the Father has sanctified him ( i.e. made him his holy One) and
sent him into the world, x. John 36. And that is more, I doubt, than a great
many irreligious spirits will confess; in their works, I am sure, the most of
the Christian world utterly deny it. Do you think the Devils who made that
confession would have disobeyed him, if they might have taken our place, and
had his Salvation offered to them? Would they not have shaken off their chains,
and taken upon them his yoke, had they received such gracious invitations as he
has made to us? Let us not be worse than they, I beseech you, by casting away
that hope, which was never given them; and slighting such tenders of mercy
which are peculiarly directed to the children of men. But let us rather admire,
adore and magnify this amazing love of God, who sent his Son so kindly to
speak to such wretches as we are. And let us show that we are sensible of his
love, by hearkening to his voice, and readily submitting our selves with all
dutiful, nay joyful affection to his commands. See, I beseech you again, that
you refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped not who refused him that
spoke on Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that
speaks from Heaven. Let all his Laws be held most sacred, and be devoutly
reverenced and observed. Know that this is your wisdom and understanding; nay,
remember that it is your life. And therefore keep your Souls diligently, lest
you forget those things which you have heard, and lest they depart from your
hearts all the days of your life. Choose death rather than the life of the
unrighteous, fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, thieves, covetous, drunkards,
revilers, and extortioners, who, he has pronounced, shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. Do you not remember how observant the children of Jonadab the
son of Rechab were of their Fathers Commandment; and how they could not be
tempted, no not by a Prophet, to contradict it? xxxv. Jer. 6. What Arguments I
pray you had they (so reasonable and moving as those which urge us) for this
injunction? Might they not have slipped many ways, with better color than we can
do, from this obligation? Did there want plausible pretenses to plead their
excuse, if they had absolved themselves and not observed it? Might they not
have said that every Creature of God was good, and none to be refused? That
their stomachs sometimes required a little Wine, and that it was reasonable to
give them satisfaction? That their Father had gone beyond his Authority, and
taken away the just liberty which God had left them? That they were restrained
enough by the Divine Laws, and that there needed no more of his making? O the
insensibleness and ingratitude of Christian people, that can think of these
men's reverence to so severe and hard a command of their Father, and be less
obedient to their most gracious Lord! What a forehead has that man who dares
venture to break any of his Precepts, when he has so many Reasons to believe
that he has laid none upon us, but those which are the very mind and will of
God; and are such a necessary indispensable burden, that unless we carry them
we cannot be saved? There is nothing that can be pretended, why we should not
strictly tie our selves to his will. Not only the love, which engaged the
Rechabites, enforces our obedience, but infinitely more reason than there was
in their Fathers will and pleasure; for we are assured that Jesus is the Son of
God. He could not but have a perfect understanding of what was fit and
convenient for us. If there had been any other way more easy to Heaven, than
this he has set before us, we cannot but think He would have revealed it unto
us. If there were any license that could be granted us, to dispense with our
obedience, He was not so unkind as to conceal it: much less would he have taken
it upon his death, that none will be allowed. For he declared openly in his
Sermons, that he will not only take no knowledge of those who work iniquity,
but bid them depart from him, whatsoever relation they pretend to him. And by
his Blood he assures us that he preached nothing but the undoubted Truth of
God. What is it then, that makes men still continue, either to slight all that
he says, or to give him the lie? It is no better, if we presume to believe that
we shall shift well enough in another world, though we do what we list while we
are here. It is to contradict the voice of the Father, of the Word, and of the
Holy Ghost. It is to oppose the Doctrine, the Life, the Sufferings, the Power
and Spirit of the Lord Jesus, who all tell us that we must be holy and
unblameable before him in love, if we hope to be accepted with him. They that
live wickedly and yet hope well, do in effect say that He is a Liar, and that
there is no such necessity of holiness, without which, he says, no man shall
see the Lord. Or else they despise that blessed sight, which is as bad, and
neither dread his displeasure, nor desire his favor. If they be believers,
then they reproach him by their wicked lives, as if he were still dead, and
could do no more to make his disciples better, or to reward and punish their
good or bad behavior, than Mahomet can, or any other impostor. All the Oaths,
curses and blasphemies which we hear out of Christian mouths, are as so many
spears to pierce our Savior again, because they forely wound his Religion, and
tend to the destruction of his Kingdom and Government. All the lasciviousness,
wantonness, and filthy debaucheries that are among us, are a kind of crucifying
Jesus afresh; they are a scoff and mock at his Cross, as a ridiculous piece of
folly. They reproach him as if he were an idiot, that did not understand
pleasure, but would put himself to unnecessary pain and trouble. Nor can we put
a much better interpretation upon men's eager pursuit of riches and honors, in
unjust, uncharitable and irreligious ways, which charges him with great
ignorance, to say no worse, who took the quite contrary course to happiness. As
for all those who gibe at his Religion, and make themselves sport with the
History of his Birth and of his Sufferings, they come under another rank, being
open and professed Enemies to his Majesty. They do as much as in them lies to
hang him upon the Gibbet again, and expose him to the scorn of the world. They
justify the Jews in their calumnies and blasphemies, and take part with Judas,
or rather are worse than He, who was tempted only by his covetousness to betray
him. And better it had been for these men, if they never had been born. It were
better for them that a millstone were hanged about their neck, and they were
cast into the Sea, or that they had been hanged themselves on a Gallows as high
as that of Haman, than that they should live thus to expose the Savior of the
world to shame. For though he will not die and rise again to convince them, yet
he will come and appear again to condemn them. He will be revealed from Heaven
in flaming fire, taking vengeance of all them that know not God, and that obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 Thessalonians. i. 8, 9. Let us therefore take good heed to our selves, that we be
neither faithless, nor unfaithful to our belief. But let us settle such an
unmovable faith in our Souls, upon these strong foundations which God has
laid for it, and let us so stir it up by new reflections every day on what we
believe, that we may have our portion among those who are spoken of in the next
words, ver. 10. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be
admired in all them that believe.

But some perhaps will pretend, that there are so many things to hinder every
man from doing his duty, that though he believe never so well, and think
obedience never so necessary, yet he shall never be able to comply with the
commands of the Lord Jesus, but must be forced to break them, even after he
has resolved the contrary. To this S. John has here also taken care to give
us an answer, when he tells us that such is the power of Christian Faith, that
by it we OVERCOME THE WORLD, ver. 4, 5. For whatsoever is born of God,
OVERCOMES THE WORLD: and this is the victory that OVERCOMES THE WORLD, even
our faith. Who is he that OVERCOMES THE WORLD, but he that believes that
Jesus is the Son of God.

V.
That is the next thing therefore which I am to give a brief account of, that
our Lord expects (which he would not do, if he did not endue us with sufficient
strength) that in the virtue of this Belief, we should get the better of all
temptations which stand in the way of our duty, and would hinder us from the
performance of it. By the WORLD, with which we are to conflict till we
overcome, is partly understood wicked men, xv. John 18. partly the tribulations
and miseries we may here endure by their and other means, xvi. Joh. 33. and
partly the allurements and enticing enjoyments, wherewith all our senses are
entertained, 1 John ii. 15, 16. All these oppose us, and set themselves against
us, either by discouraging or else flattering us from our known duty. It is
hard to be the object of hatred, contempt or scorn; harder to endure also
poverty, hunger, restraint, and such torments as the Apostles and other blessed
Martyrs suffered; and perhaps hardest of all to resist the persuasions of
pleasure, which prosperity and wordly Glory bring along with them. What must a
Believer do, when he is thus beset? Must he be content to yield himself too
weak to deal with these enemies? Must he let the WORLD have the day, and
declare that it was impossible to stand against its mighty forces? Or will it
be sufficient to enter into a conflict with them, if it be but to say that he
was not false or cowardly, though he suffer himself to be over-powred by them?
No, the Faith of Jesus is stronger than so, if it be deeply rooted in our
hearts: and will enable us to master all these, which seem to be no equal match
for us. Their strength lies only in the weakness of our Faith. If we stand
fast, as the Apostle speaks, in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved
away from the hope of the Gospel, they will lose their force and flee before
us, and leave us victorious. These six Witnesses are such Champions, if I may
so call them, that the Faith which is led by them, and firmly relies upon them,
cannot come off basely, but must needs be triumphant.

1. As for the hatred of men and their despisal, alas! what a contemptible
thing does it seem? how does it sneak into nothing, when we look up unto Jesus,
and remember that He was the Son of God, and yet endured it (as he tells his
Apostles, xv. John 18.) and thought himself never the less glorious? It cannot
be helped but we must be scorned sometime or other, if we will follow him;
unless we could persuade all men to bear us company. But this is our comfort
and encouragement, that this is the way to glory, and that now we are conformed
to our Savior, who by the shame of the Cross, has got himself immortal
honor; and that the Father at present approves us, the Word delights in us,
the Spirit of God and of Glory rests upon us; all these Heavenly Witnesses
esteem and love us, and are pleased to see us behave our selves worthily as
Jesus did.

2. And if from hence we pass through many tribulations, and encounter such
troubles and hardships as we are all desirous to avoid, they will not be able
to affright or daunt him who has this faith thus planted in his heart; For
greater is He that is in us, than he that is in the WORLD. Did not the ancient
Worthies and great Warriers against the WORLD, wade through very great
difficulties in the strength of a Faith which was much weaker than this of
ours? How did all those brave men whom you read of, Hebr. xi. obtain a good
report, but through faith, when it had not received this promise? ver. 39.
Surely, we that understand more than they did, we who know the Son of God is
come, not only by WATER, but by BLOOD; and who know that Eternal life is in
him, and have received the Holy Ghost, and are made partakers of such glorious
Revelations in the Gospel of his grace, and who know the certainty of those
things wherein we are instructed; we, I say, cannot but take the courage in the
power of such a Faith to behave our selves valiantly, and with Christian
resolution, in such like straits and dangers as made their fidelity so
remarkable. Read what S. Peter says to encourage us, 1 iii. 14, 15. But if you
suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye; and be not afraid of their terror,
neither be troubled. But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts; and be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that
is in you. As if he should have said, It may seem a strange folly to suffer so
much as you do, and you may begin to be startled at the troubles which befall
you; but bear a reverend regard toward God who has called you to this state
of Christianity, do but stand in awe of his Authority who has bid you hear,
that is obey, Jesus whatsoever it cost you; and do but tell every Man what
reason you have for what you do and suffer, and what hope you have in him upon
this account: And then they will either cease to trouble you, or you will cease
to be troubled for what they make you suffer. Now what are the reasons of our
Christian hope and patience, but these which we are here treating of? If we
allege these to our selves or to others, it will soon appear that we are no
fools in exposing our selves to any dangers for righteousness sake. The Father
has bidden us be true to it, so has the Word and so has the Holy Ghost:
every one of the other three also call upon us to be courageous; for it is a
worthy cause wherein we are engaged, and we shall not lose our reward. Here are
reasons enough; and they are stronger than all their adversaries. The World
has nothing to oppose so weighty as these Witnesses; every one of which I
might show you (if it would not prove too tedious) lay an obligation on us not
to be moved from our stedfastness, but to take up our Cross and to follow
Jesus. And I the rather pass by these, because I think they are generally of
less force than the other part of the WORLD, which uses to assault Mankind more
dangerously.

3. I mean the alluring and enticing enjoyments here below, which we are too
prone to comply withal. They are of an inveigling and insinuating nature, and
may get admittance by their soft violence; when the other cannot prevail by
more rough opposition. We are apt to fortify our selves against evil things,
and are many times angry they should attempt to overmaster us; but to the good
things of the WORLD we lie naked and open, and there is a treacherous party
within that is willing they should enter, nay, ready to open the doors to them.
And they are of three sorts, as the forenamed place in this Epistle tells us,
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, ii. 16. All
that the WORLD contains in it, for the captivating of an earthly Man's
affections, and satisfying his desires is comprehended under one of these three
Names. For the understanding of which you must know, that the Hebrews have a
manner of speech which expresses the Object by the Act: and the clearest
interpretation of these words is grounded on that use of theirs. So that by
LUST we are to understand all those things that gratify some appetite of
pleasure, wealth, or greatness; and by FLESH (which is not here, as it is
sometimes a general word) it is most agreeable to understand the lower and
duller senses which lie most in the flesh, and are affected with things that
have some grosness in them. And then the whole phrase, LUST OF THE FLESH, that
sort of things which give content to the touch, the taste and smell; such as
are meat, and drink and perfumes, and other voluptuous enjoyments, which, I
need not name but, are sometimes particularly called FLESH. And then by the
LUST OF THE EYES, we are to understand such things, as belong to the higher and
more renned sense of seeing, viz. Gold and Silver, precious Stones and Jewels,
Lordships and large possessions, noble Houses and rich Furniture, beautiful
Pictures and fair Gardens, fine clothes and costly attire; all that is
comprehended under the name of Riches, which as Solomon observes, yields only
this satisfaction to the owner, that he beholds them with his eye. There is
little in these things but what is all lodged in this sense; and therefore they
are called the lust of the eye, because it loves to look upon them, and when
that is done, they can do more for him. Only they may prefer a man to that
which he calls the PRIDE OF LIFE; which signifies all those things that flatter
and please the inward sense, our fancy or imagination. Such as are great
offices and places of Dignity, noble Titles, all the Honor and Glory of the
World, together with the esteem, at least the applause and commendation of men,
which is wont to follow them.

One or more of these three sorts of things every man naturally hunts after,
and his desires prick him forward in its pursuit. For these are men's study and
labor; with these the Devil baits his hooks, to catch Souls, and they who do
not bite at one will be nibling at another. They that are not tempted by the
first to gluttony and drunkenness, fornication and such like filthiness, feel
the second perhaps incline them to covetousness and the sordid love of Money,
with a thirst and greediness of another kind. Or if they can escape and despise
these, they may notwithstanding be in danger to be carried away with the humor
of prodigality, and affectation of vainglory, or ambition of Dignities; which
is attended with emulation, envy and other dangerous Vices. As the African
Beast which some write of, is caught with Music, and suffers its feet to be
fettered while it listens to the Lessons that are played to it: So do the
generality of Mankind let their Souls be ensnared and led into a miserable
captivity, by the enchanting voice of pleasure, riches, or glory. Whilst they
hearken to the bewitching melody which some of these court them withal, they
are taken in the mighty Hunter's net, and become a prey to him that lurks for
Souls, and seek whom he may devour. And it has not been in the power of the
wisest Charmers that ever were in the World, to open the ears of the most of
men, and to convey the sense of better things into them. All the Philosophy and
Learning that was so famous in former Ages, could never obtain such numerous
cheerful and obedient Auditors, as the Siren Songs, which these three sing in
Men's cares, have always sound. When the World therefore by that wisdom knew
not God, it pleased God, says S. Paul (1 Cor. i. 21.) by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe. The faith of Christ directs and disposes
us to avoid all those dangerous rocks on which they split themselves who listen
to those deceitful Songs. Now that the Son of God is come, He pulls our feet
out of the net; and by his far more powerful charms so stops our ears to those
enchantments, that there is no entrance for them any more. It seemed a foolish
thing indeed to the World, to believe that the crucified Jesus was the Son of
God; but where this simple faith prevailed it did more, than all the wisdom of
the World was able to effect before. For it gave them a new understanding and
saved them from perishing; by making them account it the greatest pleasure and
glory and treasures to follow Jesus, and do the will of God, as he did. The
World, they saw, passes away and the lust thereof (if they do not leave us, we
must at last leave them) but he that does the will of God abides for ever. So
those three Heavenly witnesses, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost,
assure us: whose voice as it is most sweet and melodious, so it is most
powerful to disinchant us, and to preserve those who receive their testimony,
from all the bewitching temptations of those other three, the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eye and the pride of life. Nay, here are two Threes of
infinitely greater virtue and efficacy to prevail with us, than all that the
WORLD'S Trinity can offer to us, if we will but open our ears, and diligently
listen to their voice.

And how can we choose but listen when the Father of Heaven calls to us so
graciously, when the Word opens his secrets to us, and the Holy Ghost proclaims
such an abundant love of God toward us: The Water, the Blood, the Spirit, they
also with one consent conspire with those, and all together sing this New Song,
THE SON OF GOD IS COME, the Son of God is come. This one note of theirs more
ravishes, than all the pleasures and satisfactions which the WORLD infatuates
its followers withal. Heaven and Earth cannot speak any thing more moving in
our ears than this, which again and again salutes them with new joy. For what
would you have them say? would it please you to hear that Infinite Goodness
loves us, that the Heavens stand open to us, and show us their glory, that God
is willing to receive us up thither, that he will make us Heirs of a Kingdom,
equal with the Angels, to hear their Songs, and join with that Celestial Quire?
Behold! they are all included in this one sentence, THE SON OF GOD IS COME. GOD
HAS GIVEN US HIS SON. This is the sweetest Air that can touch our ears: this
we can never be weary to hear: this strikes our souls, if we understand it, so
gratefully, that we cannot but say, let us hear that again. And therefore after
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost have blessed our ears with this joyful
sound; here are three more that take it up, and repeat it to us with the
strongest assurances, that we hear the Voice of God himself. And the oftener we
listen to them and lend them our attention (the more frequently, I mean, we
think upon the reasons we have to believe in Jesus) the more deaf shall we grow
to all the sinful allurements of this World, how inviting soever before they
have been. For my part, I think there is more real satisfaction in the very
understanding of this one place of Holy Scripture, than in all the delights of
worldly men. What is there, I beseech you consider, in all their sensualities
comparable to the rational gust of what is contained in that one voice of the
Father, THIS IS MY WELL BELOVED SON, IN WHOM I AM WELL PLEASED? What Riches are
there to be equalled with this treasure of Divine knowledge, that God has
bestowed his own Son upon us? What honor like to this, to be preferred to be
the Friends, yea the Sons of God? Can you hear any thing so delicious as that
voice of the WORD, To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of
life, in the midst of the Paradise of God? ii. Rev. 7. Were there ever any
Jewels so precious, as the inestimable gifts, wherewithal the Holy Ghost has
enriched the Church? what Music is there fit to bear a part, with those Hymns,
and Psalms, and spiritual Songs, that it inspired the hearts of Christians
withal? Does it not even ravish the heart of a pious man to think of them,
though he do not hear the like in these days? What is there in all the broken
Cisterns of this World, that tastes like the Rivers of living Water, that Jesus
has poured out unto us? What peace does it speak to us, like that which by the
Blood of Jesus is purchased for us? Or what power is there in any of this
Worlds temptation, that can stand before the voice of that SPIRIT which says
COME, and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely? xxii. Rev. 17.
Certainly, in the strength of such a faith so fortified, so encouraged by all
these Witnesses, we may easily tread the WORLD under our feet, and make its
most mighty temptations crouch to us; whereas now, for want of this solid faith
we shamefully bow down to it and worship it. Let but any man remember when he
reads these words, LOVE NOT THE WORLD; for all that is in the WORLD, the lust
of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the
Father, but is of the World. And the world passes away and the lust thereof;
but he that does the will of God abides for ever. Or when he reads any other
lesson in the holy Books, let him but remember, that thus says the Father of
all, and thus says his WORD, and this is the voice of the Holy Ghost, and of
all the rest of the Witnesses, who testify that Jesus who teaches these things
is the Son of God; and then he will never be persuaded to yield to the fairest
thing that ever eye beheld, or the sweetest thing the mouth can taste, or the
greatest pleasure any other sense is capable to feel, if it must be enjoyed by
the breaking of any of these commandments. No, he will yield himself unto God,
(vi. Romans 13.) and lay himself at the feet of his WORD, and submit to the
dictates and sentence of the Holy Ghost, and follow the example of Christ's
purity, and be made conformable to his Death, and be led by his Spirit, and
think it an honor to be conquered by such Defendants of the cause of Jesus. O
how hateful would every sin be to us, though it dress up it self never so
beautifully, and court us with never such promises of pleasure or greatness,
did we but at the same time reflect upon these Witnesses and remember what they
have testified to us! How should we desire it? How passionately should we tear
all its gaudy dresses in pieces? How heartily should we despise all its
temptations, which would have us slight all these great Witnesses, who tell us
the Son of God is come, and that he is come for this purpose, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil? 1 John iii. 8. Every unlawful enjoyment would
look like a manifest jeer to all these, and as if a man should say to them, Why
do you trouble your selves, this is our Darling, our God, and all your
persuasions shall not prevail with us to let it go. It would appear a contempt
of God; a laughing of his WORD to scorn, who came upon so needless, at least
fruitless an errand; a manifest challenge to the Holy Ghost, who by every sin
is boldly opposed. And what heart can endure to think of being guilty of such
madness? which throws dirt into this pure Water, I mean the life of Christ, and
treads his Blood under feet, and miscalls the Spirit of grace, as if it were
not the Truth, but had deceived the world when it told them, that this is the
will of God, even our sanctification. For God (says S. Paul) has not called us
unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. He therefore that despises, despises not
Man but God, who has also given unto us his holy SPIRIT, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 3, 7, 8.

To conclude this, you know what is commonly said, and it is a certain truth,
of those who are bit with a kind of Spider in Italy, which they call a
Tarantula, that there is no way to cure them of their pleasant frenzy, but by
such Music as is appropriate to the motions which their poison makes in the
brain of him, into whom it is infused. Let this be an Emblem of the truth I
have now delivered; that the old Serpent having envenomed men's Souls, poisoned
their principles, perverted their affections, and depraved their lives; there
is nothing of efficacy sufficient to recover them, but only such charms as
these, which by this six stringed Instrument, as I may call it, God has
provided for our Cure. And this will certainly do it, by infusing the Faith of
Jesus into us, which is the victory whereby we overcome the WORLD. Do but
hearken diligently to these Witnesses, do but mind their sweet consent, their
harmony and agreement in the testimony they give to this great truth, that
Jesus our Master is the Son of God; and there is no venom so deadly which this
Faith will not expel, no love to the WORLD so strong which it will not vanquish
and subdue. It will recover us to our selves, and make nothing seem so
ridiculous as the folly and frantickness of worldly men; yet it will advance us
to a Divine and Heavenly spirit, so that we shall not be apt to receive such
pestilent infusions any more, but keep our selves in the love of God, looking
for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

VI.
For I must add now, in the last place, that this Faith is so far from being
unable to conquer all temptations which would hinder us from obeying our
Savior's commands, that it gives us power and strength to do our duty with
cheerfulness. So S. John here tells us, when he adds to what he says of the
keeping of his Commandments, that HIS COMMANDMENTS ARE NOT GRIEVOUS. For (as
Oecumenius well glosses) what load is it for a man to love his Brother? What
great burden is it to visit him if he be in prison? God does not command thee
to deliver him, but only to visit him. He does not bid thee knock off his
chains, but see how he bears them. Nor does he bid thee cure a sick man, but
only comfort and relieve him. Nor provide dainties for a poor man, but only
feed him; nor give rich apparel to the naked, but only cloth them. And so we
may conclude of the rest, that it is rather an ease than a burden to be sober
and chaste in all enjoyments of pleasure; to be content with a small portion of
those things, which others desire with a greedy and ravenous eye; to bear with
that patiently which we cannot remedy; to be careful for nothing, but in every
thing to make known our requests to God with Prayer and Thanksgiving; to be
meek and peaceable amongst contentious people; to forgive those that injure us;
to envy no man's greatness; and with an humble modesty, to satisfy our selves
though we be not equal to them. These and such like qualities wherewith Jesus
would invest us, are in themselves most desirable; and, though richer than
cloth of Gold, are like our ordinary garments, which are no load to those that
wear them. But they are the less grievous to those that believe in Jesus; who
are endued with power from above, by receiving the testimony of so many Divine
Witnesses, who assure them they are in the way of God, in the company of his
Son, under the conduct of the Holy Ghost, in the direct rode to that glorious
place where Jesus is; and therefore why should not they rejoice and be
exceeding glad to find themselves thus happy? That load which to a sick man
seems intolerable, if it be laid on the neck of one in health is so easy, that
he can run away with it with pleasure. And so it is in the case of keeping
God's Commandments, which to a man that has spoiled his Soul by following
diverse lusts, are so far from being easy, that he thinks them insupportable
and impossible to be complied withal; but when he has recovered himself by the
faith of Christ, and has received the supply of these new and Heavenly
principles, they become to the very same man, not only tolerable, but sweet and
delightful. This faith would not be pleased to be excused from this burden; it
would take it ill not to draw in the same Yoke with Jesus; it naturally makes
us of his Spirit, who said, I delight to do thy will, O God. For what is it
that we believe? Is it not that Jesus is the Son of God; his well-beloved Son?
And shall we complain of that work, which was the business and the delight of
God's best beloved, when he was in the world? It would be too grievous an
accusation of God, to think that after he had filled the Earth with joy and
gladness for the coming of his Son, He should instantly quench it all, and turn
it into heaviness, by a number of such severe and intolerable Commandments, as
no man can look upon and not be melancholy. And what are the grounds of our
belief? Are they not all that Heaven and Earth can afford us? Are we not as
sure as God can make us? Phy! for shame then, what a reproach is it, that any
man should sigh and groan, look four and sad, as if he had all the burden of
Heaven and Earth to carry, when he has rather the aid and assistance of both to
support and strengthen him under an easy load?

Certain it is, that according to our knowledge and understanding, so will be
our Faith: and according to our faith, so will be our strength. Now how can
there be greater evidence and strength of Reason to induce us to believe than
these six Witnesses have given us? They fully satisfy our understandings; they
make it completely rational to acknowledge Jesus to be the Son of God. And
therefore why should not this Faith, thus begot and standing on such sure
foundations, give us a very great strength, courage, cheerfulness and spirit;
making difficult things become easy, harsh things become sweet, and the most
tedious stay in this world comfortable, by presenting us, and that so strongly,
with the power and glory of the Lord Jesus? This Faith you see rests upon these
six Columns, upon these two rows of Pillars (as I may so speak) on the one side
stands the testimony of the FATHER, the WORD, and the HOLY GHOST; on the other
side, the testimony of the WATER, the BLOOD, and the SPIRIT: and therefore
nothing will be too great a burden to lay upon it; it will support any weight,
and never let us groan, much less break under its load. All things are EAST as
well as POSSIBLE to him that believes.

It is the observation of Seneca, I remember, that nothing is so hard but the
mind of man can master it, and make it familiar, by constant thoughts and pains
about it. There are no motions so natural, but some by labor have restrained
them, and made the forbearance of them easy: and none again so unnatural but
by the like daily practice and attention they have brought themselves to the
delightful use of them. As some have kept long and tedious fasts, others
perpetual silence, and have lived out of the company of all mankind, which are
examples of the former kind. And we see instances of the latter, in those who
learn to walk and dance upon ropes, to work with their feet, and to dive into
the excessive depths of the Sea. And can the mind of man alone, when it buckles
it self to the business, be able to perform such difficult things with ease and
satisfaction; and yet remain utterly unable to take any contentment in
obedience to Christ's Precepts, though it be exalted by faith, and a faith so
strong, as these six Witnesses, if we attend, will work in us? May things to
which nature is not inclined be accomplished at last, and become habitual, and
we think God too severe to expect from us those duties which are most agreeable
to our natures, as all the actions of virtue are? And shall a weaker power
master those hard and unnatural tasks, and a power stronger than all others
sink under the burden of the most reasonable, and, in themselves, most natural
Commandments? It cannot but put a considering person into a little indignation,
to hear men complain of the uneasiness of Christ's yoke, when they lay more
troublesome and unmerciful burdens upon themselves, without any murmuring. How
can one see men, without some impatience, contend with swift horses, and
endeavor to outrun them, and yet cry out of the tediousness of the race of
God's Commandments? Shall any man persuade us, that it is not so easy to learn
the way of God's testimonies, as it is to work with his feet, or go upon his
hands? Shall they make us believe it is so hard a business to bend their wills
to God's, when we see their bodies made as supple as wax, that they may wreath
them about at pleasure? Can it be half so troublesome to lay a bridle on our
tongues, as it is never to speak at all? O man! where is thy Reason, what is
become of thy Soul, that thou groanest in the service of God, and can make a
sport of far more grievous things? Thy own mind might teach thee better, if
thou would but hearken to its instructions; and therefore what may not God
expect from the Faith I am speaking of, which is a far more powerful Principle,
and has made Men stop the mouths of Lions, quench the violence of Fire, endure
torture and not accept deliverance, when it was much weaker than our faith need
now be? I will engage that if a man do but use himself frequently to ponder
these words of S. John, and persuade himself fully, upon the testimony of these
Witnesses that Jesus is the Son of God, He will account it a small business to
deny his own will as Jesus did. He will never complain that he must refrain
from any thing in obedience to him; and whatsoever he requires him to do, he
will esteem it an excessive pleasure. For there can remain no doubt in his
mind, that if he be the Son of God, he has power to help us and that he will
ever be assistant to us and bless us; because by this faith he dwells in us
and we in him.

I have read of one, of a Noble Family, delicately educated, and of a tender
health, who had a great mind to enter upon a Religious course of life (as they
speak in the Roman Church) but was afrighted out of those thoughts by the
apparent difficulty of the exercises wherein he was to be employed; for their
ill diet, retirement, poverty, watchings and such like hardships he imagined
could not be endured. Till one day reading those words of the Psalmist, which
like a flash of lightning struck into his mind (xviii. Psalm. 33. He makes my
feet like Hindes feet, and sets me upon my high places (which he expounded
to this sense, God will enable me with speed and easiness to run, not only upon
the even ground and over the plains, but in craggy and steep places; he will
lead me not only upon the level, but assist me to climb Mountains and to
overtop the highest difficulties that are in my way to Heaven and) immediately
he found all his fears vanish, his resolutions determined, and such a courage
put into him, that from this time forward he was immoveably bent to that
formerly dreadful kind of life. Would not this word of God then, think you,
which I have expounded, inspire us with as manly a resolution and greatness of
mind to obey God's unquestionable commands, if we did but suffer it to
penetrate into our hearts? Did we but conceive that we heard the Father say to
us perpetually, This is my Son, This that came by Water and Blood, that climbed
even the cross it self that surmounted the highest difficulties, He is my
beloved Son; and if we thought we heard the WORD say, the Son of God is come,
God is manifested in the flesh; and felt the Holy Ghost inspiring him with the
same heavenly thoughts; the whole glorious Trinity telling us, they will assist
us, and afford us their continual help; it could not but give wings, as I may
say, to our feet, and make us skip over the most mountainous discouragements,
and run the ways of God's commandments, and not be tired; that we might follow
after, and go to the blessed Jesus. For the course of life which that Gentleman
affected, was that of a Religious Order (as they call it) where they are tied
to do more than God commands, to live by a Rule stricter than the Gospel, and
under the Will of a Superior, whom they are bound to obey, as if he were
Christ himself: And it was not the literal sense of the place neither which
thus animated him, and put it into his heart to undergo such a servitude. And
therefore if he did the will of men so cheerfully, and undertook more than God
requires of us, and upon a weaker persuasion, by accommodating the sense of an
holy word to his own present thoughts; there is no doubt but a right faith
would indue us with the like power (notwithstanding the appearance of great
labors) in the true service of God, in obedience to his indispensable
commands: we having this word of God to strengthen our faith, the prime and
natural intention of which is to make us confident, that He who leads us in
this way, the Captain that conducts us, is Gods Son, his most dearly beloved;
who cannot but be as faithful as he is powerful to make good all his promises
to us.

And we should the rather strive to follow after him, and to run with joy the
race that is set before us, because then we shall have the honor still to
testify to him upon Earth; we shall be his WITNESSES and prove at this day, by
his mighty power in our hearts and lives, that he is the Son of God. Turks and
Jews that read not our Books, cannot be convinced by any arguments at present,
so much as by this. They see how we live; but we can show them no Miracles to
convince them, nor can we make them hear the voice from Heaven for their
conversion; till we can recommend our Bible to their serious consideration. And
the only way to do that, is for us to live more justly, soberly, charitably and
piously than the rest of the World. By which means they may be brought to have
better thoughts of Jesus, by having good thoughts of us; and be induced to read
our Books, by seeing so much of them in our good works. And what happy days
might we hope to see could we but use this argument to prove Jesus to be the
Son of God; that no men are so good, so holy and pure, so peaceable and
kind-hearted, so free from fraud and all guile, as those who are called by his
Name? How glorious then would the name of our Lord be over all the world? His
word would run, and be glorified (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Thessalonians. iii. 1.) just
as it did in ancient days; when they could say confidently, Non de nostro, sed
ex illorum numero, etc. Lact. lib. 5. cap. 19.
. They are not of our company, but of theirs (that follow the Heathen
superstition) who rob and steal by Sea and Land, who murder and kill, who cheat
and cozen, who drink and swill, who prostitute their bodies and profane
themselves by filthy fusts; the Whores, the Fornicators, the Cheats, the
Forgers of Wills and Testaments, the Drunkards, the Thieves, the perjured
Persons, and all the rest of the wicked crew are of their number: nothing of
this can be objected to our People, whose whole Religion is to live without
wickedness, nay without any spot or blemish. How would it stop the mouth of all
the world, nay make them fall down and confess that God is certainly among us,
could we but say thus in our days and make such a challenge to Turks and all
other unbelievers? Shall we always let our Savior want this noble testimony?
Shall we do nothing but talk of him, and prattle of our Faith, and make our
boast that we are right Believers, and damn all Infidel People? Alas, alas!
these big words will do nothing. As long as they see us live no better than
they, we shall not persuade them that we believe better. And therefore let us
have this worthy ambition in our hearts, to become WITNESSES our selves unto
Jesus. Let us study how to show forth his praises, (or rather Powers (...), 1
Pet. 2.9.
who has called us into this mavelous light. And since we cannot do it by
Miracles, let us do it by well doing and patient continuance in it. So shall
the Name of our Lord Jesus be glorified in us, and we in him, according to the
grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ (2 Thessalonians. i. 12.) who at his
appearing will bear WITNESS to us (xi. Hebr. 4.) that we were faithful and
righteous, by receiving us, as God did Abel's gifts, up unto himself.

For hereby also we shall be instruments of conveying this Faith down to
Posterity, with some power. Would you not have them believe the same that you
do? Is it not your desire that the next Age may confess him, as well as this?
There is no such effectual means can be thought of to promote and propagate his
Faith, as the fruits of it in an holy life. This will make men afraid now to
speak evil of him; and this will teach our Children after us to be zealous
professors of Christianity, and not such cold believers or such infidels as we
see and hear of in the World. Assure your selves it is Profaneness which has
made so many unbelievers in this Age. Increase of wickedness not only in
themselves but others, has made some so impudent as to scoff at Religion and
blaspheme Christ. While they see those who acknowledge him do no better than
themselves, they are inclined to think that their belief makes them no more
worth, than those who have none at all. Nay, since they concur with them in
their wicked practices, they imagine that their fear of Hell, and hope of
Heaven is no part of their belief, but only of their profession. The hands of
Infidels are strengthened in their impieties, by the perfidiousness of ungodly
believers. They join with them to pull down Christian belief; and make that be
thought nothing, which does nothing above what infidelity does. And therefore
let all those who love the memory of our Savior, who love their posterity, and
would not have them in danger to be drowned in a deluge of infidelity, put a
stop to it; by holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience. 1 Timothy
iii. 9. Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity, and
endeavor all he can to support the honor of his Name and of his Religion, by
a strict observance of all his holy commands. They who believe not or mind not
what they believe, may think it strange that you run not with them to the same
excess of riot, speaking evil of you (1 Pet. iv. 4.) But ye beloved, building
up your selves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your
selves in love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal life. Jude 20.21.

And that now is the next thing which flows from hence. If we believe the
Record or Witness which God has given of his Son, it contains in it the
greatest joy in the World. For this is the record, that God has given to us
eternal life: and this life is in his Son. But I must refer that to another
Discourse alone by it self.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.
GLory in the highest; Let the Holy and undivided Trinity be for ever glorified
by all Mankind; especially by all Christian People: who are made partakers of
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the communion of the
Holy Ghost. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him: But
God has revealed them unto us by his spirit. Blessed be God.

I most thankfully receive the manifold testimony which he has given of his
well beloved Son; and humbly bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, of whom the whole family of Heaven and Earth is named, that he would
grant me according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by
the same spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in my heart by faith;
that being rooted and grounded in love, I may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the
love of Christ which passes knowledge, that I may be filled with all the
fullness of God.

And God forbid that any Soul who hears the voice of these Witnesses of God,
should refuse and turn away from him that speaks from Heaven: and has
declared to us the unsearchable riches of God's grace, and the whole counsel of
his will. O that all they, upon whom the glorious Gospel of Christ has shined,
may most heartily believe in his Name. Let them all be knit together in love,
unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment
of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ; in whom are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And God forbid, that any of them should
hold the truth in unrighteousness. But as they have received Christ Jesus the
Lord, so let them walk in him; rooted and built up in him, and established in
the faith, as they have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.

And quicken that faith, O thou author and finisher of it, that it may work
with great power in all Christian hearts: and mightily bow their wills to forgo
any of their own desires, rather than displease thee, and forfeit thy love and
favor. Let it enable them to overcome the World; that they may be no longer
slaves to the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye and the pride of life;
but conquering all these, may yield themselves unto God to be the servants of
righteousness, and obey from the heart that form of doctrine which is delivered
unto them. And may the powerful working of faith and love and hope, make all
our duty easy to us; that we may ever render thee cheerful as well as constant
service. May thy testimonies be our daily delight, and the rejoicing of our
heart. May we love them above gold, yea above fine gold. May they be dearer
unto us than thousands of gold and silver. May we daily renew our strength; and
run and not be weary, and walk and not faint. May the holiness of our lives
bear witness to the sincerity of our faith; that others may glorify thee our
God for our professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ. And we obtaining a
good report by faith, and carrying this testimony out of the world with us,
that we have pleased thee; thou may receive us to thy self, to be glorified
with thee, and to rejoice in thy love toward us for ever. Amen.

THE END.
Our Lords Ascension.
Acts. 1: 9. And when he had spoken these things, while they be: held, he was
taken up, and a Cloud received him out of their sight to And while they
steadfastly looked toward heaven, behold two men stood by them in white
apparel. H. Which also said, this same le sus shall so come, as you have seen
him go into heaven. depiction of the Ascension of Jesus

THE WITNESSES TO CHRISTIANITY; OR, The Certainty of our FAITH and HOPE: In a
Discourse upon 1 S. JOHN V. 11.

PART II.

By SIMON PATRICK, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
Majesty. MDCLXXVII.

TO The most Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, By Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of CANTERBURY, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan; and one of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please Your Grace
TO cast your eye upon the Second Part of that Work, the First Part of which I
took the confidence to address unto your Grace the last year. It is concerning
that ETERNAL LIFE which was with the Father, as St. John speaks; and now is
manifested to us by his Son Jesus Christ, who has published the most gracious
Purposes of God the Father toward us. The thoughts of which, as they cannot
but be at all times exceeding welcome to Devout Christians, (especially to
those who are faithful Ministers in Christ's Kingdom*) so never more, then
when they see their Departure is at hand. In which regards I doubt not this
Treatise will be acceptable to your Grace, because it contains a Description
and full Assurance of that happy Life which you shortly expect. For there is
nothing so reviving in our declining Age, as to think that the passage out of
this Life leads us not to Death, but to Immortality: and that it will not take
away our Happiness from us, but give us a purer enjoyment of it: Pleasure not
mixed with a mortal body, but sincere and free from Grief and Sorrow. For when
we shall be set at liberty and delivered from this Prison, we shall come
thither where there is no Labor, no Sighing, nor Old age: but a Life of
perfect ease and tranquillity, that breeds no trouble, nor any other evil; but
is serene and clear in an immovable Rest and Peace. Where the happy Inhabitants
sweetly contemplate the nature of things; and philosophize, not for Popularity
and the Theater, but for the finding out solid and everlasting Truth.

I have but translated the words of Plato in Axiocho, p. 370.
(or of some other Philosopher that has borrowed his name,) who was much
pleased in such thoughts as these: though he made but uncertain guesses at that
blessed state, which our Lord has so clearly revealed, and so strongly
demonstrated; that we have reason, with never-ceasing joy, both in life and
death to give him thanks for so great a Grace. For as there is nothing beyond
this that the heart of man can wish; so nothing of such importance to our
present Happiness in this World. For which cause the Jews have thought fit to
expunge those from the number of Israelites, who do not believe the Immortality
of the Soul, and the Resurrection of the dead: and to resolve, that they shall
have no part in the World to come, though they otherwise live orderly, and
observe the Precepts of the Law. For such men, they saw, opened a door to all
licentiousness; and could never do so much good by any other means, as they
did hurt by subverting this Belief.

Which I have endeavored therefore to establish by such Arguments, as they
were ignorant of, till our Blessed Lord and Savior appeared: who, as St.
Matthew observes out of the Psalmist, uttered things which had been kept secret
from the foundation of the World. Maimonides himself says, in his last Chapter
of his Book concerning Kings, that at the coming of Christ, things hidden and
profound shall be laid open and revealed to all. Which is true of nothing more,
I have shown, then of that which is the greatest desire of all mankind,
immortal Life. Of which though I have not treated according to the dignity of
the Subject; yet I am confident I have laid a good Foundation, to be improved
by the labors of those who have more skill and more leisure. And it is a very
great satisfaction, to have done any thing (though never so small) for the
honor of our ever-Blessed Lord and Master: whom it is the highest glory in the
world to serve in faithfulness and truth. For He will not fail to reward such
services with an ample recompense: being a Prince so great, that nothing is
beyond his Power; and so gracious, that his Servants have reason to expect the
best effects of his Good will. Which may very well content us, whatsoever usage
we meet withal at present: And should mightily excite us, as St. Chrysostom
often and earnestly exhorts Homil. 87. in Matthew. p. 539.
, neglecting the suspicions, and the reproaches, and the praises too of men, to
study this one thing alone; how to be conscious to our selves of no evil:
which will bring us in the end, both here and hereafter, the greater glory.

The God of all Grace bless this Work to the settling and increasing this holy
Faith and Resolution in all our hearts; whereby we shall also obtain the
sweetest foretasts of the Joys of the future State. And may your Grace be blessed
with many of them, to support the infirmities of Old age; and having finished
your days, have an easy passage to that better Life; and there receive from
the Chief Pastor, when he shall appear, the Crown of glory which fades not
away. Which is the hearty Prayer of

My Lord, Your GRACE's in all dutiful Observance, SY. PATRICK.

TO THE READER.
I Have no other reason to give for adding one more to that heap of Books,
which men complain is already grown too great; but the hope I have of doing
some service to our Lord, by making a farther search (as I promised in the
conclusion of the former Part of this Work) into the Testimony of these Divine
Witnesses, concerning ETERNAL LIFE.

The Hope of which is the most precious Legacy the Son of God has left us; the
Hindge upon which all Religion turns: without which it would be the greatest
Vanity (as Lactantius Lib. vi. c. 9. vii. 1.
often speaks) to obey the commands of Virtue; for whose sake we must endure
not only many Labors, but ofttimes sore Calamities. We were born (as he
discourses elsewhere Lib. vii. 6.
) to acknowledge God the Maker of us and of the World: whom we therefore
acknowledge, that we may worship him; and therefore worship him, that we may
receive Immortality for a reward of our labors, (because his service ingages
us in the greatest:) and therefore Immortality is bestowed on us for a
recompenc^, that, being made like to the Angels, we may serve the Father and
Lord of all for ever, and be the Eternal Kingdom of God. This is the Chief of
all things, this is the Secret of God, this is the Mystery of the World: to
which they are strangers, who, following their present pleasures, have addicted
themselves to terrestrial and frail goods; and sunk their Souls, born to
celestial enjoyments, into delights as deadly as they are muddy and dirty.

And it is the singular Privilege of Christians, as I have demonstrated, to be
assured of a Good so great, by so many most credible Witnesses: whose Testimony
none can refuse, but they that will be so absurd as to believe none at all. The
Father, the Word, the Holy Ghost, the Water, the Blood, and the Spirit, declare
so unanimously and so plainly, that the Lord Jesus will give Eternal Life to
his followers; that what the Orators said in flattery to the Athenians in the
time of the Chremonidian War, may in truth be said to us, if we alter but one
word: that other things indeed are common to us with the rest of the World;
Athenzus in Deipnosoph. L. vi. p. 250.
(...), but the way that leads men to heaven is known to Christians alone. Who
have a manifold grace bestowed on them; enjoying not only a Promise of
Eternal Life, (which the World never had before,) but that Promise attested by
so many Witnesses: who tell us also, it is in the power of him that died for
us, to conferr it on us; as well as to show us by what means we may become so
exceeding Blessed.

The serious Reader, I doubt not, will be sensible of all this, when he has
perused the following Work. In which I have endeavored to satisfy those also,
who wish I had said something of that part of this Record which I undertook to
explain; THESE THREE ARE ONE. Which words, I have reason to believe,
(whatsoever the Socinians have pretended to the contrary,) were always a part
of this Holy Scripture. For they are alleged by Saint Cyprian in his Book of
the Unity of the Catholic Church; to show how dangerous it is to break that
Unity, by the clashing of our wills, which not only coheres by celestial
Sacraments, but proceeds, as he speaks, from the Divine firmness. For our Lord
says, I and the Father are one. And again, it is written of the Father and the
Son and the Holy Ghost, Et hi tres unum sunt, And these three are one. By which
that the Apostie would have us to understand, not merely the consent of their
Testimony, (though that is not to be excluded,) but the Unity of their Nature
or Essence, we have great reason to think. Because there can no account be
given, why he should not use the same form of speech here, which follows, when
he speaks of the other three Witnesses; if these three in Heaven were no
otherwise three then those three in Earth. Which being admitted, (and if we
take in the constant sense of the Church to interpret the words, we cannot make
any farther doubt of it,) that these three are one in their Essence; then it is
certain there are Three Persons, whose Essence is one and the same. For else
there would not be three Witnesses in heaven, but only one: which would cross
the design of the Apostle; whose scope is, to show that our Faith does not rely
upon a single Testimony. And indeed the Holy Scriptures, in other places,
ascribe such Actions and Works to each of them, as are proper to Persons: which
is a sufficient warrant to the Church, to express the distinction that is
between them by this Name. Non quia Scriptura dicit, (as St. Augustine Lib.
vii. de Trinitate, cap. 4.
speaks concerning this very business,) sed quia Scriptura non contradicit; Not
because the Scripture says they are Persons, but because the Scripture does
not say the contrary: but rather, I may add, directs us to say they are, for
the reason before mentioned. When humane scantness (as that Holy Doctor of the
Church goes on) endeavored to express in words that which it conceived in the
secret of the mind concerning our Lord God the Creator, it was afraid to say
there were three Essences; lest any diversity should be thought to be in that
highest Equality: and on the other side, to say there were not tria quaedam,
really three, was to fall into the heresy of Sabellius. For it is certain there
is the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and that the Son is not the
Father, nor the Holy Ghost the Father or the Son. It sought therefore what
three it should call them; and it said, three Persons; (as the Latin Church
speaks;) by which Name it would not have any diversity understood, but only
singularity. That not only Unity should be there conceived, because we say
there is one Essence; but a Trinity also, because we say there are three
Persons.

This Faith we ought to defend; and in this simple belief we ought, I have
shown, to acquiesce. We ought to defend it, because it is the Catholic Faith,
revealed in the Holy Scriptures; according as they have been always understood
by the Church of Christ. For it is sufficient (as St. Gregory Nyssen Lib. iii.
contra Eunomium, p. 126.
excellently discourses against those that demanded more proof of these things)
to the demonstration of this Doctrine, that we have a Tradition descended to
us, like an inheritance, by succession from the Apostles; and transmitted
through the hands of holy men that followed them. They that will innovate, need
the help of mighty arguments, if they will go about to shake the Faith, not of
men built on the sand, and wavering like Euripus, but grave, settled, and
constant in their opinion. And while we see nothing but mere discourse against
it, (...), who is there so silly and brutish, as to think the Doctrine of the
Evangelists and Apostles, and of those Lights that succeeded them in the
Church, to be weaker then their Babble without demonstration?

But we shall not wholly avoid the imputation of folly, unless we also rest
satisfied in this plain belief; not busying our selves in more curious
enquiries. For the greatest Lights in the Church, I have shown, will lead us no
farther; but tell us we shall groap in darkness, if we will needs pry too much
into this Mystery. Which we ought to discourse of as becomes Divines, not
Philosophers. Lest, as Henricus a Gandava censures Albertus Magnus, (in his
Book of Ecclesiastical Writers,) whilst we follow too much the subtilty of
secular Philosophy, we cloud the splendor of Theological purity. We must
remember that we are men, and that our understandings are but shallow: which
ought not therefore to venture boldly into such depths as that of the Divine
Essence. There is nothing so much becomes us, when we think of God, as an holy
fear and reverence, producing in us low thoughts of our selves. Without which
we are not like to be illuminated from above; nor can we, should we know never
so much, be acceptable to God. Quid enim prodest alta de Trinitate disputare,
si careas humilitate, unde displiceas Trinitati? (as Thomas a Kempis honestly
speaks:) For what will it profit thee to dispute loftily of the Trinity, if,
through want of humility, thou displeasest the Trinity?

The way to ETERNAL LIFE, it is certain, lies in that rode; which we shall be
in danger to miss, if we give our selves too great a liberty of disputing about
things so much above our reach. We ought to be aware of this artifice of the
grand Deceiver: who is wont to draw us secretly from attending to our known
duty, while we are amusing our selves with sublime speculations. Which the holy
Fathers of the Church have carefully observed, and cautioned us against by
their severe reproofs. What means (says Saint Gregory Nazianzen Orat. xxxiii.
p. 533.
) this ambitious humor of disputing, and itch of the tongue? what new disease
and unsatiable appetite is this? While our hands are bound, why do we arm our
tongue? Hospitality, Brotherly love, Conjugall affection, Virginity, are no
longer praised. Feeding the poor, Psalmody, Nocturnall stations, Tears are not
now in request. We do not bring under the body by Fastings; nor leave it a
while, to go to God by Prayer. We do not bring the worse in subjection to the
better; the Dust, I mean, to the Spirit. We do not make our life a meditation
of death. Our Passions are not mastered. Forgetting our heavenly Original, we
let anger swell and rage; and take no care to suppress that pride and
haughtiness which will at last lay us low. We do not chastise irrational
sadness, nor foolish pleasure, nor unchaste laughter, nor disorderly aspects,
nor unsatiable hearing, nor immoderate talking, nor absurd thoughts, nor any of
those things by which the Evil one takes advantage against us to our ruin.
There is nothing like to this; but quite contrary, we give liberty to other
men's evil affections, and (like Princes when they have got the Victory)
require nothing of them, but only that they be on our side, and take our part:
though they oppose God the more impiously and audaciously.

These things, it seems, were then too manifest to be denied; and
notwithstanding these reproaches of holy men, the humor propagated it self to
aftertimes. For the cure or prevention of which, nothing is so necessary to be
believed and preserved perpetually in mind, as that Counsel which the same
great Doctor gives in another place Orat. xxix. p. 493.
. (...), etc. Would thou be a Divine, and worthy of God? (...), Keep the
Commandments: Go in the way of God's precepts. Practice is the best step thou
can take to contemplation. Which is the surest advice for all Christians to
follow: who must not think by any other means to arrive at that blissfull sight
of God; in which our knowledge of him will be perfected in the other World.

Of which Beatificall Vision I have not adventured to say much in the ensuing
Treatise, because our manner of living (as Saint Augustine Epist. cxii. ad
Paulinam.
speaks in an Epistle of his upon this very subject) is of more consideration
in this inquiry, then our manner of speaking. Nam qui didicerunt a Domino Jesu
mites esse and humiles cord, plus cogitando and orando proficiunt, quam
legendo and audiendo. For they that have learned of the Lord Jesus to be lowly
and humble in heart, profit more by meditation and prayer, then they can by
reading and hearing. But something I have said, as far as I could find any
directions in the Holy Scriptures: which warrant us to conclude, that the
participation we have of God now, shall be so improved in the other World, that
whatsoever we enjoy of him here, we shall in a higher and after a more perfect
manner, with the addition of immortality, enjoy when we rise from the dead. We
are now the Sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus; who bids us be confident of
it, and rejoice in it: And yet he mentions this as a special privilege
belonging to us after the resurrection; when we shall not marry nor die any
more, but be equal to the Angels, and be (...) the Sons of God, being the
children of the Resurrection. xx. Luke 35, 36. Just as it was with our Lord
Christ himself, who was in a more special and excellent manner called the Son
of God, after his rising from the dead; when God said to him, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee: (advanced him, that is, to a more excellent
degree of likeness to him in power and dominion, putting all things under his
feet:) So it shall be with all those Sons whom he brings unto glory. They shall
be more nearly related to God, at the Resurrection, and resemble him more
exactly; whose Image they now bear in Wisdom and Goodness. But how much he
will then impart of himself to us, the Apostles themselves were not able to
inform us. We are now the Sons of God, faith Saint John 1 Ep. iii. 2. but it
does not yet appear (...), how we shall be the Sons of God, in the other world.
We now find (I may add by a parity of reason) a great pleasure in holy
thoughts; we feel the joys of ardent love; are ravished with the melody of Songs
of praise, and with the sweet violence of a glance of light from heaven upon
us; and we are fure we shall be so happy as to have a great increase of this
pleasure, when we remove from hence: But it does not appear how we shall think;
nor what will be the satisfaction of heavenly Love; nor what new Songs shall be
put into our mouths; nor how God will look in upon us, when we shall see him as
he is. We must be content to know, that all these will bear a proportion to the
infinite Goodness of Him who is Omnipotent, and has loved us so much as to
purchase us with a great price, and to give his Holy Spirit to us; and
according to the Love of him that died for us, and is gone to prepare a place
for us, that where he is, there we may be also.

In this hope we may now rejoice (though we do not at present see our Lord)
with joy unspeakable and full of glory. For I have proved, by undeniable
arguments, that God the Father has given power to his Son Jesus, to make us
more happy then we can now conceive; and that He will undoubtedly bring us to
live with himself. What greater Good can we desire then this? Or what greater
Motive can be thought of, to persuade us sincerely to embrace the Christian
Religion; whose business it is, (as Lactantius concludes his Book of a Blessed
Life,) to direct us to the Eternal Rewards of the heavenly Treasure? Of which
that we may be capable, we must presently disingage our selves from the
insnaring pleasures of this Life; which deceive men's Souls by their pernicious
sweetness. And how great a felicity ought we to esteem it, to go, being
delivered from the impurities of this Earth, to that most equal Judge, and
most indulgent Father; who for our labors will give us rest, for death life,
for darkness light, for earthly short goods, those that are celestial and
eternal? None of the sharpnesses and miseries which we endure here, while we
are employed in the works of righteousness, are in any manner to be compared
with that reward. Therefore if we will be wise, if we will be happy, let us
propose the worst things, that can be, to our selves, and resolve to suffer
them: since it is manifest, that this frail Pleasure we have here shall not be
without punishment; nor Virtue without a divine reward. All mankind ought to
endeavor, with all speed, to direct themselves into the right way; that,
having undertaken and performed the duties of a virtuous life, and patiently
endured its labors, they may be worthy to have God for their Comforter. For
our Father and Lord, who made and settled the Heaven, who brought the Sun and
the rest of the Stars into it, and out of Nothing raised the rest of the World
to this perfection wherein we see it, beholding the Errors of mankind, sent a
Leader, who should lay before us the way of righteousness. Him let us all
follow: Him let us hear: Him let us most devoutly obey. For He alone has
purged men's hearts by his truth, and set due bounds to their desires and fears;
showing them the chiefest Good, to which they should tend, and the way whereby
it may be attained. Nor has He only shown it, but he has gone before us in
it; lest any should shun the course of Virtue, because of the difficulty that
attends it. Let the way of perdition and deceit therefore be forsaken; in which
death lies concealed under the inticements of pleasure. And the nearer any man,
by reason of his years, sees that day approaching in which he must depart this
life, let him cast in his mind the more seriously, how he may go away as pure
as may be; how he may come innocent to his Judge; and not, as those whose minds
are blinded, how he may satisfy his lusts more greedily before he go. Let
every man deliver himself out of that gulf, while he may, while he has some
power; and convert to God with his whole Soul: that he may securely expect that
day, in which God, the Lord and Governor of the World, will judge every man's
works and thoughts. Let him not only neglect, but fly from, those things of
which men are now so greedy. Let him look upon his Soul as better then these
fallacious goods, whose possession is uncertain and fading. For they go away
continually, more swiftly then they come: and if we could enjoy them to the
last, they must be left to others. We can carry nothing away, but a life
piously and innocently led. He shall come rich and wealthy to God, whom
Continence, Mercy, Patience, Charity and Faith shall wait upon. This is our
Inheritance, which can neither be taken from any man, nor transferred to
another. And whosoever is desirous of it, may have it if he please. But let no
man trust in Riches, nor in Dignity, nor in Kingly Power: these do not make us
immortal. Let us give our mind to Righteousness, which alone will be our
inseparable Companion, till it bring us to God. As long as we live, let us
continue our warfare unweariedly; let us keep our watch; let us valiantly
encounter with the enemy: that being conquerours, and triumphing over the
vanquished adversary, we may receive from our Lord the reward of Virtue, which
he has promised.

There is the greatest reason, I have demonstrated, to expect it with such a
lively Faith as was in the first Christians, (in whose words I have chosen to
deliver these things, rather then mine own,) who confidently looked Death in
the face, in whatsoever shape it appeared; and were not in the least daunted at
the sight of it. There were innumerable experiments made of it, not only in
Men, but in Women and Children; as the great Athanasius (...), etc. p. 80, etc.
justly glories. Who takes this to be no small token of the abolishing death,
(so that it had no power, but was indeed dead it self,) that it was contemned
by all the Disciples of Christ. Before whose Divine appearing, (...), it was
dreadful to the Saints themselves, who bewailed and lamented those that died,
as if they were lost. But since our Savior rose from the dead, it is no longer
terrible; but all that believe on him tread it under foot, as if it were
nothing; and choose rather to die, then deny the Faith of Christ. For they know
certainly that the dead do not perish; but that they both live, and shall also
be made incorruptible by the Resurrection. That Evil one, the Devil, who
heretofore by death insulted over us, is himself alone now left truly dead. Of
which this is a sign, that, whereas before men believed on Christ, they looked
on Death as very formidable; since they embraced his Faith and Doctrine, they
do so much slight it, that they run cheerfully to it, and become Witnesses
against him of our Savior's Resurrection. Mere Children make nothing of it.
The weaker Sex, (so weak is he that had the power of Death now grown,) who were
formerly deceived by him, laugh him to scorn, as one that is dead, and has
lost his power. Just as a Tyrant, when a lawful Prince has vanquished him, and
bound him hand and foot, is despised, and made a mocking-stock by all that pass
by him, who no longer fear his rage and cruelty: even so is Death, being
overcome by our Savior, trampled upon by all his Disciples; who bearing
witness to their Master, deride it in those words of the Apostle, O Death,
where is thy Victory? O grave, where is thy sting? What conquests have thou to
brag of now? Behold, we are all made alive, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Mankind, it is certain, naturally abhors Death, and the dissolution of their
Body; and therefore it is no small demonstration of our Savior's victory over
it, that he has so changed the nature of man, as to persuade even children in
Christ, and tender girls, to make no account of this Life, and with joy to
think of Death. It may seem to some an incredible thing, that Death should thus
have lost its power: but so it does, that there should be a cloth made of an
Indian stone, which fire cannot burn; or that a mighty Tyrant, notwithstanding
all his forces, should on a sudden be subdued, and held in chains, by no
visible power. Let him that doubts of either of these put on that cloth, or go
into the Dominions of the Conqueror; and he shall be satisfied of the weakness
of the fire, and of the Tyrant. In like manner, if we meet with an Unbeliever,
who, after so many Wonders and so many Martyrs of Jesus Christ, makes a doubt
whether Death be destroyed, and a period put to his Kingdom; we cannot blame
his admiration at so great a thing: provided he do not harden himself in
infidelity, nor impudently oppose those things which are most evident. Let him,
for his satisfaction, do as he that would know whether such a Tyrant, as I now
spoke of, be vanquished; go into the Conquerour's Country, submit himself, I
mean, to Christian instruction, and receive the Faith of Christ; and then he
shall soon see the weakness of Death, and the victory that is got over it.
(...), etc. For many who were once not only Unbelievers, but Mockers, have
afterward believed; and so contemned Death, that they have become Martyrs for
Christ 's sake.

I pray God these Treatises may have the like happy effect upon some doubting
or unbelieving Soul, who shall vouchsafe to examine the Evidence I have
produced for the Christian Faith. Against which I beseech such persons not to
shut their eyes, nor harden their hearts in infidelity. If they will condescend
so far, as to consider what we say; they may, of Scoffers, become such zealous
Assertours of the power and glory of the Lord Jesus, as to be willing and ready
(though there will be no occasion, I hope, to try their resolution) to testify
their love to him, and hope in him, with the loss of their lives. And as long
as they live, they will find it the highest of all pleasures, to think that
they shall never die. Of which happiness we can by no means be so well secured,
as by the Christian Religion. All the Philosophers of greatest fame (as
Eusebius Lib. 1. Prapar. Evang. c. 4.
observes) talked like Children about the Immortality of the Soul, in comparison
with Christians. Among whom, says he, boys and girls, and those Barbarians
too, and the most despicable people, declare this truth (...), not so much by
their discourses as by their deeds, which they perform by the power and
cooperation of our Savior. The Discourses of Aristotle about this matter are
justly said by Saint Greg. Nazianzen Orat. xxxiii. p. 535.
to be (...) because, as Jacobus Billius has demonstrated, he thought the
Souls of men to be mortal. And accordingly Theodoret ranks him, in this
regard, with Democritus and Epicurus, who boldly said they were corruptible. So
little force was there, as he also observes Lib. v. Therapentices, p. 546. 556.
, in the many discourses of the most wise Plato, to prove the Soul's
Immortality; which could not make his greatest Scholar in love with his
Opinion. Whereas our Fishermen, and Publicans, and Shoemakers, persuaded both
Greeks, and Romans, and Egyptians, and all other Nations of mankind, to believe
it. And you shall see, says he, not only the Doctors of the Church, but
Smiths and Weavers, and other Artizans, both men and women, that understand
these things. And not only such people as live in cities, but poor countrymen
are so well instructed, that one may find a Ditcher or a Neatherd discoursing
of the Holy Trinity, of the Creation of the World; and that knows more of
humane Nature then either Aristotle or Plato.

For Plato himself was not constant in his Opinions about the state of the Soul
after it departed this body. But sometimes speaks of great torments which the
wicked endure in dark prisons; and describes their punishments to be dreadful,
by the sentence of impartial Judges: and otherwhere he talks as if those Souls
were at liberty to choose what body they will please to go into; and that it
pleases them better to be a Bird, or perhaps an Ass, then formerly it did to be
a Man. Which contrariety of opinion is observed, and handsomely represented, by
Eusebius Lib. xiii. Praepar. c. 16.
, whose words I shall not transcribe. For we find the Philosophers talking so
discontentedly concerning the present state of mankind, who are subject, they
say, to more calamities, and therefore in a worse condition, then any other
Creature upon the face of the earth; that it is sufficient to convince us how
little certainty they had of a future state. The steadfast belief of which being
taught, as Theodoret observes, with one mouth, and without any disagreement or
doubting, by all the Apostles and Followers of Christ, made all Christian
people not only contented with their portion, though more calamitous in those
days then any other men's; but also cheerful under the sorest burdens that
oppressed them.

And though the ancient Hebrews were taught by holy men of God to know better
then the Philosophers; and God in his infinite goodness was pleased, when they
were in danger of grievous troubles for Religion sake, then to give them still
more and more hope of another life; (as Grotius wisely observes, both upon the
story of Elijah's calling the Soul of the Widow's Son back again, 1 King. xvii.
21. and upon the dead man's rising again, when he touched the bones of Elisha,
2 King. xiii. 21. and may be farther verified from the story of the Maeeabees:)
yet it must be acknowledged, there was no particular promise made to them of
Eternal Life, either before the giving of the Law, or in that Covenant made
with them by Moses; nor any clear and express promise in aftertimes, until
the coming of our Lord Christ. Who has made a New Covenant with us, which is
established upon better promises then those in the Old, as the holy Writer to
the Hebrews speaks, viii. 6. For the promises of the Covenant made with them by
Moses were only, that they should possess the land of Canaan, and lead a happy
life there, while they observed his Precepts: But the promises of the Gospel
are, that, by obedience to our Lord, we shall come to live eternally with him
in the heavens. So the Church of Christ has always understood it, as any one
may be satisfied who can read the Answer of Ger. Cap. xxiii.
Vossius to Ravenspergerus. Where he shows, that the ancient Doctors,
especially Saint Augustine, looked upon the Old Testament as containing properly
and directly the promises only of earthly and temporal things; which were the
Figures of those that are celestial and eternal. The words of Saint Augustine
are very memorable to this purpose, in a little Book of his, Epist. cxx. cap.
2, 3.
wherein he answers to five Questions put to him by Honoratus: to which he adds
another of his own, concerning the Grace of the New Testament; in which that
Grace is revealed, which was hid in the Old. God willing to show, says he,
that even earthly and temporal felicity is his gift, and ought not to be
expected but from him alone, though fit long ago to dispense the Old Testament,
which belongs to the Old man; from whom this life must needs begin. But those
felicities of the Fathers are proclaimed to be granted by the bounty of God,
though belonging to this transitory life. For those earthly gifts were the
things that were openly and apparently promised and given. Covertly indeed the
New Testament was figuratively foretold in all those things, and was understood
by a few, whom the same Grace was pleased to honor with the gift of prophecy.

By which gift, bestowed not upon a few persons in one Nation, but, as their
Prophets foretold, upon all flesh, these things, which were then locked up in
secret, are now laid open to the view of all: and so plainly revealed, that we
read of ETERNAL LIFE oftener in the New Testament, then they did of health,
and riches, and victory, and long life, in the Old. Blessed be the tender mercy
of our God, should all those that have any faith say, who has called us into
his mavelous light: whereby we see such things, as eye never saw; and see
them so clearly, that we cannot reasonably doubt of them. We enjoy the body of
that, whereof they had but the shadow. We have that in substance, which they
had but in picture. The promise of that is ours, which they had only in the
type. We have the proof, the evidence, the demonstration of that, which was
only represented to them in mystical figures. So far are we illuminated
beyond those great Souls, who were the glory of their times, that we understand
the meaning of their own Books, and the signification of all the types and
shadows, wherein these heavenly things were wrapped up and hidden, better then
they could do themselves. For our Lord is risen from the dead, and has opened
the Kingdom of heaven; and, tearing the veil in pieces, has set before our
eyes the holy place not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. Into which he
is entered as our Forerunner, to prepare a place for us; and from thence has
sent a more abundant measure of the Holy Ghost, to enlighten the eyes of our
understanding; that we may know what the hope of Christianity is, and how
exceeding glorious that celestial inheritance, which he intends to divide
among us. i. Ephesians. 17, 18.

But it is not sufficient to admire this grace, (I have demonstrated,) we must
carefully improve it; or else it will be worse with us then if we had never
known it. For if the Word spoken by Angels was so punctually verified, that
every breach of it was duly punished: (as it is ii. Hebr. 2, 3, 4.) there is no
hope that we should escape the severest effects of God's displeasure, if we
neglect so great Salvation as this; which (...), being first published to the
world by our Lord Jesus, was farther confirmed by the coming down of the Holy
Ghost upon his Apostles. We are the disciples of Him, who spoke as never man
spoke. Whose word of Salvation (as his Gospel is called) we then neglect, when
we mind not what he says; or do not often think of it; or, having thought of
it, prefer every trifle before it, and will not be moved by such a wonderful
grace to obey his precepts. For by the opposition wherein this stands to the
transgression and disobedience mentioned before against Moses his Law, we are
sufficiently informed wherein this neglect principally consists: viz. in the
transgressing those bounds our Lord has set us; and disobeying those commands,
to the observance of which he incites us by the promise of immortal Life.

It is a fearful thing to think how miserable they will be, who prove thus
inconsiderate; and in how great danger Christians are to be so, by the means of
that very deceit which plunged the Jews into so many calamities. Because God
had manifested more of his love to them, then to other Nations; had given them
an excellent Law, spoken to them by his Prophets, instructed them how to offer
Sacrifice, and appointed a place where he would dwell among them; they blessed
themselves in the outward enjoyment of these singular privileges; they bragged
that they were the seed of Abraham, and that they had the Oracles of God, and
were a people separated to him from the rest of the world by many holy rites:
but they took no care to be obedient to his Laws; and less regarded to be
endued with the spirit of faithful Abraham, who left all those earthly goods,
in which they placed their chief treasure, for God's sake. Just thus men suffer
themselves to be deluded at this day. Because God has granted us the
preeminence even above the Jews themselves; has brought us into the Kingdom of
his dear Son, made us the Children of Light, and let us see such things as many
Kings and Prophets desired to see, but did not see them; they content
themselves with the bare profession of this Religion, and think it enough to be
called by such an honorable Name, as that of Christ: on whom they rest and
rely as the Jews did on their Sacrifices; never thinking of being endued with
his blessed Nature and Spirit, and offering their Wills entirely to God, as he
did. Thus men perish, even in the midst of so great light and means of being
saved. And there is no help for them, unless they will grow serious, and
consider the design of the Christian Faith. Which will teach them, after a very
few thoughts about it, that our Lord Jesus is the author of eternal Salvation
to those only that obey him; (v. Heb. 9.) and will be so far from protecting
others from destruction, that he himself will be revealed from heaven, with his
mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Thessalonians. i. 7, 8.

I end this Preface as St. Augustine begins his third Chapter of his first Book
of the Trinity, with the alteration of one word only in the conclusion.
Whosoever reads this Book, where he is convinced, let him go along with me:
where he sticks, let him enquire with me: where he sees his own error, let him
return to me; where mine, let him call me back to him. Thus we shall all walk
together in the way of charity; tending to him, of whom it is said, Seek ye his
face always. Whosoever therefore, when he reads, says, This is not well said,
for I do not understand it; let him reprehend my speech, but not my faith. It
might, it is likely, have been spoken more plainly: but there is no man ever
spoke so, as in all things to please all.

The general CONTENTS.
AN Introduction. CHAP. I. Of Eternal Life in general, page 1. to 13. which
our Savior calls SEEING GOD: explained in seven particulars, p. 14. to 40. A
Meditation, p. 41. CHAP. II. A more particular discourse of this Life, p. 43.
wherein the happiness of the Soul is described; in regard of its increase in
the knowledge of God, p. 46. to 62. and in its love to God, to p. 72. and joy
in God, to p. 84. A Meditation out of St. Augustine, p. 85. CHAP. III. A
farther explication of the Happiness of this Life, p. 87. in perpetual Praises
of God, to p. 97. and in free uniform Obedience to him, to p. 101. There the
happiness of the body also is briefly touched, to p. 108. A Meditation out of
Macarius and others, Ibid. CHAP. IV. Of the Eternity of this Life, p. 111.
being without intermixture of Misery, p. 112. and without intermission, p. 115,
and without end, p. 121. represented by the Sabbath, p. 124. Particular
expressions chosen to signify that it never dies, p. 127. A Meditation, p.
133. CHAP. V. Of the Certainty of this Eternal Life, p. 137. whose excellence
is farther represented from xxi. Rev. 7. in 5 particulars, from p. 138. to 149.
Two Observations about his RECORD, p. 151. to 158. A Meditation, p. 161. CHAP.
VI. The Testimony of the FATHER, concerning this Eternal Life, p. 165. The
first testimony illustrated, to p. 172. The second testimony at large
considered, from thence to p. 195. The third testimony, Ib. to p. 204. A
Meditation, p. 205. CHAP. VII. The Testimony of the WORD to it, p. 209. The
first testimony, p. 211. The second, p. 220. The third, p. 230. A Meditation
out of St. Gregory Nazianzen, p. 245. CHAP. VIII. The Testimony of the HOLY
GHOST, p. 249. The first testimony, Ib. to p. 258. The second, Ib. to p. 270.
The third testimony, Ib. to p. 279. The sense of the Church about the Holy
Trinity, p. 280, etc. The use we should make of this Record, p. 286. A
Meditation, p. 294. CHAP. IX. The Testimony of the WATER concerning Eternal
Life, p. 299. Where, first, the purity of our Savior's Doctrine is considered
in many particulars, p. 300. to 312. Secondly, the purity of his Life, Ib. to
p. 317. Thirdly, the Baptism of John, Ib. Lastly, his own Baptism, p. 322. A
Meditation, p. 330. CHAP. X. The Testimony of the BLOOD is considered, p. 333.
in Ten particulars. The first, p. 335. The second, p. 339. The third, p. 346.
The fourth, p. 348. The fifth, p. 350. The sixth, p. 352. The seventh, p. 356.
The eighth, p. 362. The ninth, p. 365. The tenth, p. 371. A Meditation, p. 376.
CHAP. XI. The Testimony of the SPIRIT considered, p. 381. First, in the
Miracles he wrought, p. 384. which are considered in general, p. 388. and then
in 6 particulars, p. 397. Secondly, in his Resurrection from the dead, p. 407.
and Ascension to heaven, p. 417. explained in eight particulars, to p. 426. An
explication of 2 St. Peter i. 3, 4. p. 427, etc. A Meditation, p. 434. CHAP.
XII. The Testimony of the holy APOSTLES, p. 439. who opened this Doctrine more
fully, 443. declaring, first, how our Lord will appear in person at the last
day, Ib. p. 444, etc. Secondly, that in the mean time Souls do not sleep, p.
445. proved by several testimonies of St. Paul, and St. John, p. 447. to 457.
which was always the sense of the Church, p. 460. The certainty of the Apostles
testimony, p. 464. proved by their Life and Doctrine, p. 470. by their Blood,
p. 474. and by the power of the Spirit which accompanied them, p. 478. by which
they cured some, and delivered others to Satan, p. 481, etc. A Meditation out
of St. Chrysostom, p. 491. CHAP. XIII. The Use we are to make of this RECORD.
First, in admiring the great love of God, p. 499. Which is illustrated,
(secondly) by what God has done for us, more then for any in former times, p.
507. How uncertain the Philosophers were in their reasonings about this matter,
p. 508. How little of it was revealed to the Jews, p. 514. who had no express
promises of Eternal Life, p. 515, etc. and therefore saw it but obscurely, p.
524. and had no such Witnesses of what they knew, p. 532. Which ought (thirdly)
to excite in our hearts such love to God, as moves us universally to obey him,
p. 536. No motive comparable to this, p. 539. whose strength appears in six
properties it has, p. 541. to 551. Which (fourthly) makes it more strange that
it does so little move men, p. 552. Want of Faith is the reason of it, p. 555.
which we must therefore awaken, p. 556. by the consideration of what has been
said, which is briefly summed up, p. 557. to 566. A Meditation out of St.
Chrysostom to the same purpose, p. 571. CHAP. XIV. A farther Improvement of
this RECORD, p. 577. which we ought to believe with an unshaken Faith, p. 578.
An encouragement to Faith, p. 583. For the quickening of which several
questions are proposed, which is the Fifth Use, p. 586. First, about the way to
this Felicity, p. 587. Secondly, about the nature of the way, p. 597. Thirdly,
about the unreasonableness of being desirous to stay always here, p. 606.
Fourthly, about their distance from it, who never have their thoughts in
heaven, p. 608. Fifthly, about the danger of resisting so mighty a motive to
well-doing, p. 611. Sixthly, about men's resolutions, all these things
considered, p. 617. The last Use concerns the great joy the righteous should
have in the thoughts of what they hope for, p. 624. which is a strong support
under the greatest afflictions, p. 629. demonstrated in three Observations, p.
630. to 636. where the resolution of good men before Christ came is
represented, to p. 642. The examples of the Martyrs presented, p. 643, etc.
Comfort from hence derived against the death of friends, p. 646. or in any
other sad condition, p. 649. even in death it self, p. 653. The Conclusion out
of St. Gregory Nazianzen, p. 655.
ERRATA.
PAge 101. line 6. read VI. p. 109. marg. r. prosolog. p. 461. marg. penult.
Hom iv. in Hebr. p. 508. 2. r. own peculiar. p. 534. antep. r. (...). p. 606.
marg. r. iii.

IMPRIMATUR.

Guil. Sill, R. P. D. Hen. Episcopo Land. a Sacris Domesticis.
Oct. 21. 1676.
1 S. Joh. V. 11. AND THIS IS THE RECORD, THAT GOD HAS GIVEN TO US ETERNAL
LIFE: AND THIS LIFE IS IN HIS SON. AN INTRODUCTION To the following Discourse.
HAving made, in the former Treatise, as diligent a search as I could into the
Records of Heaven and Earth, and found there the clearest Evidences that Jesus
is the Son of God, (to whom therefore we owe the most humble and cheerful
Obedience;) I purpose now to make a farther inquiry into them, after the Royal
Powers which belong to so great a Prince, who both in his Nature and in his
Office so infinitely excells all other, that his loyal Subjects may well expect
from him the greatest grace and favor. He was God appearing as Man, Epist. ad
Ephesians.
(to use the words of Ignatius,) and Man working mightily as God; but yet
submitted himself to the meanest condition, and the basest death, for the
purging away our sins by his blood whereby he obtained, as the most ample
Dominion over all creatures, so the larges^ Power, both to remit sins, and also
to reward the services of all those that believe on him. To whom his affection
is so great and extends it self in such boundless love, that his kindness
toward them will not be perfected, I shall prove, till he has bestowed on
them ETERNAL LIFE.

A Blessing for which all mankind most passionately wish: not only because the
weakness of our bodies, the inconstancy of all their enjoyments, the troubles
we mee^ with in the world, and the necessity of dying, make it most desirable;
but because it comes recommended to us by its own proper worth and excellence;
which is so exceeding great, that it renders the most constant untroubled
possession of this world's goods, and a perpetuity in this life (could it be
obtained) without any sickness or infirmity, a vile and contemptible purchase
in comparison with it. This therefore all considerate minds would gladly be
well assured of. There is nothing of such importance to their satisfaction, as
a certainty of immortal happiness, when they leave this Body. Which will make
our Obedience to God's commands as steadfast as our Belief is; and withal most
sweet and easy, whatsoever opposition we have to discourage us. For the hope
of Eternal Life is able to lift us up above all the temptations wherewith the
world can assault us: be they either the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and the pride of life; or be they those hatreds, reproaches, persecutions,
loss of goods, yea and death it self, which we may be in danger of for Piety's
sake.

Now looking a little farther into this Holy Writer, who has preserved the
unquestionable Records concerning these matters; I find there is as great a
certainty of this Eternal Life by Jesus Christ, as there is of his being the
Son of God: and that the very same Witnesses who so fully declare the one, give
no less strong Evidence for the proof of the other. For THIS (says He, 1 John
v. 11.) IS THE RECORD, (or WITNESS,) THAT GOD HAS GIVEN TO US ETERNAL LIFE:
AND THIS LIFE IS IN HIS SON. Which words, being a continuation of the foregoing
Discourse, carry this sense in them; There is great reason you should receive
the Witness of God, (viz. of the Father, Word, and Holy Ghost, and of the
Water, Blood, and Spirit,) not only because it is greater then the Witness of
men, which you cannot justly reject; (v. 9.) and because, if you do reject it,
you make God a Liar, which who can have the heart to do? (v. 10.) but also
because the thing which is testified to us by these Witnesses, when they say
that Jesus is the Son of God, is of all other the most desirable; viz. that God
designs for us no less blessing then Eternal Life, which the Lord Jesus has in
his hands to keep for us, and to bestow upon us.

The ensuing Discourse then will necessarily fall into these two Parts. First,
to show what this Eternal Life is; and secondly, to prove the Certainty of it,
from the mouth of all those Witnesses. Of the first of which I must treat with
the greater brevity, because it is not the Design of the Apostle in this place,
to give us an account what the Eternal Life is, which God has promised; but to
show that he has given us an undoubted right to it, and that it is in the
power of that Great Lord, whose Servants we are by Faith in him, to dispose of
it.

THE WITNESSES TO Christianity.
PART II.
CHAP. I. Of ETERNAL LIFE in general.
AND now I launch out, when I go about to speak of Eternal Life, into a wide
Sea; of which it is but little that our eye can descry, or our thoughts fathom,
and less that I must confine my self unto, in this present Discourse. There is
more contained in these two words, ETERNAL LIFE, then all the world can
discover; though we have so good a Compass as the Book of God, whereby to steer
our course, and to guide and assist us in our Inquiry. We may venture, as far
as ever our thoughts will carry us, into this depth; but we shall still see
something beyond all that we can conceive, and be enabled by our search to
discern more fully, that it has no bottom, no bounds nor limits: as will
appear, if you do but attend to this general Description of it out of the Holy
Writings. In whose style it is most certain it signifies, a full and constant
enjoyment of all the happiness that our Being is capable to receive. I say
Happiness, because as DEATH in the Sacred language denotes all manner of
Misery, affliction and trouble; so by LIFE it expresses all kind of Felicity,
pleasure and contentment. And I say full and constant happiness, because the
word ETERNAL must needs add something to the other; and that is compleatness,
firmness and solidity. As Death, if it be not eternal, leaves some room for
thoughts of happiness: so Life, if it want that addition, does not exclude all
vexation and sadness. But then, on the contrary, both the one and the other, if
this be annexed, are made perfect; without any hope of happiness in that Death,
or any fear of misery in this Life.

To clear our passage, I judge it necessary to spend a few words in making good
this Notion of Life and Death, by producing some places of Holy Writ, where
they are so used. And first, for DEATH, the very first time we meet with it in
God's Book, it is used to express all the Misery that man drew upon himself by
his Sin. ii. Genesis 17. In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die; i.
e. fall into a most calamitous estate, (as it is explained iii. Genesis 16, 17,
18, 19.) till worn out with labor, sorrow and pain, he returned to the dust
out of which he was taken. Thus when the Locusts came upon the land of Egypt,
and destroyed every green thing, Pharaoh entreats Moses (x. Exodus 17.) to pray
to the Lord that he would take away this Death only. Which shows, that all the
plagues and disasters which fell upon that land; went under this general name
of DEATH; though now it be restrained to the last and greatest of all
punishments. The like you read in the second Book of the Kings, (iv. 40.)
where the sons of the Prophets, as they were eating of their pottage, cry out,
Oman of God, there is DEATH in the pot; something that is very distasteful to
the palate, and perhaps hurtful and poisonous to the body, which made them
they could not eat it. In the New Testament also (penned by men of the same
country) we find the very same language; St. Paul saying that he was in Deaths
often, (2 Cor. xi. 23.) and that he died daily, (1 Cor. xv. 31.) and wishing to
be delivered from the body of this Death; (vii. Romans 24.) i. e. of such misery,
that it made him sigh and groan sorely under the burden of it. And to name no
more, the Shadow of Death in these Books signifies nothing else but an
horrible, dangerous place; or a dismal forlorn condition, into which any
miserable person is fallen.

This being the notion then of the word DEATH in the speech of the Hebrews,
such must be the signification of the word LIFE which is opposite to it;
whereby they express all Felicity and comfortable enjoyments. Thus when David
says, his enemies were lively or living, (as it is in the Hebrew text, xxxviii.
Psalm. 19.) he means, they were in a flourishing prosperous condition, abounding
with all worldly goods; while he was abandoned to contempt, poverty, and
continual danger. And when he says, their heart shall live that seek God,
(lxix. Psalm. 32.) his meaning is, they shall enjoy true peace and contentment.
So when the people say, (2 King. xi. 12.) Let the King live, which we render,
God save the King, they wish him a prosperous and happy reign. And when David
acknowledges God to be the fountain of life, (xxxvi. Psalm. 9.) it is as much as
to say, an ever-running spring of all felicity, from whom flows, as the
foregoing words are, a river of pleasures. Hence they are bid to keep to God's
Commandments as their life, (xxxii. Deuteronomy. 47.) And this is said to be the
excellency of knowledge, that wisdom gives LIFE to them that have it, (vii.
Eccles. 12.) because by observing those wise precepts, they were put into a
most happy condition; which could not be had by any other means, but would
certainly be lost by turning from those holy paths. This is a phrase so known,
and the translation of the word to this use (says More Nev. par. 1. c. 42.
Maimonides) is so frequent, that all good and wholesome Doctrine is called
Chajah, that is, LIFE: and thence our Masters say, The just are called LIVING
even in their death, and the wicked are called DEAD even while they are alive;
because the one were happy, and the other miserable, in those contrary
conditions.

The true reason of which dialect or manner of speech I take to be this: that
LIFE being the foundation upon which all felicity is built, the root out of
which it grows, (it being impossible to enjoy any thing unless we be alive,)
and it abiding and continuing also, when the pleasures and other circumstances
of life are often interrupted; it was thought the aptest thing to express that
felicity which we partake of in life, yea the fullest felicity, the fruition of
the compleatest Good, when life shall be made eternal. And if this be not
sufficient to demonstrate that the Holy Writers intend by Eternal Life, all the
good we are or shall be capable to enjoy; you may farther observe, that they
describe it by all things that are excellent and desirable, having borrowed
from the glory of the whole World whatsoever is lovely and illustrious, to help
to represent it to us. Shall I put together the several lines whereby it is
described in as handsome an order and composure as I can; and so leave every
one to judge of the rare beauty of this Life, when it shall have all its
fillings up, which in its ruder draught appears so amiable in our eyes?

This LIFE then, that it may be understood to be the enjoyment of a fuller good
then we can conceive, a good beyond the bold desires of the most enlarged and
luxurious appetite, is expressed by the hugest heaps of Treasures; (such as the
Heavens only are great enough to contain;) by the possession of an immortal
Inheritance reserved there for us; and by Pearls and Jewels of a price so
invaluable, that he is stupid who sells not all he has, if they are not to be
had at a lower rate, to make a purchase of them. These expressions and the rest
that follow are so well known, that I need not stay to set down the particular
places of Holy Scripture where they may be found; but proceed to tell you, that
this Life is there also set forth, by feeding upon the delight of the most
exquisite pleasures, and being entertained without any satiety, and in the most
noble company, at the most sumptuous Feast: by exaltation withal to the
sublimest pitch of Honor; such as the power of Kings, the majesty of Thrones,
and the glory of Crowns; which Holy men call in to their assistence, that they
may serve to lift up our minds to conceive the height of this happy Life, and
make it seem the more royal and magnificent.

To which you may add, that they make use of the names of Rest, and
Refreshment, and Peace, and Joy or Contentment. For as we read of entering into
Life; so we do of entering into Rest, and into the Joy of our Lord, and dwelling
in Peace: because these are the only things on earth which can complete and
perfect the happiness of those who enjoy Princely dignity and power.

But then, when the Earth can afford no more colors for the drawing a picture
of this most excellent Life, or supreme Felicity, those Holy men ascend up to
Heaven, and fetch from thence, not only some rays of light, but the very Sun
it self, and that in the top of its glory, to illustrate by its brightness the
incomparable beauty of it. For it is called the Inheritance of the Saints in
light; and our Blessed Lord is called the Light of the world; who promises the
Just, that they shall have the Light of life, and shine like the Sun in the
Kingdom of the Father.

But, alas! it is not in the power of such words as these to express its
excellence. And therefore, when all things that fall under our eyes and our
taste are spent in the description of it, we read then of melodious Songs and
Thanksgivings, and the joyful voice of those who triumph continually. Nay, the
whole World, as big as it is, is introduced as a small resemblance of this
Happiness; wherein victorious Souls are said to inherit all things, and to be
made equal to the Angels; who join in consort with them, and bear their part in
those heavenly Anthems and Hymns, wherewith they bless and praise the Great
Lord of all.

But if all the goodly things that are or ever have been in the whole world
should meet together, and falling down at the feet of one man, should, with a
joint consent, conspire to make him happy, they could never advance him near
the height of this celestial Bliss, whose incomparable excellence cannot be
expressed, without the assistence of words called down from the highest
Heavens, the place of God's Habitation. And therefore nothing below the Kingdom
of Heaven, a Mansion in our heavenly Father's House, a Building of God in the
Heavens, is made the portion of such happy Souls. And as if the Heavens, yea
the Heaven of Heavens, could afford nothing great enough to represent this
Blessedness; Holy men lead us, at last, to God himself; whom they bid us behold
in the High and Holy place, as in his Chamber of Presence. And this LIFE is
called Seeing GOD, and beholding his Glory, and being with our LORD: which are
names of such transcendent greatness, that we had need enjoy this Happiness, to
understand them.

But thus the Men of God, from things sensible, lead us by the hand to those
that are spiritual and invisible. And now that they have placed our thoughts
in the presence of God, there they leave them to take as full a view as they
can of him, and to spread themselves in the largest contemplations of his
Perfections. For they were not able to go any farther, then only to tell us,
that we shall be made like to him, whose Perfections shine so gloriously in our
eyes. This is the highest pitch to which they carry our meditations. Here they
bid us rest our thoughts; and now that they have advanced them above the Earth
and Heavens, to consider with our selves what it is to See God, till we
resemble him, and be perfectly transformed into his most blessed Nature and
Life. All they can do more for us, is only to tell us what GOD is, the
enjoyment of whom is our Happiness: and who, we are to understand, will be
infinitely far more to our whole man, then Kingdoms and Thrones, then Crowns
and Jewels, then Feasts and Songs, then the Sun it self and all the sweet
influences of Heaven, with the rest of the things forementioned, could be, were
they all united in one design to make us happy.

The wisest of the Jews, as blind as that Nation is, are sensible of this; how
disproportionable all the words, which even divinely-inspired persons use, are
to the Nobleness of this Life. In which, says Maimonides, Cap. viii. de
Poenitent.
there is no room for meat and drink and such like pleasures; but the just sit
with Crowns on their heads, and delight themselves in the Splendor of the
Divine Majesty --. There are many names whereby this Life is called (Derech
Mashal) after the figurative way of speaking in the Holy Books. For example,
the Mountain of the Lord; the place of his Holiness; the Courts of the Lord;
the Beauty or Sweetness of the Lord; the Tabernacle of God; the House of God;
his holy Temple; the Gate of the Lord. And after the same way of similitude and
figurative speech, Wise men call this Good prepared for the Just, by the name
of a Banquet or Feast; and most commonly, the World to come. Let not this Good
seem light to thee, nor do thou imagine the reward of Piety to be so little, as
to drink the richest wines, to eat the best victuals, to have the most
beautiful wives, to be clothed in silk and scarlet, to dwell in ivory
palaces, and to have all the furniture of gold and silver and such like things.
But understand that there is no Good in this world to which that supreme Good
can be compared, but only by way of figure and similitude. In truth, there is
no proportion between the Good of the Soul in the other World, and the Goods of
the Body, such as meat and drink, in this. But that Great Good is
incomprehensible and incomparable, according to those words of David, xxxi.
Psalm. 19. O how great good have thou laid up for those that fear thee! He could
not tell how great: but with what desire did he long after the life of that
world, when he said, xxvii. Psalm. 13. I believe to see the goodness of the Lord
in the land of the living? That Is another name whereby they called this place
of Bliss. For wheresoever their ancient Wise men (says their Mystical
exposition of the Psalms) meet with this phrase in Scripture, the land of the
living, Manasseh Ben Isr. Probl. xvii. de Creatione.
they expound it of Paradise, because that is the country where men live for
ever.

But there are no words like those of our Blessed Lord to represent this
surpassing Happiness of the pure in heart, who he promises shall SEE GOD. Let
us therefore here fix our minds, and stay a while, before we pass on any
farther, to search into the meaning of this phrase, which is the sublimest and
most comprehensive of all other, whereby this ETERNAL LIFE is described to us.

I.
And the least that can be meant by it is, that we shall be there where He has
his most special residence, and shall dwell in his House in the Heavens, where
there are so many Mansions. There the Angels are said to stand before God, to
behold the face of our heavenly Father: And therefore for us to see GOD, or
behold him, must in general denote, that we shall be more like Angels then
Men; and being admitted into the society of those heavenly Ministers, shall
take up our habitation in the same place where they wait upon the Divine
Majesty. Whence it is, that as the Angels are called the Sons of God, (i. Job
6. ii. 1.) so are all those who shall be accounted worthy to obtain that World,
and the Resurrection of the Dead, xx. Luke 35. We are now the Sons of GOD,
says St. John, 1. Epist. iii. 1, 2. in a state, that is, of great favor with
him; and therefore need not care if the world hate us: But we have far greater
things in hope, and look for a more excellent relation to him; it not appearing
yet what we shall be. The meaning of which last words, in all probability, is
this; that the manner wherein we shall be the Sons of God in the other world,
is not now manifest. There is no body knows how near we shall be to him, when
we shall be the Children of God, being the children of the Resurrection; as our
Savior speaks in the place before mentioned. Only this is certain, as I said
just now, that we shall be Companions of Angels, and such Sons of God as they
are: And withal St. John here tells us that, when He (or it) shall appear, we
shall be like him; it being natural, that the Child should bear some
resemblance to its Father.

II.
Now from hence it follows, that to SEE GOD is to enjoy such favors as He will
be pleased to impart unto us in that high and holy place where he dwells: yea,
to have some participation with him in his Blessedness, who is most Blessed for
evermore. For to See, in the language of the Hebrews, is to enjoy, when it is
applied to a thing desirable; or to be in that state, when it is applied to
that which is hurtful. Thus to see good, xxxiv. Psalm. 12. is to possess it,
and to lead an happy life; and to see the good of Jerusalem, cxxviii. 5. is to
partake of its peace and prosperity; and to see the goodness of the Lord in the
land of the living, xxvii. Psalm 13. is in its first sense, to be delivered by
God, and to enjoy the sweet fruits of it before he died. Nor is there any other
meaning of seeing life, and seeing the kingdom of God, but this, that the
parties to whom those promises are made shall be put into the possession of
such blessings. And, on the other side, to see the Son of man sitting on the
right hand of power, and coming in the clouds, xxvi. Matthew. 64. is to feel his
heavy wrath, the stroke of his revengefull hand upon their nation; as may be
gathered from i. Revel. 7. And to see death, lxxxix. Psalm. 48. ii. Luke 26. is
no more then to die. This is so plain, that those things that belong to other
senses yet are said to be seen; which can signify nothing else, but that they
are perceived or enjoyed. O generation, (says Jeremiah ii. 31.) see ye the
word of the Lord; that is, hear it, mind and consider it: or, as Maimonides
expounds it More Nev. par. 1. c. 46.
, the intention of the Prophet is, that they should apprehend the sense of
God's word. And that likewise which is said to be seen in one place, is said to
be tasted in another; as to see death, viii. Joh. 51. is the same with tasting
of death, ver. 52. Which is a demonstration, that to See in their language is
frequently used for having a sense, perception or enjoyment of any object.

And therefore we cannot necessarily draw any more out of these words of our
Savior, which promise that we shall see God, but that we shall have as real
an enjoyment of him, and as sensibly perceive him, as we do now any good in
this world; though the manner of it be not certainly known, as not so plainly
deducible from these words. Let us conceive with our selves, as well as we can,
what his infinite Perfections are, his Wisdom, his Goodness, his Power, his
Purity, his Unchangeableness, his Immortality and Bliss; and then make account
there will be a lively communication between us and all these, which will make
us partakers of his Happiness. We shall not only enjoy such good things as
flow from his greatest favor and love; but in our measure, and according to
such capacities as he will give us, be what He himself is. Those glorious
Perfections of his will impart something of themselves to us: so that we shall
be like God, and bear some similitude to him in Wisdom, Goodness, and Bliss.
We shall be filled with Divine joys and pleasures, by being filled with a great
sense of him, and a strong love to him, and a lively resemblance of his blessed
Nature, immutably and immortally, without any change and without any end. Thus
much we need not doubt is included in this phrase of Seeing God; but
confidently believe, that good men shall enjoy all the effects of an holy
Friendship with infinite Goodness, and receive such communications from his
boundless Love, as shall make us really and substantially happy, like as he
himself is.

III.
And I make no question likewise but hereby is signified an abundant Felicity
which God from his own most blessed Nature will impart unto us; a very copious
participation of Himself, which he will bestow upon us. For when Job says, xix.
26, 27. that in his flesh he should SEE GOD, and that for himself, his own eyes
beholding him, not another's; his meaning seems to be, that before he died, he
was sure God would deal exceeding bountifully with him; not only rescuing him
from his present miseries, but making him very happy: so that he should not
only leave his posterity, when he was gone, to enjoy the blessings which God
had still in store for him; but be made in his own person partaker of them.
Which prediction of his seems to have been fulfilled, when it is said, the Lord
gave Job twice as much as he had before, and that he blessed his latter end
more then his beginning: xlii. 10, 12. Then he saw God, and that with his own
eyes, when he was thus liberally blessed by him, and received such a large
reward of his patience. In like manner, when our Lord says, that pure upright
men (like Job) shall see God, his meaning may be, that they shall in the
highest degree partake of his bounteous Goodness, and receive as much from him
above all their thoughts, as Sight is above all other senses.

And indeed the Sense of Seeing is so much more spacious and wide then the
rest, that we may very well think an exceeding great happiness is only able to
fill up the whole meaning of this expression, of SEEING GOD. Which may be the
better understood, perhaps, if we briefly consider the reasons for which the
Sense of Seeing seems fitter then any other to set forth our participation with
God in his supreme Felicity. They are such as these. (1.) It best agrees with
those things whereby God is represented to us in the Holy Scriptures. Where we
read that God is Light, (which is the object of Sight only,) and in him is no
darkness at all. As Light is a thing of which we are most sensible, and whereby
we discern indeed all other visible things, but cannot comprehend what it is:
such is God; of whom, if we attend, we cannot but be most apprehensive, and
without whom we can enjoy nothing; though we cannot declare the inconceivable
purity and excellency of his Nature. And (2.) Sight is the noblest Sense about
us; the Eye being a work of more curious and exquisite contrivance then any
other part of our body. And (3.) it is the most comprehensive Sense, which
takes in a vast number of things at once; not only of this lower world, but
also of the upper. And it is a Sense (4.) that can longest enjoy the same
object: for its object is not wasted and spent in the enjoyment, nor does it
vanish and die so soon as others are apt to do. And (5.) it is the principal
Sense of discipline and learning, which conveys to us the first notices of
things more abundantly then the rest; and especially helps us to the knowledge
we obtain by making experimental Observations. And (6.) it affords us the
greatest certainty and evidence of the truth of things. Insomuch that we are
wont to say, We will believe it, when we see it: and it is become a Rule in
Law, that One Eyewitness is better then an hundred Hear-say's. And again (7.)
it is a very affecting Sense, which raises passions sooner and quicker then any
other. All the Rhetorical praises in the world which are bestowed to commend a
lovely object to us, will not move us so much as one glance of its beauty will.
The Queen of Sheba, you remember, was led by report to come to the Court of
Solomon; but when she saw the splendor wherein he lived, then it was, that
there was no more spirit in her. And therefore (lastly) it brings in the
greatest revenue of the purest and most long-lived pleasures, by presenting us
with such a vast variety of objects, as other Senses, who have not so large a
sphere and compass to move in, cannot entertain us withal.

From all which you may easily gather, that when our Lord expresses the
Happiness of pure and holy Souls by Seeing God, he may well be thought to
intend thereby, the strong sense that God will give them of himself, and the
intimate familiarity we may hope to have with the first Wisdom, Purity and
Goodness: and then the height and dignity of that state to which we shall
hereby be advanced; together with the vast measure of knowledge and love which
he will communicate to us; the exquisite and most delicious pleasures which
will spring from thence, and overflow our Souls; the delightful passions
whereby we shall be transported; and the inconceivable satisfaction which we
shall have within our selves. For if St. Philip said here, Lord, show us the
Father, and it suffices; what shall we think of that manifestation which he
will make of himself to us when we shall be uncloathed, and have nothing to
interpose to hinder our clear sight of him, and full converse with him? We are
not able to conceive how mightily it will affect our hearts. We must stay till
that happy day of our Lord's appearing, to be satisfied to what degree of
honor and bliss he intends to promote us: But sure enough he will come, and
not fail our expectation. The Certainty of this happiness may well be included
in our Savior's promise of Seeing God: Who will give us a sure possession of
himself, and undoubted contentment, to the very height, in the enjoyment of
him; and that in an endless life, without any disquiet or disturbance, without
alteration or change, without weariness or disgust; in a never-ceasing ecstasy
of joy and delight, to find our selves united to him, the Almighty Lord and
possessour of Heaven and Earth, the Fountain of all that is good and amiable in
this world, who here entertains us with so many pleasures, that by them we may
guess what he is able and willing to do for them, who have no greater care
then above all things to please him. They shall be fixed in a steadfast sight,
that is, enjoyment, of him, to their infinite satisfaction.

IV.
And if we mark the words of S. John, who speaks this more fully, and tells us,
in the place before named, we shall see him AS HE IS, (which he makes the
reason and cause of our being like him,) they will imbolden us still to seek
into a farther meaning of this phrase. And since we can enjoy nothing without a
knowledge of it preceding, we are to understand, that to see God as he is, will
be to have our minds filled with a knowledge of him, so clear, so distinct and
strong, that it will even turn us into his own Nature, Life, and Bliss. We
shall not behold, that is, know him, as we do now, by similitudes,
resemblances, and expressions borrowed from other things, (which is all our
natures are here able to bear;) but by a clear notion of him formed in our
minds; wherein our hearts will be infinitely pleased, and feel his happiness
come flowing into them.

My meaning may be thus explained: As it is an imperfect sight of a man which
we have in a Picture, though drawn by the most curious hand and strongest
fancy; and the man himself, if he stand before a Looking-glass, will in a
moment draw an Image more like him, then the skilfullest Artist can delineate
all his life long, especially if he never saw the person, but only had a
description of him in a book or by report: just such is the sight or knowledge
that we have of God in this world, either by his Word, or by his Works, or by
the Idea's of our own mind; a very imperfect thing, and much like the picture
of a person which we never yet had before our eyes. But hereafter, when he will
be pleased to appear, to give us a more immediate sight of him, without these
helps, and present himself to our mind as the face to a glass; this will be to
know him indeed, and to see him as he is. Now as the sight of a Friend, when he
presents himself to the eye, does marvellously refresh and comfort us; and
there is a sense of pleasure imparted to us in the very beholding a rare
beauty, which we are not like perhaps to see any more: so this Seeing God is no
barren thing, but instantly infuses the highest satisfaction and delight into
pure hearts; who by knowing his blessed Nature, will find it imprinting it self
(as it were) upon them, and making every one of them to be the blessed Image of
it. Look what God is, that they by the sight of him shall be: He will dwell in
them, as the image of a thing does in the glass: And they shall be possessed of
him, of his life, of his joys, by having a sensible perception of the Wisdom,
the Goodness, the Purity, and all the other Perfections that shine in himself.

V.
Or if this be too hard to be understood, let us content our selves to know,
that to SEE GOD as he is, is to enjoy him as he is in heaven; that is,
according to that manner and measure wherein he shows and manifests himself in
those celestial places. Pious Souls shall really perceive all the effects of
his Bounty, Wisdom and Power, which are known and communicated in that other
world. Which as it is higher then this; so has more of God to be seen in it,
then can be discovered here. All that the holy Angels see and enjoy of him, all
that Good which he lets forth out of himself in that glorious place, wherein
above all other he is said to be, shall be the portion of those happy Souls;
who may be said therefore to see him AS HE IS. They shall not enjoy him in so
low a manner as the highest and the most highly beloved persons have enjoyed
him in this world, where there is but little of him: but in the noblest manner
that he can be enjoyed; so as the heavenly Ministers, yea our ever-Blessed
Lord, are made partakers of him. For when our Lord prays that his Disciples may
behold or see his glory, which the Father had given him, xvii. Joh. 24. his
meaning is, (according to what I have said of the word Seeing,) that they might
have their share at last with him in his Happiness, and be admitted to take a
part with him in that supreme Dignity, to which he was ready to be advanced.
And thus when St. John invites others into the Christian Society, telling them
that their fellowship was with the Father and his Son jesus Christ, 1 John i.
3. it is as much as to say, that they could nowhere be so happy; because it is
the singular privilege of Christian people, to be admitted unto a partnership
with God and our Savior in their most happy life, and to have hopes and
expectation to partake with them in their eternal Bliss.

VI.
Which may very well give me occasion to add, that since Grace, Mercy and
Peace come to us now from God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; we may hope in
this Vision of God to have as well a clear Knowledge of that ever-Blessed
Trinity, as a full communication from their ineffable Love. We shall understand
that Holy Mystery, which now the sense of our weakness forbids us to pry into;
and be able, perhaps, to unfold how the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost is
one God, without any diversity or separation of nature, Epist. cxii. ad
Paulinam cap. 19. Homil. de Martyr Mamante.
(as St. Austin expresses this Mystery;) which I durst not, in my former
Treatise, adventure to explain. For St. Basil had taught me to mark this, in
those words of our Savior, (x. Joh. 27. My sheep hear my voice,) that he says,
(...), they hear, not question or dispute. They believe he is the Word of God,
but do not ask how: nor say, if he was always, then he was not begotten; or if
he was begotten, then he was not always. These are not the words of the Sheep of
Christ: who receive his voice, and enquire no farther. And I had learnt also
from a great Divine of our own Nation, D^ Jackson Pres. to Cathol. Church.
(to whose grave judgment I thought there was a greater veneration due, then to
the little forward Censurers of this Age,) that the Doctrine of the Holy
Trinity is an Argument more fit for Meditation, in Prayers and Soliloquies,
then for Controversy, or Scholastic Discourse. We believe one Divine Nature
in three Persons: and that the Divine Nature in the Person of the Father
required Satisfaction for the Transgressions of men against his Holy Laws; and
that the same Divine Nature in the Person of the Son undertook to make
Satisfaction for us, in taking our Nature on him, whereby he had by right of
Consanguinity the authority and power of redeeming us; and the same Divine
Nature in the Person of the Holy Ghost does approve and seal, as he speaks,
this happy and ever-blessed compromise. But what it is to be a Person, and what
manner of distinction is between the Persons in the Blessed Trinity, are
points, Knowledge of Jesus Christ, Chap. xxv.
says he, which I never had a mind to dispute after the manner of the Schools,
but was always ready to admire, what I knew not to express.

For what is it that we can say of God, who can conceive so little of him? It
is an ancient saying of Plato, that to conceive God, is difficult; to express
him, is impossible. But he should rather have said, Greg. Naz. Orat. 34.
in the opinion of a greater man, (...), It is impossible to express him, and
more impossible to conceive him. For that which we can conceive in our mind, we
may declare in words; if not indifferently well, yet at least obscurely;
provided they that hear us are not dull of understanding: But to comprehend in
our mind so great a thing as God, is utterly impossible; not only to the dull
and stupid, (...), but to the most sublime Souls, and those who are lovers of
God. Alas! all that comes to us from him now, Ib p. 548.
is but only a short glance, (...), and as it were a little beam of a great
Light. We may call it a full knowledge of the Blessed Trinity, (as Origin In
vi. Bom. p. 633. and see Greg. Nazian. Orat. 36. p. 594.
does) when we can say, The Father is Light, and in his Light, which is the
Son, we see Light, the Holy Ghost. But how far short is this of what we long to
know of these Three in One? How much are we in the dark still? And what a
satisfaction will it therefore be, to see them clearly shining on us, and
discovering their Blessed Nature to us? which hitherto no man has been able to
find out, and whether ever any shall find, let those inquire who have a mind.
In my opinion, Greg. Naz. ibid.
says the forenamed Father, then we shall find, when this Divine, this
God-like thing, our Mind and Reason, shall be intimately joined with its
heavenly kindred, and the Image shall return to its Archetype or original
Pattern, of whose acquaintance it is now so desirous. And this seems to me to be
that which is so much discoursed of, to know as we are known.

Now we know only in part, says St. Paul, (to whose words he has respect, 1
Cor. xiii. 11, 12.) we behold rather the images of things, then the things
themselves; and those also but darkly, and in a cloud: but then we shall see
face to face, and behold God so clearly, that we shall know him as he knows us.
"He has a double knowledge, says Elias Cretensis upon those words of
Nazianzen: one whereby he simply knows all things; and another whereby he knows
his own Image, when it is not quite spoiled, which is accompanied with love and
delight. And in this latter sense Gregory here understands it. For look how
much serenity and stilness, void of all perturbation, God beholds in his own
Image; so much of his knowledge will he bestow upon it: giving to every one a
measure of illumination answerable to its purity and holiness. Then we may hope
to discover those things which are Secrets now; and no more understood by us,
then a Child understands the thought of the wisest men. For if St. Paul himself
(as St. Chrysostom discourses upon those words,) he who knew so much compares
himself to an infant while h^ was in this state; what may we think of our
selves? how childish are ou^ thoughts? and how like children do w^ speak about
Divine matters? especially of the transcendent Nature of God, the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost? But how resplendent then must the conception be of our grown
estate, since in this infancy of knowledge God has revealed so much of himself
to us, beyond the thoughts of former times? If these things be so bright which
we see now but in a glass, and obscurely too; think what the sight of the face
will be. And the better to understand this difference, and to dart a ray of
light, says he, though but duskish, into thy mind, look upon those things
under the Law now that Grace shines. Before Grace came, they appeared great and
wonderful: but hear now what S. Paul says of them after Grace, 2 Cor. iii.
10. that even those glorious things had no glory, in this respect, by reason of
the glory that excels. Such is the difference between the knowledge we now
have, and that which we shall have hereafter: even what we see of God here,
though, as S. Paul says, so exceeding glorious, has no light in it, in this
respect, by reason of that light which transcendeth. And therefore if our
Savior pronounced his Disciples blessed, because their eyes saw, and their
ears heard such things as the old Prophets and just men had longed to see and
hear, but could not attain that happiness: how much more blessed shall we find
our selves, when we come to see things as much beyond what is now manifested,
as this Revelation is beyond the ignorance of former Ages? We shall both wonder
at our childish presumption, in offering to talk of things so much above our
reach: and wonder at the grace of the ever-blessed Trinity, which has
conducted us notwithstanding to the sight of their undivided Glory.

VII.
But it is time to put an end to this; and therefore I shall say no more of
this promise of being so happy as to SEE GOD, but that there is a sense to be
made of it which will admit the Body, as well as the Soul, to a share with him
in those supreme Felicities. For when an exceeding great Splendor, beyond any
created Light, appeared to Holy men in ancient times, they called it by the
name of God; (who was hereby represented to be present with them;) and the
beholding this is called Seeing God. As when Moses saw the Bush in a flame, and
from thence a light broke forth at noonday (as Greg. De vita Mosis p. 172.
Nyssen speaks) (...), brighter then that of the Sun, we read that he thought
of approaching to behold with his eyes the wonder of that light; but, which was
more wonderful, (as the same Father goes on,) he had his ears illuminated with
its beams, (...) and the voice of that light forbad him to come near the
mountain. Whereupon he presently apprehended that there was a Divine Presence
in the Bush; and it is said, He hid his face, (out of reverence and a holy
dread,) and was afraid to look upon God, iii. Exodus 6. Thence this Mountain is
called the mount of God, v. 1. and xviii. 5. from this glorious presence here;
which appeared afterward also to give the Law from the same place. After which
you find that he, and Aaron with his sons, and the seventy Elders of Israel,
being invited by God to approach toward the foot of that Mount where he spoke
with Moses, it is said that they saw the God of Israel, xxiv. Exodus 10. In both
which places, though Maimonides would willingly understand a spiritual sight
of God with the mind, (being afraid lest any man should imagine God to be
corporeal;) More Nevoc. part. 1. cap. 5.
yet he acknowledges it is safe enough to interpret it as the Chaldee does, of
a sight of that Glory which I treated of in my former Book, (Chap. IV.) or of
an Angel, which in a luminous Body appeared to them.

But this last is rejected by a Rule in the Talmud Tit. Kid. ^u hinc. 11.
where this very place last named is explained. It is this: He that interprets
a verse of Holy Scripture always according to the literal sound, is a Liar;
and he that adds to it, is a Blasphemer. As for example, when it is said,
they SAW THE GOD of Israel; if any body interpret it literally, he is a Liar,
for the God of Israel cannot be seen: And if any one add, that they saw the
Angel of God, he blasphemously gives the honor of God to Angels. The Chaldee
only is in the right, who says, They saw the GLORY of the God of Israel. And
so S. Cyrill of Alexandria understood it, in the like case, L. 3. Glaphy. in
Exodus
when he observes, the people were brought to Mount Sinai that they might be
both Auditors and Spectatours of God, (...), or of his Divine and secret
Glory. Which, having never been seen out of the Secret place, made now a most
illustrious appearance: and at the bottom of it (called his feet) there was a
pavement (on which the Glory stood) very bright, and becoming the Majesty that
was upon it. For the Text says, it was like a Sapphire-stone, and as clear as
the purest and serenest sky. A token, I suppose, of the Divine favor toward
them; which the clearness of the Heavens very well represented, as clouds and
darkness were signs of God's displeasure. And accordingly it follows, (v. 11.)
that he did not lay his hand upon the nobles of Israel; i. e. did not hurt
them: (though the common opinion was, that if men saw such a sight, they should
die presently.) No, so far were they from receiving any harm by it, that they
did not merely see God, but also eat and drink of the relics of the
Sacrifices that had been (v.5.) newly offered to him. He entertained them with
provision taken from his own Table; and they feasted with his Majesty, to their
great joy and satisfaction.

Such a Glory, I told you, S. Stephen saw, when his persecutours were going to
stone him. And it is reasonable to suppose that, in some part of the Heavens,
God now manifests himself in a most glorious visible Majesty, to the exceeding
ineffable joy (not terror and affrightment) of those who shall be admitted to
approach to that Light, which is now inaccessible. So that this will be a part
of our eternal happiness, to live in those pure clear Regions, where unknown
Glories and most splendid magnificent sights will present themselves to us:
where we our selves shall be clothed with a brightness like that wherein our
Lord appeared to S. Stephen and S. Paul; and behold him in a greater Majesty
and brightness then that was, because our capacities will be enlarged to make
room for more illustrious manifestations of God to us. We shall live in that
place, (as was said before) where he dwells in light unapproachable by mortal
men; in the company of the holy Angels, who, as so many Stars of glory, will
add, if it be possible, to the splendor of that place; and with our Blessed
Savior, God-Man, whose glorified Body we shall behold. And so behold it, that
we shall bear the image of the heavenly, as we have born the image of the
earthy. We shall be made immortal, that is, we shall be ever with the Lord, in
such glorious Bodies as his is: so that in our selves we may see the Glory of
God.

For it must be noted here, that though our Happiness will begin when our
Spirits depart this life; yet it will not be perfected till the Son of God
shall come the second time to raise our bodies out of the dust, that they may
have a part with our Souls in a never-dying Life. Till then, the Happiness I
speak of, it must be confessed, will not have its Crown or utmost Consummation.
But yet the Soul in the mean time (I shall prove in its proper place) does not
lie asleep, nor has all its Powers bound up in a cold and lethargick dullness;
though it have not attained the utmost enjoyment of that Good for which it
hopes. Our Savior seems to make these two distinct things; the putting us in
possession of everlasting life, and the raising us up at the last day. vi. Joh.
40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son,
and believes on him, may HAVE EVER LASTING LIFE, and I will RAISE HIM UP at
the last day: which he repeats again v. 54. The former of which expressions may
well denote the comfortable Hope we have of Happiness, when Soul and Body shall
be united; and the other, the perfection of this Happiness, when they shall be
again united. We shall enter into a great part of Felicity, when we quit these
Earthly Tabernacles; our Souls shall then feel themselves alive, and alive in
the midst of those delights that will still increase and never have any end:
and they shall joyfully expect the Resurrection of the dead, and the Glory
wherein our Savior shall then appear, and all his Saints together with him;
who having received abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall
reign in life by Jesus Christ.

Thus I have said a little concerning this great promise of SEEING GOD; and it
is so little, that I feel my self unsatisfied, and would fain penetrate
farther, or at least speak more distinctly of this ETERNAL LIFE. But this
small glance we have had of it may well awaken our Souls, and excite them in
the worst condition here to burst out into those words, which the Author of
the Commentaries upon Job (under the name of Origin) puts into that Holy man's
mouth. Lib. I. p. 448, 449.


Thither will I go, where the Tabernacles of the Righteous are, where are the
Glories of the Saints, where is the Rest of the Faithful, where is the
Consolation of the Godly, where is the Inheritance of the Merciful, where is
the Blessedness of the Undefiled. Thither will I go, where Light and Life
dwells, where Glory and Mirth, where Gladness and Exultation inhabit; from
whence Grief, Sadness and Sighing fly away; where the former Tribulations,
which afflict the Body upon this Earth, are no more remembered. Thither will I
go, where we shall lay down our Troubles, where we shall have a reward of our
Labors; where is the Bosom of Abraham, where the Propriety of Isaac, where
the Familiarity of Israel; where are the Souls of the Saints, where the Quires
of Angels, where the Voices of Archangels; where is the Illumination of the
Holy Ghost, where the Kingdom of Christ, where the never-ending Glory, and the
blessed Sight of the Eternal God the Father. Thither will I go, there I hope
to arrive: not complaining, not finding fault, much less cursing and
blaspheming; but blessing and praising, and with giving of thanks, saying, The
Lord gave, the Lord has taken away; as it pleased the Lord, so it is come to
pass. Whatsoever pleases God is good; whatsoever pleases him is just. It
pleased him to give; his pleasure was good: it pleased him to take away; his
pleasure was just. All that the Lord wills is Life, is Light, is Rest and
Peace, is eternal Blessedness. Whatsoever pleases the Lord therefore, whether
to enrich or to impoverish, all is incorruptible and endless Bliss. Blessed is
the man, O Lord, whom thou chastenest. As pleases the Lord, so it is: Let the
Name of the Lord be blessed world without End. Amen.

CHAP. II. A more particular Discourse of this LIFE.
THERE is the greatest Reason that all Christians, as the same Author goes on,
should say and do and think thus in all circumstances, and in all things that
occur; and say so with the devoutest, the most humble and cheerful
Submission to him: since it is the will and pleasure, you heard just now, of
this Great Lord, that his Son Jesus should give us, after our short labors or
sufferings here, Everlasting Life. The very name of which sounds so
delightfully, that we cannot well presently cease to speak of it; nor choose but
desire to be better acquainted, if it be possible, with so transcendent a
Bliss. It concerns us more then any thing else to understand it, and to be sure
of it: For the Hope of it is our Refuge, the Anchour, the Stay, yea the Joy and
comfort of our hearts. And therefore, for the sake of those who desire to be
led into a more particular knowledge of this Happiness, I shall venture
something farther in the description of it: and know not how to conduct them
better in this enquiry, then by explaining, as clearly as I can, these two
words, LIFE, and the ETERNAL duration of it.

And if the nature of the First be examined, you will find, that LIFE is
nothing else but the exercise of all those faculties and powers, which are
proper and peculiar to us, upon their true and natural objects. Whence it is
that wicked men are said, in the Sacred style, to bedead; because nothing that
is reasonable, nothing that constitutes the form of a man, acts in them: and on
the other side, they that are converted from Vice to Virtue are said to be made
alive; because such persons only employ and make use of all those powers which
belong to reasonable creatures, and have devoted themselves to the best
improvement of them. There is in a man, as Philo excellently expresses it,
(...), etc.
(...), a certain notion and sense that loves God, and is a friend to Virtue:
which when it is extinguished in his Soul, the man is dead; and when it is
revived, he is then again made alive. Since therefore St. John is speaking of
the highest Life that man is capable of, we are directed by this notion to look
upon it as consisting in the most intended operation of all our Powers, and
that in their highest improvement, upon the greatest and noblest Good; which we
saw before is God himself.

Let us then consider, that man consists of Soul and Body as his essential
parts; and that the Soul, as the better part, must be most considered in this
state of Bliss; for from it Bliss will be derived to the Body: and therefore
consider again what the several Faculties and Operations of our own Souls are;
and farther, how much they shall be enlarged, and their force increased, by the
mighty change which shall be made in us at death and at the resurrection; and
lastly, how that all these Faculties thus improved, and made bigger then they
themselves can now comprehend, shall be filled to the brim with that fullest
Good: and we shall be able to frame in our mind some distinct apprehension of
this blessed Life. Now we all know there are two Faculties of our Soul, the
Understanding and the Will, upon which all Operations depend: and it is as
certain that the satisfaction and felicity of the Understanding can consist in
nothing but in Knowledge and contemplation of the Truth; and that the happiness
of the Will consists in the Love of that which is Good: And by necessary
consequence the utmost satisfaction of both these is in the clearest
Contemplation of the highest Truth, and in the most ardent Love o^ the highest
Good. And therefore every one sees where we must begin to speak of this most
Blessed LIFE.

I.
Which consists in the greatest Treasures of Divine Knowledge, by the
contemplation of the fairest Object; which is the exercise of the prime Faculty
in man, and the good of his Soul, as it is rational. For the better
understanding of which let us consider, (1.) that the Soul in it self is apt to
receive the notice of all manner of things: as we may easily discern, if we do
observe, how things most cortrary in themselves can agree to lodge together in
our Mind; and we behold them one after another, or both together, without any
disturbance, yea with abundance of pleasure. But, (2.) whatsoever our capacity
now is, we find it is very little that we actually know, by reason of many
impediments that we are clogged withal. And yet that little, when we are
masters of any notion, communicates so much pleasure to us, that we are hugely
desirous of having our minds enlarged to know more; and think it necessary to
our happiness, that we should be put into a condition of more free and
undisturbed converse with Truth. When therefore (3.) we shall be rid of this
clog, being either alone without this body, or having it made so spiritual,
that it will be under absolute command, and when we shall be in a still and
quiet place, and enjoy perfect settlement of mind and peace of conscience, (the
want of which is the only thing conceivable to disturb an uncloathed Soul in
its contemplations,) we may reasonably hope to be put into that most desirable
condition. But we finding (4.) even in this narrow condition, wherein our Souls
are pent up, such an infinite thirst after Knowledge, that the Mind of man is
never satisfied; we may guess by that how vehement this desire will grow, when
our Souls shall be no longer imprisoned, and their capacities so much enlarged.
And therefore you may consider farther, (5.) that if this capacity and this
desire in our Souls be not filled, we shall be so far from leading an happy
life, that we shall be more miserable then we are now; because we shall be more
able to discern our wants. And thence we may conclude that, to make us happy,
our Mind shall be gratified, and its widened enlarged Faculties filled with a
Divine light, proportionable to the power it has to apprehend.

Well then, (6.) considering that all objects are finite, and limited both in
their nature and number, except God alone, who contains in his own Being all
things that are and can possibly be; our Minds will certainly be carried to
him, as the only object that can perfect their Happiness, by satisfying their
boundless desire of wisdom and knowledge. He alone can fill those Minds who
long to know all things, and who have an aptitude to a vaster knowledge then
now can be conceived. And (7.) who can doubt but he will fill them, since he
has promised, as you have heard, by our Savior, that the pure in heart shall
see him? that is, know him and contemplate him in that Eternal LIFE which
Christ has revealed? For in this our enjoying God must begin: and it may well
be called SEEING in Scripture, because Knowledge to the Mind is the same with
Seeing to the Eyes; and the Understanding to the Soul is the same with the Eye
to the Body. And (8.) we can as little doubt but that their Souls will be most
happy who shall lead such a Life, which begins in their admission to this
blessed Sight. The contemplative Life, even in this world, has been thought by
the greatest Philosophers to be the most excellent, and in a manner Divine; as
Aristotle endeavors to prove by several Arguments in the conclusion of his
Ethics. Lib. x. c. 7, 8.
Now the more excellent the object is which we contemplate, the more excellent
is the contemplation it self. From whence he concludes, xii. Metaphys.
in another place, that God must needs be the most Blessed, because he
perfectly and perpetually contemplates himself; whom all acknowledge to be the
most excellent and perfect object. And since the Understanding, says he,
conceives by a kind of conjunction with that which it understands, so that in
some sort they are made one; from thence also we may argue, that his
Contemplation of himself must needs be the most excellent, because it is the
most intimate, as well as constant and never interrupted enjoyment of the most
excellent Being. The more then our mind can be fixed on God, and the more we
understand of him, and the nearer we approach to him, the more we shall partake
of his most blessed Life; who being most intimately One with himself, never
ceases to contemplate his own most adorable Perfections.

You will be the more sensible of this, if you do but imagine how happy many a
man would think himself, could he but raise his mind to understand the
wonderful frame of the World, and discover the rare wisdom that lies hid in
the contrivance of every part of so goodly a Fabric. If there be such pleasure
in looking into the curious composure of this great Book of the Creatures, and
searching after all the mysterious learning contained in it, (which employs the
study of innumerable souls night and day;) you may easily conceive it must
needs be a most sublime satisfaction to know him clearly who is the Author of
this Structure, whose Artifice now ravishes contemplative minds into such
admiration. They seem to have meant nothing else anciently who discoursed of
the Music of the Spheres or celestial Orbs, but the extraordinary pleasure
and delight wherewith the minds of those Philosophers were struck, who beheld
the orderly and graceful motion of those heavenly bodies. And the same men
said the Mind of man was an Harmony, because of the well-set notions whereof it
is composed, and the sweet touches that it gives us when it is in tune, and
runs into coherent thoughts and orderly speculations. Now look what joy it
would be to a contemplative man, if he could know the Art there is in the frame
of the Heavens, or if he could but so reflect upon his own Soul as to know its
nature, all its motions, the spring and the manner of them, nay, but to know
his own Body, which, as the Psalmist says, is so fearfully and wonderfully
made, that it astonishes our minds when we seriously think of it; and by this
you may judge what an happy life it will be, to be acquainted with God, by
whose wisdom the heavens were made, and all the host of them by the breath of
his mouth, and who fashioned all our Souls, and curiously wrought all the
members of our bodies, where no eye could see but only his own; yea, to know
so much of him, that --

But it is not in my power to make you understand what this Knowledge shall be,
for that would be to place you in Heaven. Nay, we cannot conceive how God
himself should make us know it in this state; unless he work a change in us,
and cause these bodily operations to cease. All that I can do is, to make you
understand, that our Souls shall be enlarged to know more then now we can
conceive, and that we shall be as inconceivably pleased in that knowledge: for
the very hope of it now is not without its singular pleasure. You will ask,
perhaps, But what is it that we shall know of him? Do you tell us of a
mysterious Darkness, or, which is all one, an inapprehensible Light? This is
but to know that we are ignorant. And who can fasten his heart on things of
which he has no perception? or delight in the thoughts of that with which he
has no acquaintance? I answer, We are already acquainted, blessed be God, with
something of him; though, as I have said before, we see but through a glass,
darkly, 1 Cor. xiii. 12. As a glass represents not the thing it self, but its
image; and he that sees a thing in a glass does not know it immediately from
its self, but from its image: such is the knowledge we have of God in this
life. We know him by the effects of his Wisdom, Power, and Goodness; and by
the revelation he has made of his Mind and Will in his Gospel. We know him not
immediately and by himself; but we know, as it were, an Image of him, in his
Works and in his Word. And though this knowledge be but obscure, and not so
clear as we desire; yet so much is plainly revealed, that one day we shall see
him face to face: that is, we shall be more nearly present to him, and
immediately contemplate him; who is a Mind and Spirit, joining himself to our
very Mind by himself, and not by an image.

What that is, some excellent Souls seem also to have had a little taste of here
in this world; by gasping with the mouth of their heart (as St. Confess. Lib.
ix. c. 10.
Austin speaks) to the fountain of Life, that receiving a small sprinkling from
thence, they might perceive after some sort so great a thing. For he says,
that as he and his Mother were discoursing together, a little before she died,
of the life of holy Souls in the other world, they had their thoughts carried
by degrees above all things sensible, till they touched it a while with the
whole stroke of their heart. And could we but silence the tumult of the flesh,
could we make all imaginations of the earth, the air and the heaven it self lie
quiet and still; could the Soul it self not stir, but, by silencing its own
thoughts, go beyond it self; could we but listen alone to him that made all
things, and hear him alone speak, not by them, but by himself; so that we heard
his word not by a tongue of flesh, nor by the voice of an Angel, nor by the
darkness of a similitude, but him whom our Soul loves in all these, it could
hear without these; (as he and his Mother then did, when with a swift thought
they touched that eternal Wisdom, who is over all:) we might easily and
sensibly perceive what eternal Life is, by such a moment; and conclude, that
if this moment was continued, and all other lower ways of thinking vanishing,
this alone remained, it would be no less then to enter into the joy of our
Lord. Thus he and she discoursed, till this World and all the pleasures in it
were forgotten; and she cried out, Son, there is nothing that I delight in in
this Life.

Now the hope we have, that what some have felt, for the twinkling of an eye,
by an intimate conjunction of their Soul with God, we shall all at last feel in
endless life, is a mighty attractive to our hearts; the greatest of all other,
though we cannot reach it here. Therefore the Good we are to enjoy is so
desirable, because it is bigger then all our present thoughts; and the
greatness of it is not hid from our eyes, because we should not understand it,
but because we cannot. What more powerful argument can there be to move our
affections, then the consideration that, though we know not these things, what
they are and what the manner of their enjoyment is, yet, we know that they
shall be known and enjoyed; and we know also so much of them and of other
things, as gives us assurance that the fullness of that knowledge will be beyond
all thought pleasant and delightful to us? For, (1.) it is now so great a
pleasure to the mind, to behold the wisdom which appears in the smallest Mite
that creeps on any part of this earth; that we cannot but be sensible the
highest perfection of it is, to have any conception of the Wisdom, the Power,
the Goodness, the Eternity, Immensity, Truth, Purity and Providence of Almighty
God; which the longer we look upon, the more we find our minds enlarged, and
their thirst increased. This perfection of pleasure then (2.) cannot but be
strangely advanced, when we shall come to see him face to face, and to know him
as we are known: for our thoughts of him in that state, as was said before,
will differ as much from our present conceptions, as the understanding of a
grown Man does from that of a Child. And then likewise (3.) we may discover
some Divine Perfection of his, which no man ever thought of before. New
Beauties may reveal themselves to us, of which we have not now the least
notice: because God is ALL, and therefore contains more in his Essence, then we
ever framed any Idea or notion of. So that, perhaps, (4.) we shall never cease
to make some new discovery or other, but be still beholding more and more of
his Glory, to our endless satisfaction.

Let us but cherish some such thoughts as these, and we shall feel presently,
by the incomparable pleasure wherewith they affect us, how powerful they are
to draw our hearts toward this blessed LIFE, and all the ways that lead unto
it. It was some great delight which they preconceived, that made one
Philosopher put out his eyes, the better to be able to contemplate
intellectual things: and which made another travel all the learned world
over, that he might have the conversation of knowing men: and a third live xxii
years in the fields, that he might discover only the manners and the
workmanship of Bees: and a fourth wish he could be able to look upon the Sun,
to see what it is; though he died the next moment after the sight: and all the
wise men, to improve their knowing faculties, take such vast and incredible
pains. Would any man so toil his brain as the Mathematician does, were there
not a certain ravishment in Knowledge surpassing all sensual delights? How is
the silliest Soul affected, when you bring it the notice of some new thing, of
which before it was perfectly ignorant? And all pious hearts how glad are they
but to think that they are in the direct path to Heaven? And the sense they
have of God sometimes overspreading their hearts, how much does it transport
them, and make them long to have it continue for ever? And therefore think with
your selves, if these little notions of sensible things be so sweet, if a small
flash of light, that breaks in upon us from Heaven for a moment, be so
glorious; what will it be to have our minds so constantly illuminated with the
Divinest knowledge, as the air is with the beams of the Sun? How desirable is
that state, when we shall be all shining, when our inheritance shall be Light,
and when we shall be able to look upon the noonday brightness?

We all find, that a pure and unspotted Beauty has a strange power in it to
charm the dullest minds. Let us suppose then, with a modern Philosopher, that
there were a Beauty whose colors were so radiant and bright, that our eye
should not be able to look upon it, without the assistence of some newfound
Spectacles; by which the luster of the colors, and the exceeding great purity
of its light, might be kept from striking our eye with too piercing a
splendor. Do you not conceive that, if there were such an object, and such an
help to your eye, you should be presented with a sight more ravishing then you
ever yet beheld? and that you would desire never to put off those Spectacles,
which fortified your eye to see so fair a Beauty; unless you could hope to have
your eye made so strong, that of it self it should be able to behold it? Ponder
then within your selves, that just as the pleasure, in such a case, would arise
together with the excellency of the object, and the increased power of the eye;
so will the delight of seeing so sublime an object as God by our raised and
strengthened Souls, exceed all that which we now perceive in any worldly good,
or even in God himself. And according to the degree to which our Faculties
shall be advanced and empowered, which may be as much as God pleases, so
certainly will the fullness and the overflowing measure of the delight be, which
rises and falls according to the alterations that are in in us; for in GOD
there is none at all.

To all this I have one Consideration more to add; that the Soul, as you heard
before, by knowledge becomes, in a manner, what it knows: not indeed by being
changed into the object, but by receiving the object into it self. As we see
some Bodies admit others so entirely into them, that they have all the
qualities of the nature which they have assumed: (iron, for instance, in the
fire becomes red, and warms or burns according as other bodies approach it:) so
our Minds, by the knowledge they have of things, are after a sort united to
them, and partake so far of their qualities, that Heaven and Earth do not
differ more, then two Souls do, who have fixed their thoughts, the one on
Earthly, the other on Heavenly things. And therefore, when we shall come to
know God face to face, the sight of him will be nothing less then a full
possession of him, a kind of becoming what he is, in a true and real, (as
Divines speak) though not essential likeness to him, in Wisdom,
Righteousness, Goodness, Immortality, and, I may add, Power too, because we
shall perfectly command our selves, and have our present unruly thoughts and
affections in a due subjection to his sovereign Will. For if, as the Apostle
says, by beholding now (without a veil, but) in a glass the Glory of the Lord
Christ, we are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, 2 Cor. iii. 18.
then much more, when we shall come without the help of words and writings to
behold the Face of God himself, we shall be transformed into his image; and by
being assimilated to his Divine Nature, be made partakers of the joys and
pleasures which are inseparable from it.

And if the transfigur'd Humanity of Christ (as Anselm in Matt. xvii.
meditates) in the company of two Saints gave such delight, when it was seen
but for a point of time; O how great will the pleasure be of seeing the Deity
among the Quires of Angels? If Peter, beholding the glorified Humanity, was
affected with such a joy, that he desired never to part with that sight; what
shall we think of those who shall be counted worthy to see the Divinity? We may
ask the Question as often as we please, but can no more give an Answer to it now,
then the Disciples could tell, till they beheld it on the holy Mount, what it
was for their Master to be transfigured. Then we shall understand it, when we
come to the High and Holy place where Jesus is; of which that Mountain was but
a figure. For the present, we must be content, if we can raise up our minds to
some small conceptions of its greatness, by such considerations as these. O^
which I have the longer insisted, because they lay the foundation of what
follows* and lead our thoughts to the easier understanding of it.

II.
And if the nature of this LIFE be farther examined, you will find the Mind is
not the only Faculty that shall be gratisied; but the Will shall conceive a
Love as great as the Knowledge of which I have discoursed. For as God is the
highest object of the Understanding, being the Prime Truth; so he is the
chiefest object of the Will, being the First and Best Good. And therefore as
the Understanding shall then ^ost clearly know him; so the Will, in like
manner, shall most ardently love him, and find perfect satisfaction in that
Love. There is a necessary connection between these things; and it cannot be
otherwise, but that from the best Good clearly known, there will flow the
greatest Love; drawing along with it the greatest delight, and the most perfect
repose. And therefore to SEE GOD, virtually contains in its notion both Love
and Delectation, with Rest, or Satisfaction. Love naturally flows from thence,
as from its fountain; and the other naturally flow from Love. Which is the
highest act of that Faculty which we call the Will, as knowing and
contemplating is of the Understanding. Desire, indeed, is the first Motion of
it, when any thing is apprehended to be good for us; but that will there be
quenched in possession and enjoyment: and no more of it can be conceived to
remain, then a longing after the continuance and increase of this Happiness;
which, yet, will be so certain, that we shall be rather confident, then
desirous.

The Will therefore, having such a glorious object always before it, will be
wholly employed in Love, and spend it self, without any decay, in flames of
affection toward this Universal Good, which shines so fairly and brightly in
its eyes. It will apply it self to the enjoyment of it with as great a
vehemence as it can; and laying its mouth (as St. Austin teaches me to speak)
to the Spring of all happiness, do more then taste the sweetness of it. We may
expect to have it filled with those delicious pleasures which we know attend on
Love; and which in that state will be proportionable to the greatness of the
Good that is embraced, and to the strength and ardency of the embracement.

And whereas here in this world men are wont to love beyond all reason, whereby
their love becomes adulterate, and is mixed with so many discontents, that it
proves but a bitter-sweet: There our Understanding (as you have heard) will be
in its full growth and highe^^ pitch; so that as nothing which is reasonable
shall be omitted to be done, nothing likewise shall be done that is
unreasonable. This Love will be grounded upon the clearest Judgment; this Flame
kindled by the purest Light: so that there will be no ^nquiet or trouble in it,
but perfect rest and peace.

And whereas in this world men's affections flow to things that are not ^ea^ so
big as themselves, ( i. e. as (...) desires,) and so they languish, and faint,
and fall sick, even in the enjoyment of the best good that it affords; because
they find it is not a supply proportionable to their want, or to their
expectations: There will be no such emptiness nor want of satisfaction in those
celestial enjoyments; because we shall embrace not only our proper good, but
that which is commensurate to our desires, and beyond our hopes. Our Affections
will not fall then upon that which cannot sustain the whole weight of them; but
feeling themselves born up to the greatest height of Love, by a Good so full,
that it will leave no room for complaint or uneasiness, they will enjoy the
most solid Rest and Satisfaction.

Do but conceive then in your minds what a pleasure it is here in this Life, to
Love and to be Beloved; and you will have some notion whereby to take a measure
of the LIFE we are speaking of, which will consist in such mutual Love and
delightful Correspondencies. And they who have neither Father nor Mother, Wife
nor Children, near Kindred nor Relations, whereon to place their affection; let
them consider, if they have but a singular Friend, what the pleasure is that
two persons, who sincerely and purely love, take in the sweet company and
conversation of each other. Or if I must suppose any man to be so unkind and so
unhappy, as to have no love for any body but his own self, let him think what
contentment he has, and how he is pleased, if he can arrive any thing near to
a quiet enjoyment of his dear Self And such a delightful state may be a small
image of Heaven, where holy Souls will love God with a far greater flame, then
ever they did (or shall then) love themselves: because He will appear
infinitely more lovely, and to bear also a far greater love to them, then it is
possible for then to do to themselves.

Now none can tell how transporting it will be to a good Soul, when it feels i^
self the Beloved of God, as well as full of love to him: because we cannot
think how great the Love of the Almighty is, unless we could know how great he
is himself. This is a thing that cannot fail to have a strange power over our
affections, and to master them so that we shall be taken quite out of our
selves: for we all extremely love to be beloved.

If any neighbor show us an unexpected and undeserved kindness, we are apt to
think he is the best person in the world: And the poorest Wretch that is, if we
see in him the undoubted signs of an hearty love to us, we cannot choose but
requite it with some expressions of kindness back again. Nay, if a Dog, as I
have said elsewhere, or such a dumb creature, do but fawn upon us, and delight
in our company, and with a great deal of observance follow us wheresoever we
go; we cannot but be so far pleased with this inclination toward us, as to
make much of it, and to be troubled to see any harm befall it, and to love to
see it play and be well pleased. Judge then what a pleasure it will be to pious
Souls, to find themselves beloved of him, who has put these kind resentments
into our nature. To what an height will the sweet breathings of his Love blow
up the flames of theirs? Into what Ecstasies will they fall, when they feel by
the happy fruits, what an exceeding great affection their Heavenly Father bears
to them? It is above our present thoughts to apprehend the joy that will then
overflow them: but we may conceive a little of it, if we remember, that GOD is
Love; and that by our Love He will be in us, and by his Love we shall be in Him.

But, if you please, let us fall much lower then this; and only represent to
our selves, how great an happiness we shall account it, to be beloved of the
whole Family of God in Heaven. Look down from the highest Angel to the smallest
Infant that shall be blessed there, from the noblest to the meanest in that
celestial Court; and there is not one of them but will love us, and be ready
to show their sincere and most affectionate kindness toward us. They that are
the greatest in that Glory, will be the greatest Lovers; they that enjoy most
of God, will be disposed to let us enjoy most of them. For there is no Pride
nor Envy in the heavenly Quire; but the more any are Beloved, the more they
will delight in the most effectual expressions of their Love. And how can they
choose but interchange to each other unspeakable contentment, who live in the
comfort of such indissoluble Amity and Friendship? Nothing can be thought of
beyond this to set forth their happiness: But we much conclude with (...), p.
459.
Philo, that this i^ the best definition of immortal life, (...), to be held
fast in an unfleshly and incorporeall love and friendship of God.

You will say, perhaps, that I have been now speaking of some other Love
besides his; which, supposing our hearts so fixed on him, we shall not be
capable to entertain our selves withal in the other world. For who can divert
himself from so beloved a Good, (which sends also such tokens of Love to him,)
and turn to any other object? We cannot think that they who love God perfectly,
will be inclined to love any thing else. And you may think so still, if you
please, without any prejudice to what I have said. This will but make that LIFE
the more desirable, and move us to wish for such an happy state; where God will
be in all our thoughts, and we shall always love him, and yet love one another
too. For these are not at all inconsistent, but we may delight our selves in
the sweet society of Angels and Saints, and yet always SEE GOD; because we see
and love Him in every thing. They will be his Beauties which we shall behold in
them. Those holy ones will shine in his Glory. So that our affections will not
incline to run to any person merely for himself; but because we behold the face
of God in him, and see his Graces wherewith he is adorned. All the Love there
will be Divine: And the more of God shall appear in any persons, the more
lovely they will be; and the more we shall be ravished with their company, and
rejoice in a happy league of friendship with them.

Well then, withdraw your thoughts a while from all the things you love here,
and raise them above to look at Love where it reigns, and has an uncontrolled
Empire: Behold it sitting on its Throne, advanced to its utmost pitch of
Perfection, and showing it self in its full Glory: And then keep the beginnings
of this Heavenly LIFE out of your Souls, if you can. It will be impossible you
should not think, there is nothing so much to be desired as to be all Love. O
happy Life, will you say, where they love as much as they are able! and where
they shall be able to love more then now can be conceived! and where they will
be beloved more then they can love; and have their Love hereby heightened, when
they reflect upon it, in an endless Circle of joy and pleasure! Let us enter
upon this Life with all the speed we can make. Let us begin it this very
moment; and endeavor that no moment may pass hereafter, but in the Love of
God. For there is no heart so stony (sure) and insensible, that will not be
dissolved into flesh, and receive any impressions from God, if it be once
touched with the serious thoughts of this state of Love. No Soul so hard frozen
and icy, that will not be thawed and melted to run whether God pleases, when it
does but feel the least spark of this heavenly Fire fall down upon it. Do but
go from the reading of this, with the thoughts of this Happiness burning in
your breasts, and preserve the fire, for one hour, from going out: and you
cannot imagine, till you try, to what an heavenly temper it will purify and
refine your Spirits. It will make you heartily in love with the Life of Christ
here, which leads to such a blissfull Life in the other world. You will
zealously follow those holy desires and resolutions, which you will necessarily
feel it inspiring you withal. And you will not suffer any temptation
whatsoever to divert you from that earnest pursuit; but still be saying, as St.
Austin begins and ends his Confessions:

Thou, Lord, have made us for thee, and our heart is uneasy and restless
until it repose it self in thee. Who being that Good which needs no good, art
always at rest; for thou thy self art thine own Rest. But to understand this,
what man will give to man? what Angel to Angel? or what Angel to man? Let it be
asked of thee, let it be sought in thee, let it be knocked for at thee: So, so
shall it be received, so shall it be found, so shall it be opened. Amen.

III.
And the more we think of it, the more we must needs still desire it; because
our Understanding being filled with the knowledge, and our Will with the love
of the chiefest Good, we shall sensibly perceive a Divine joy resulting from
these, and flowing into our heart with inexpressible pleasure: For it is
essentially included in every act both of that Knowledge and that Love, as may
be clearly discerned by what has been already said. We are now compounded of
different, and sometimes contrary passions; which frequently disquiet us, and
disturb our peace, by falling out with our Reason, and with one another. But in
that blessed LIFE there will be no such troublesome mixture; no fear, no
sorrow, no hatred, no anger, or any the like, remaining: But joy alone,
advanced to the greatest height of glory, will be left in the possession of the
whole Soul, and have the sole Dominion of it to it self. The reason is, because
we shall for ever have the presence of the greatest Good; which will exclude
the presence of any evil, to give us the least fear of losing what we love.
That Is the original of all our Passions: As we are glad when we enjoy any
thing that we love; so we are troubled when we want it, or when we lose it; and
we are full of care and solicitude when we eagerly pursue it; and rise up in
hatred and displeasure at that which opposes our desires. When Love then is
secure by the possession of that Supreme Good, whom no evil can approach, the
cause of all other passions will be banished; and Joy alone be left to triumph
in the conquest of them. For which cause this heavenly Joy must needs be the
more excessive, when we shall have nothing else to do, but to rejoice. This
will mightily increase the greatness of it, that there will be no employment
for the rest of our Passions, which here, whether we will or no, take their
turns together with it: and consequently there will be nothing to diminish the
greatness of it, by any trouble or disorder that can be given it.

For the proof of which I need only refer you to the foregoing discourses, and
desire you to reflect upon what you have read of the Knowledge and Love of God.
You could not but observe how joy and pleasure was so inseparably knit to them,
and interwoven with them, that I could not well speak of them, but I must touch
upon this also.

1. As for the first of them, we all feel a certain complacency which our very
Senses as well as our Understanding takes in objects conformable to them; even
before our appetite moves at all toward them. Truly, the light is sweet, says
the Wise man, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun. xi.
Eccles. 7. Look then how much the Divine Light excells all other, and how much
the Majesty and Splendor of the Author of Nature is beyond the best of his
Works, the glory and brightness of the Sun: and so much sweeter and more
pleasant will it be for our Mind to be filled with that Light, and to behold
that first and Original beauty, from whence all other are derived. We cannot
think of God and of our Savior now, without a singular joy: and therefore we
shall not be able to SEE them, without an excess of it.

2. And, secondly, as for Love, Joy is a no less necessary attendant on it, or
rather is intwined with it; being nothing else but that delight and pleasure
which springs up from the sense of any Good that we have taken possession of.
So that look how great the Good is to which the passion of Love has carried
us; proportionable will be the Joy, when we feel that we are owners of it. And
if it now please us so much to think that we are really beloved of God, and of
his Son Jesus; what an endless pleasure will the sense of their Love yield us,
when it has placed us in Heaven? Do but consider now how vast the Love of the
Lord Jesus is, in coming down from Heaven to us, and that he knows better
reasons of his Love then we do, and that his own pleasure is concerned in
loving us, and that he cannot but finish his Love to those who are purchased
with his Blood, and are of his Spirit; and it will give a mavelous
satisfaction to your heart at present. But what it will do then, when he will
have expressed all his Love to us, and perfected his kind intentions toward
us, we are not able to tell. We can only consider a little farther, how he
has plainly told us, that they who love him will rejoice now, because he is
gone to the Father. (xiv. Joh. 28.) And therefore it must needs be an
additionall pleasure in the other life, to see (what we here believe) our
Dearest Lord shining in the Glory of God the Father, and inthroned on the right
hard of the Majesty in the Heavens. It will be an exceeding high satisfaction
to us, to behold him, who loved us so much, and was so ill requited for it by
men, so gloriously rewarded for it by God himself. -- But it is so easy to
apply what has been said to this purpose, that I shall leave such
considerations as these to your own diligence, and note something that is not
altogether so obvious.

3. Which is, that pious Souls will considerably augment their joy, by the
reflections they will make upon their happiness, and the strong attention of
their mind to their own delight and pleasure. For we are never so truly
delighted, as when we find that we are not deceived in the comfort and
contentment which we promised our selves; and when we take notice of all the
pleasing motions that are in our hearts, and duly mark and observe the
sweetness of them. Before this reflection and self-observation; our Souls are
only touched by the Objects which they apprehend, and receive such impressions
as they are able to make there: But by this means the Soul touches and strikes
it self; sealing those impressions deeper, and pressing them harder upon our
spirit. The presence of a Friend, without asking our leave, excites a joy and
sudden passion of pleasure in our heart, upon his very first approaches: But
when we consider with our selves, not only that he is our Friend, but how good
a Friend he has been, and what joy he has now and many other times given us;
we then affect our selves with his presence and sweet company, and make the joy
greater by minding how great it is. For it is the highest kind o^ life in this
world, which has an apprehension that it lives. This makes the life of a man
above the life of beasts, and his pleasures above those that they enjoy. This
is it also which makes a man in ^ Lethargy to be no better then dead; because
he has no perception of his own life. The quicker therefore and the more
lively this apprehension of our LIFE and of the happiness and contentment of it
grows, the more blessed and joyful will the LIFE it self be which we shall
then lead. If by loving without seeing, we rejoice in this world with joy
unspeakable and full of glory; (1 Pet. i. 8.) how glorious will the joy be
there, when Sight or Knowledge shall be, if I may so speak, in its high-noon,
and Love at its full sea; and when there will be no declension, much le^ night,
nor the least ebb any more; and when we shall with the most accurate quickness
instantly apprehend and observe every circumstance that adds to our
unconceivable happiness?

We have many considerations left us now, in the Gospel of Christ, to refresh
our minds withal, from his great Love in becoming a Man for us, from his
Cross, from his Resurrection, from his Ascension and sitting at God's right
hand, from his promise of coming again, and the hope we have of reigning with
him for ever: but by not attending to such blessed Truths as these, we lose the
comfort of them. And when they are mightily urged upon us by others, and the
Holy Spirit of God also touches us, and makes us sensible of the glad tidings
that they bring us; we lose still a great deal of the pleasure, by not pressing
them farther upon our hearts, marking how they are affected with them. And when
all this is done, we shall still feel a damp upon our spirits, unless we can
comfortably reflect upon our own sincere love to God, and assure our selves
that we are persons qualified for this supreme Joy. But there will be no danger
of any such defects in that happy World above; where holy Souls will as readily
improve, as they easily discern, every thing that gives them satisfaction. As
nothing will escape their observation which brings any joy along with it; so
they will please themselves in the contemplation of their own pleasures, till
they grow greater. And so far they will be from wanting any reflections on
themselves as the persons whom God loves and delights to honor, that they
cannot but perceive it, and be transported with the joyful sense of it. For,
if we should speak strictly, this Joy will be so great, that it will need no
attention to it. Its own strength will make it be most sensibly felt; and (as
some have ventured to express so sublime a state) it will, by the transcendent
force of its delight, essentially reflect upon it self.

4. But let us come down from these heights, and consider again, that as much
as the Joy which God has in himself exceeds all other satisfaction, so much
will the Joy which we shall have in him exceed all that we have or can enjoy in
any other thing. In his presence (says the Psalmist, xvi. 11.) is fullness of
joy, and pleasures everlasting: which cannot fail to be the portion of those
who shall be admitted into his presence, and have the happiness to See him. For
since by our sight of him we shall be assimilated to him, (as was said before,)
and made in a manner such as he is; we must needs be partakers with him in his
Joy as well as in other things, and have such a measure of it as exceeds all
the measures that our scanty apprehensions can now take of so full a Good. It
is too little to say, that this Joy alone exceeds all worldly pleasures, as far
as the longest life exceeds a moment, or this whole World the least mote we see
in the Sunbeams: rather we may say, as far as God surmounts this World, or
Eternity Time; between which there is scarce any comparison to be reasonably
made.

5. To all which you may subjoyn this, as the highest consideration of all,
that such are the Perfections of the Divine Nature, such is his infinite
Bounty, that they who are united to him in Love, will meet with an infinite
Satisfaction. All objects of our delight here may be comprehended by our
Understanding, and we may see an end of all their perfection. For which reason
they may be slighted by our Will, as less then our selves, and unable to give
us the contentment we desire. It is at our choice whether we will love them or
no, or at least what portion of our love we will bestow upon them: and
therefore it is no great joy that they can give to one, who feels how much he
is above them. But God now is so full, so infinitely above us, that he entirely
satiates the heart of those that love him. We cannot refuse him, when we are
perfectly acquainted with him; nor is it at our liberty to love him but to such
a measure. No, He will force our Soul then to love him and delight in him as
much as it can; yea, more then naturally it could without the presence of such
a Good; more then it believed it should ever have been able to love. And this
is not a force of which the Soul grows weary, as in other cases when it is
strained beyond its present capacity; but a plesing violence, to which it opens
it self, and perceiving the power of that great Good, would willingly be more
possessed of it. The pleasure that it feels sweetly dilates it, and with a
grateful constraint so stretches and widens it, that the extension becomes
natural to it. And with all this New Love created in it, the joyful Soul will
for ever remain thus big; embracing its most beloved Good, and delighting it
self in this largeness of Love.

This is the incomparable pleasure of the LIFE that Christ promises. All other
joys are but cold and dull, in respect of the flames and spirits of this. It is
but a dream of drowzy delight which we enjoy here, in comparison with that
substantial sprightly pleasure which our Souls will find in the bosom of God's
Love; wherein they will repose themselves with such a transport, as if they
would lose themselves to be all one with him. Whosoever he be therefore that is
insensible of all other charms, let him hearken to this; and see what pleasure
can do, to make him in love with this Life of our Lord. Pleasure, I say, which
all mankind most passionately desires, be it never so weak and imperfect: the
Light of all good things; which should we suppose separated from humane life,
it would be nothing but darkness and horror. And if thou know not yet what
spiritual delight means, let thy fleshly pleasures tell thee something of this
happiness. If thou art not so sottish, as never to have a thought of any thing
beyond the satisfaction of thy fleshly lusts; think how much more noble a
Spirit and the pleasures of it are, then a Body and all its delights. And then
raise up thy mind a little higher, to consider, that if pleasure have now such
power over thee, here are the greatest to invite thee. Pleasures, that as much
exceed those of the spirit, as they do those of the flesh: Pleasures at God's
right hand; the very joy of the most High, the Father of spirits; the pleasures
of God himself. O come, come, if tho^ love thy self, and thy own perfect
satisfaction, come, I say, whosoever thou art that eagerly followest after
pleasure, to the contemplation of these joys which are so sublimely sweet. And
be content to part with all other, if that be the only means to be possessed
of these. What if thou should suffer, by devoting thy self to pursue these,
in many outward accommodations? nay, if thou should lose this Life, to attain
that which is Eternal? It will be no dear purchase, but bring thee in an
increase of more then an hundred-thousand-fold. Whatsoever thou expendest here
for the Lord Jesus, He has given thee his Bond for it, that it shall be
repayed with good measure, heaped up, pressed down, thrust together, and
running over into thy bosom. vi. Luke 38. An overflowing joy it will be, but
it runs over into our own breasts. None of it will be spilt beside our selves;
but it will trickle down, with a delicious sweetness, into our own hearts:
Which should stir up our most thirsty desires, methinks, to be made partakers
of it. If we fore-taste the least drop of it in such Meditations as these, it
should fill our hearts with sharp longings after more; and dispose us to say
with the devout Father I named at the conclusion of the foregoing particular,

Far be it from me, O Lord, August. Lib. x. Confess. cap. xxii.
for be it from the heart of thy servant, to think my self happy, whatsoever
joy I have in this world. There is a Joy which is not the portion of the
wicked, but of those who serve thee freely; whose joy thou thy self art. And
that is the truly-happy life, to rejoice to thee, because of thee, for thee.
This is it, and there is no other.

O how far distant is this present life from that! Here is Falsehood, Orat.
contra Judaeos, Pagan. and Arrian. cap. xxi.
there is Truth. Here is Disturbance, there is sure Possession. Here is the
worst Bitterness, there eternal Love. Here dangerous Pride, there secure Joy
and triumph. Here we fear lest he that is a Friend should on a sudden turn an
Enemy: there a Friend is always constant, because no Enemy can be admitted
thither. Here whatsoever Good we have, we are afraid to lose it: there
whatsoever we receive shall be preserved by him, who takes care that neither we
pass away from it, nor it from us. Here is Death, there is Life. Here all
things that God has created; there God himself in stead of all, and in all
things.

But what humane tongue can extol that, which no sense of mortals can
comprehend? We will go thither, that we may comprehend it. We will go and see
there that which eye has not seen, and hear there that which ear has not
heard, and understand there what the heart of man cannot now conceive: and
seeing, hearing and understanding, we shall exult with unspeakable joy. And
what Joy is that, where no Fear will be? Wha^ kind of Joy will it be, when thou
shall see thy self a companion of Angels, a partaker of the Kingdom of Heaven,
in Royal state with the King of all, desiring nothing, in passession of all
things, rich without covetousness, administering without money, judging without
Successor, reigning without fear of Barbarians, living an eternal Life
without Death?

CHAP. III. A farther Explication of the Happiness of this LIFE.
IV.
WE must stay, as I have said before, for the resolution of such Questions,
till we enter into that Joy. And for the present be glad to know, that our
Souls being thus happily disposed, shining with the Divine Light, satisfied
with the Divine Love, and rejoicing in both, must needs issue forth in the most
cheerful and delightsome Praises of God, who has preferred us to such a
blissfull state. For this we all find is one of the natural effects of Joy,
here in this Life. As it transports and raises the Soul above it self; as it
makes us eager to possess, if it were possible, more of that Good which gives
such delight; and as it makes us for the present forget all other things, all
the cares and troubles of this life; and, indeed, so much betters and improves
our Soul, that of all other things we are not willing to forgo it: So it never
fails likewise to employ the tongue in praising and commending that Good, to
which it owes it self. How barren soever the Mind be, or what slowness soever
there be in our Tongues; joy and pleasure make us fruitful in Thoughts, and
quicken our Speech to declare the content we take in the company of that which
is the cause of it. Nay, the Voice becomes bigger and louder by its means; and
it never utters it self, but with earnest notes of its high satisfaction. And
therefore it is impossible for the ravished Soul, when it is come to the
delightful Vision of God, to refrain from joining with the Heavenly Quire, to
give Glory to God in the highest, that is, after the most excellent manner, and
with the most exalted affections.

As the Understanding, by reflecting upon the blessedness of the whole Man,
will excite an extraordinary Joy in the heart, (as I have just now discoursed:)
so, by reflecting upon the fountain from whence that happiness flows, and
earnestly observing the Original of its enjoyments, it cannot but excite in it
self admiration and wondering thoughts; and presently employ them to invent the
noblest hymns and songs of praise, whereby to magnify and laud this glorious
Goodness of God. And this will make still greater additions to the Joy before
spoken of, which must necessarily be intermixed with these most affectionate
Thanksgivings; as every one can witness who has tried this heavenly
employment, which the Psalmist, in his experience, found so good, so pleasant,
and so comely. cxlvii. 1.

Were all the mercies of but one day placed now in a clear view before your
eyes, or could you but at once behold all the blessings that are crowded into
every moment; what admiration would it raise up in your hearts? what a volume
of praises would you be able to compose? and how much sweeter would this one
act of lauding and praising God be, then the enjoyment of all the good things
you praise him for? Raise up your minds then to conceive the height of those
Praises, that will be continually springing and bubbling up from thankful
hearts, and always filling their mouths; when they shall be able to shoot their
thoughts down to the very bottom of their days, and see all the curious
Providence of God about them, all the favors they have enjoyed, and all the
dangers they have escaped as they passed through the tumultuous Sea of worldly
affairs. O what Hallelujahs will it create, when these shall be represented
thick together, or stand at once before us? and when we shall not only look
upon the past loving-kindnesses of God in one train of thoughts; but in the
next behold all our present enjoyments, the quiet shore where we are landed,
with the riches and pleasures of the Heavenly Country? and when we shall also
think again of those that are still future; which are always beginning, and
never ending, always present, and always to come? This sure will make the voice
of praise more loud and shrill, and every note so sweet, that it will give the
most grateful touch unto the heart.

Look upon the little Birds, and hearken how they chirp and sing in the wide
and spacious air, where they have no limits set to their liberty: and then
think what a cheerful life they lead, in comparison with one that is
perpetually coup'd up in a cage, and spends many lonesome days and melancholic
nights in that solitude. And look again upon your own Souls, which we think are
capable of the highest pleasures; and cannot you conceive a little how
delightful they will find it, to be always singing in the vastest liberty and
freedom; to be spreading their wings in the boundless Light to which God will
bring them; and to be uttering their joys, as they see themselves encompassed
on all sides with innumerable objects of contentment? O how infinitely will it
transcend all that they are capable of while they are imprisoned, or rather
pinioned, in this body? though one moment of those Joys which are sometimes
felt here by holy Souls, is not to be exchanged for all that the world can
offer in its stead.

And these Songs will be made the more melodious, by the company that shall
join together in the most harmonious consort. All the Saints and Angels will
make up but one happy Quire; and will all strive, we may imagine, with an holy
emulation to excel each other, and without any envy contend who shall sing the
loudest and sweetest praises to our Creator and Redeemer. And what delight,
may we conceive, will they take in the delicate strains of each other? How will
they be pleased to hear their own voices accompanied with the hymns of so many
celestial creatures? How will the whole number be even rapt out of themselves
by the melting airs of the whole Quire; when they all lift up their voices
together, as those myriads of holy ones which St. John saw (v. Rev. 11.)
acknowledging the Lamb worthy to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and
strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing, which (as he says v. 13.) all
good Christians even in this world delight to ascribe unto him that sits upon
the throne, and to the Lamb, for ever and ever?

The Pagans had some little sense of this pleasure, as we may learn from
Metrodorus himself: who, though an Epicurean, Lib. v. Strom. p. 614.
yet in these words, as Clemens Alexand. observes, spoke divinely. Remember, O
Menestratus, who art born mortal, and have received a life which will have an
end, that ascending with thy Soul even till thou come to eternity and the
infinity of things, thou shall see both things to come, and things that have
been. For, according to Plato, we shall contemplate with the happy Quire (...),
the blessed Vision and Spectacle. Where we attending upon Jupiter, and others
upon other Gods, shall be admitted, if it be lawful to speak it, to celebrate
the most blessed Mysteries. Which we shall joyfully observe, being entire, and
insensible of any of those evils which expected us in our latter days. And we
shall be admitted to the mysterious contemplation of those perfect and steady
sights, in pure light: being our selves pure and disingaged from this body,
which we carry now about with us; to which we are tied as fast as an oyster is
to its shell. They felt, it appears by these words, very strong motions in
their Souls after a sight of those things, to which they could not reach while
they were in these Bodies. And they had a faint hope also, that, when they were
got loose from these shackles, they should neither be confined nor clouded; but
in pure light and liberty rejoice and be glad in the love of their gods, who
they expected would admit them to the knowledge of such secrets, as they
imparted only to their Friends. For that is the meaning of celebrating the
Mysteries; which were Secrets that all were not permitted to see, and when any
had seen, they might not reveal; but were kept with festival joys, after the
most solemn manner, by those who were thought worthy of them. To the delight of
those feasts he compares the joy they should have in the other life; which they
were wont to promise to all those who were admitted to the sight of their
Mysteries. There they fansied they should rejoice in a nobler manner then they
did when they followed the pomp of Bacchus and Ceres; (to whose mysteries this
Author alludes;) and without that noise and tumult which accompanied such
trains, behold in quiet the unknown spectacles of the invisible World.

But if you think that all the expressions I have used borrow too much from
sensible things; yet remember at least what delightful touches a sweet voice,
or other excellent music, has in any moment given your Soul; and conceive
then what a pleasure it would be, to have two hours continued like that one
minute, or your spirits so delicately moved for one whole day together. By this
means you will the better understand the truth of what I have said: for just
such is the pleasure of those Souls, which now strike themselves and touch
their own hearts with a lively sense of the Goodness of God toward them; and
which feel withal the finger of God giving the like strokes upon them. There
is nothing so delicious as this, nothing so powerful to ravish them out of
their bodies. The very strings would crack, and the Soul and flesh would
dissolve their Union, should there remain such a powerful and delightful
motion for some hours, as for a little space they sometime feel transporting
them. They cannot but imagine, that the prolonged harmony of one day, should it
bless the Soul, would make it account all the pleasures in this world harsh and
troublesome; and cause it to cry out, as the man St. Hierom speaks of, who
after he had dreamt he was in Paradise, called still to those who were about
him, Set me again in those flowery fields: restore me to those pleasant walks. O
let me enjoy that melody once more; let me hear those sweet songs: trouble me
no more with any of these worldly noises; but bless me again with those
heavenly touches.

Lift up your minds then by such thoughts as these, to conceive what not one
day, or year, or age, but an eternity of such rare ravishing delight would be;
and that is a part of that blessed LIFE which I am treating of. Which by your
own confession must needs be more desirable then all that can be expressed by
Music and sweet Airs, and melodious Strains and Songs, or any such like words:
which must be acknowledged to be weak and imperfect, able to express only the
outward images and shadows of those Divine enjoyments. And the more perfectly
you digest and frequently excite such thoughts as these, the more you will
apprehend of this bliss; and the more impossible it will be, that any thing
should hinder you from beginning to be so happy, by devoting your selves to a
Christian life. One part of which is, to praise and bless the Lord at all
times; to bear in your grateful minds a faithful remembrance of his benefits,
and to express it as often as you can in the most thankful acknowlegments. In
which exercise whilst you seriously employ your selves, you will be able
thereby to know in part what the blessing of Eternal Life is, wherewith our
Lord has promised to reward our hearty obedience.

V.
And here it will be seasonable to add, that such will be our Knowledge and
Love of God, and our true Delight in him, that they will produce a most sweet
harmony between our Wills and his, and move us to yield a free and constant
Obedience to him with all our powers. The Understanding, which now is subject
to many mistakes and errors, will then shine upon the Will with the rays of
the purest Light. And the Will, which now is often too refractory, will not then
in the least rebel against the Understanding, but be obsequious to its
illuminations. And the Affections will be as ready to obey the Will, and follow
its motions: which will all agree with the Mind of God, and perfectly
correspond to his desires. His Will shall be always done, and ours shall be but
a sweet compliance with his. For our knowing him making us like him, will take
away all liberty from us of doing any thing but what he would have us. And the
whole appetite being so entirely filled and satisfied, as has been said, with
this great Good, there can be no room left for any inordinate desires; but we
must eternally cleave to God, and cannot be turned aside from him any more.

And it will not prove any trouble to us neither, to be thus fast bound to his
will, and observe all his motions: but we shall fly as swiftly about in that
free light, as the winged Angels now do; who never fetch so much as one sigh
when they receive his commands, but cheerfully in every thing obey his
pleasure. Nay, it would be the greatest trouble to us, if we should do
otherways. We should create a disturbance in the midst of that heavenly Rest,
should we not thus readily obey him. One groan would spoil all the sweet
accents of the joyful Praises which are there continually offered. Much more
would one act of disobedience be so jarring with that harmony, as to make us
lose the pleasure of it. But there will be no danger of this; we shall all be
changed, as the Apostle speaks, not only in our Body, but also in our Spirit:
and in this, as well as all other things, that our liberty of indifferency, the
freedom we now have to choose good or let it alone, yea to choose evil as well
as good, shall be turned into a cheerful spontaneous motion toward that which
is Good alone. The will, as some have expressed it, shall remain; but not the
choice: we shall willingly serve God; but not choose whether we will serve him
or no.

For that Sight which we shall have of his Beauty will not let us take our eyes
off from him; and that Love which flows from thence cannot but be exercised by
those who have that blessed Sight: and they that cannot but see and love so
great a Good, will not be able to turn their minds and hearts inordinately to
any thing else. They therefore who shall be accounted worthy of that World to
come, will be free from Sin, and from the fear of sinning; whereby they will be
secure of perpetual Blessedness: which is necessary to make us perfectly
happy. For they are very short of it, who are in danger or in fear of losing
the felicity they enjoy. Both these will be far remote from that happy World;
where they will be fixed in their Happiness, because they will be fixed in their
Obedience. Which as it may grow, it is possible, still more and more cheerful;
so it will infuse a greater sense of the Divine Love into their hearts; and
every act wherein they do the will of God may be rewarded perhaps with a
greater increase of happiness.

Who would not choose then to obey God now, that hereafter he may not be able to
do otherwise? Who would not strive to bring his will in subjection to Christ,
that he may at last exchange his own will wholly for his; the liberty, that is,
of a man, for the liberty of the Divine Nature, which is always determined by
an happy necessity to that which is Good? Yea, who would not choose such an
happiness as is always, it is probable, growing more perfect? the excellency of
which we can never comprehend, because it will be growing more excellent? A
Life so noble, that every operation of it makes it more divine? It is no
disparagement to its worth, to say, that we cannot at first know all that we
shall know, nor love so much as we shall be able to love, nor possess all the
joy of our Lord: but it is rather a commendation of it, that after such an
height of knowledge, love and joy, as we shall arrive unto at first, we shall
be advancing to a greater nearness and familiarity with God.

IV.
But it is time to bring this Discourse to a conclusion, when I have told you,
that it is not the Soul only which will be happy in this Eternal LIFE. That
word, I said at the first, imports the supreme felicity of the whole Man: and
therefore Man consisting of a Body as well as a Soul, that must come in for a
share in this Bliss, and at last be made partaker of it. Yet I shall not stay
to tell you particularly what the LIFE of the Body shall be after the
Resurrection; because I have been longer then I intended in describing the
operations of our nobler part about its highest Good. It shall be sufficient to
give you but these two marks, whereby to know the exceeding happy condition to
which it will be promoted. First, it must needs be transformed into a very
noble Being, which is to be the companion of such an exalted Soul, and be
capable to comply with it in these sublime operations. We read much of its
brightness and glory, which the Scripture seems to say shall be so great, that
it will contend with the splendor of the Sun it self: And we may very well
believe it, seeing it is to be the Vesture of a Spirit so illuminated by the
Vision of God. For which reason, among others, it may be that the Apostle calls
it a Spiritual Body. Which as it needs no supports of meat and drink, and is
made immortal, and no longer liable to any disease: so is it of a purer sense
and a quicker power then this present flesh, moving with so much agility and
ease, that we shall feel it is no burden to us. And the Apostle indeed tells
us, (which is the Second thing) that Christ, by his power which is able to
subdue all things to himself, will fashion it like to his own glorious body.
iii. Phil. 21. Now what the brightness of that is, you may guess by the Visions
of the two great Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul.

The first of which, when he saw our Savior transfigured in the holy Mount, (
Matthew. xvii.) was so overcharged with joy, that the sight put him in a manner
beside himself. For he knew not, says the text, what he said, when he uttered
those words, Let us make here three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias. He knew indeed that it was good being there, ix. Luke
33. though he scarce knew where he was. This was the only thing in his
thoughts, that they should be most happy men, might they never stir from that
glorious place; but always remain thus transported, as at present he was. Let
us be fixed here, was his wish; let us always live in such pure light, and
enjoy such beautiful sights: from whence he was loath to take his eyes, or to
leave such good company as now appeared in glory, v. 31. And yet this, you must
remember, was no more then a glimpse of that Glory which our Savior was to
have after his Resurrection, and which he now shines in, and shall one day be
revealed. Judge then by this, what happy creatures they will be, whose bodies
shall be made like that glorious body; which when it was but a while
transformed in this world, made the place seem no less then a Paradise. How
illustrious will the condition of true Christians be, when they shall not
merely dwell in such Tabernacles as St. Peter wished; but in bodies resembling
that which was so transfigured, or rather of a far greater splendor: there
appearing then, as I said, but a twinkling of that Glory of our Savior, to
whom we shall be conformed.

For if you observe it afterward, when the Heavenly light of our Savior's
glorified Body encompassed the other Apostle St. Paul, (to whom he appeared in
his way to Damascus,) he could not look upon it, as St. Peter had done upon the
other: but it was so shining, that it put out his eyes, he continuing three
days without sight. ix. Act. 9. And for any thing we know, he had never
recovered the use of them more, had not the same Jesus restored his sight to
him by a Miracle. These senses of flesh were not able to bear a Light so
effulgent. It was to deprive them of all their operations, to approach near to
such a brightness. And yet such glorious creatures will our Lord make his
faithful Servants. So astonishing is his love, that he will never cease his
kindness to them, till they be numbered among his Saints in glory everlasting;
that is, till he impart his own most excellent glory to them.

Which signifies that they must be wonderfully changed from what our bodies are
now in this vile state; wherein they are not capable to behold such a glory as
shall then be revealed. But the serious belief and hope of it founded upon the
word of our Savior, and of those who were eyewitnesses of his Majesty, is a
mavelous comfort to us; and should make us study to purify our selves more
and more, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God. We should cleanse and
refine our affections, and render them still more spiritual and heavenly; that
being less moved with the things of this world, and finding our inclinations
weaker toward them, we may more readily and cheerfully comply with the will of
God, and prevent as much as we can the resurrection of the dead: when we shall
have no lust to do otherwise then as God would have us, but shall entirely
please our selves in accomplishing his good will and pleasure.

For the more faithfully and eminently any persons serve the Lord Christ, out
of pure love to him and to his Christian Brethren, the greater marks of his
favor will he set upon them. Their very Bodies, it is probable, will shine in
a greater glory, and be made so much the more illustrious, according as their
light here shone brighter before men, and moved them to glorify their heavenly
Father. For St. Paul seems to teach, not only that the bodies we shall have
after the Resurrection will differ as vastly from those we have now, as Earth
does from Heaven; but that those heavenly bodies which we shall put on will
differ very much among themselves in brightness and glory. As the glory of the
celestial bodies is one, and the glory of the terrestrial another: so he
tells us, (among the celestial) there is one glory of the Sun, and another
glory of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars; for one star differs from
another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead. 1 Cor. xv. 40,
41, 42. That is, some will have bodies more bright then others, and shine as
Stars of a greater magnitude; to note them to be persons of eminent rank, who
have done very glorious service to their Lord.

The Martyrs, for instance, whose bodies were slain or burnt to ashes for
Christ's sake, we may well suppose will be more splendid then those who were
laid in their graves in peace. Nay, the Church in St. Austin's time, out of
their great affection to them, wished to behold the scars of those glorious
wounds which they received for Christ's sake, shining with a peculiar glory in
their immortal Bodies. And perhaps, says he, L. xxii. de Civ. Dei, c. 20.
we shall see them: For it will not be a deformity in them, but a dignity; and
in the body will shine the beauty of their virtue more then of their body.

This the Writers, whom we call the Schoolmen, imagine is the Aureola or little
golden Crown which the Judge will give to rare Virtues. By which they mean some
accidental reward superadded to the essential Blessedness. Like the little
crown of gold, wherewith the other crown upon the Table of Shewbread was
finished, as the Vulg. Lat. renders xxv. Exodus 25. from whence this expression
seems to be borrowed. But that the overplus of reward which Christ will give to
some shall consist only in a peculiar brightness of their body, I see no
ground to determine; because God has so many other ways to crown the faith and
love and hope of those whom he delights to honor. It is better to conclude all
this discourse with the words of the same Father, which follow a little after
Ib. cap. 21.
. What and how great the spiritual grace of the Body will be, because the time
is not come to make experiment, I am afraid lest all that we say of it be
rashly spoken. And therefore I shall only add, of which we may be certain,
that, as Macarius observes, whether it be a greater or a lesser glory that we
attain, we shall all shine together in one most blessed and glorious place. His
words are these;

As Birds produce feathers of a different kind, Homil. 32.
and some fly nearer to the earth, others farther off, but all fly in one
common air; or as there is one Heaven, which has many Stars in it, some
greater then others, but all fixed in heaven: So the Saints shall be
differently planted (...), in one Heaven of the Divinity, and in one invisible
country. Thither let us all direct our paths, thither let us continually
aspire; saying, as he does in another place, (to which I shall add the words
of another great man,)

O how ineffable are the promises of Christians, Macarius Homil. 4.
who have such glorious expectations, that the Faith and riches of one single
Soul cannot be equalled by the glory and beauty of heaven and earth; though we
take in all their furniture, and treasures, and variety, and goodliness, and
bravery! And yet how fairly do these things shine in our eyes? and with what
pleasure do we behold their beauty? Anselm. in Protolog.
If then the created life be so good, how good is that Life which creates! If
the salvation we receive be so pleasant, how sweet is that Salvation which
gives all Salvation! If that wisdom be so lovely which understands the works
of God, how lovely is that Wisdom which of nothing contrived them all!
Finally, if there be so many and so great delights in delectable things, what
and how great is that Delight which is in him that made all things delectable!
He that shall enjoy this Good, what shall he have? what shall he not have? He
shall have what he will, and what he would not he shall not have. If honor and
riches be desired, God will make his good and faithful servants rulers over
many things. Nay they shall be called Sons of God, and Gods; and where his Son
is, there they shall be, heirs of God, and coheirs with Christ. If they desire
true security, there is none like that: for certainly, they shall be as certain
that these, or rather this Good shall never by any means be wanting to them, as
they are certain they shall never leave it of themselves; nor God their Lover
ever take it away against the will of those he loves; nor any thing stronger
then He be able to separate them and God. They shall rejoice therefore
perpetually. And they shall rejoice as much as they love; and love as much as
they know. And how much, O Lord, shall they know thee then! how much shall they
love thee! Certainly neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered
into the heart of man in this life, how much they shall know thee, and how much
they shall love thee in that. I beseech thee, O God, let me know thee, let me
love thee, that I may rejoice in thee. And if I cannot do it to the full in
this life, O that I may profit every day, until it come to the full! Let thy
Knowledge grow in me here, and there be made full: let thy Love increase, and
there also be full: that here my Joy may in hope be great, and there in
possession full. Amen.

CHAP. IV. Of the ETERNITY of this LIFE.
FRom this larger (then was at first designed) consideration of the nature of
this LIFE, pass we now to a short Meditation of the ETERNITY of it; which
indeed is the Crown that God sets upon its head, the Circle, if I may so speak,
which wreathing it self about this Happiness, makes it to be our sovereign
Good. And it may not be unworthy our observation, that this Eternity of Life is
as far above the continuance of all other blessings heretofore promised, as the
Life it self is. LIFE among the Jews, according to the letter of their Law,
signifying only all earthly good things, there was only a long life, not an
eternal, in the land of Canaan, promised to them that kept that Law. But quite
otherwise, the LIFE promised by Christ consisting only in the enjoyment of
spiritual and heavenly blessings, it is not a long, but an eternal,
never-ending life, in the possession of these good things, which he has
assured to us. It being but fit, that as the Life exceeds that which Moses
promised; so the duration of it also should as much outrun his, as for ever
extends it self beyond an Age.

Now the word ETERNAL may be conceived to comprehend in it these Three things.

I.
First, that there is nothing but LIFE in this state of Blessedness; which
shall not be interrupted by any doleful accident. Life and Death, I told you,
in the holy language signify the same with Blessedness and Misery: And
therefore the Eternity of life must include in its notion a state of pure
happiness, of mere and unmixed pleasure; without any thing that deserves the
name of Death to give it the least annoyance. There we may hope to be so happy,
as to know without mistake, and to be wise without folly, and to increase in
knowledge without our present toil to acquire it. Love is there without hatred,
jealousy or envy, joy without any sighing or sorrow, praises without
complaints, obedience without reluctance, speed and alacrity without dullness
and heaviness; in one word, perfect purity and holiness, without spot or
blemish to sully the glory of it. As this lower region of the air we see is the
place of clouds and darkness, thunder and lightning, storm and tempest; but to
the dwellings of the Sun and fixed Stars none of these pitchy vapors ascend,
to obscure their brightness, or trouble their peace: just so is this World the
scene of misery and vexation, confusion and disorder, our bodies are tossed
with several storms, and our Souls many times hurried with more violent
tempests, the fierce gusts of their own passions; but when we ascend to the
region of Light, and are clothed with the Sun, we shall be out of the reach of
these troubles, and find our selves in a state of perfect rest and joy, without
the least disgust to abate our contentment.

And what will make us despise this Valley of tears, if this blessed hope have
not force enough to lift our hearts above it? Who would not desire to come to
the Mount of Vision and Transfiguration, where we shall SEE THE LORD, and be so
changed thereby, as to be made impassible as he is? Let the Readers pardon me,
if I so far digress as to ask them, What is this Wilderness wherein you live,
that you should love it better then that heavenly Canaan? What is forty years,
or perhaps seventy, of toil and labor, to that Eternal Rest which Christ has
promised? Are not these husks contemptible in respect of the Manna, the Bread
of life, of which if a man eat he shall live for ever? Is not our life here a
dream, a shadow of life, in comparison with this Life that is everlasting? Why
then are you so hardly persuaded to take off your thoughts and affections from
things beneath, and not so much to handle the thorns and prickles that are in
all mortal things? Why should we be at so much pains to draw you into this
Paradise, where, as there is a perpetual Spring, so, all joy flourishes
without the least sense of grief to spoil its pleasures? If you would have us
to account you men, we cannot but expect you should entertain this Happiness;
unless you can either disbelieve it, or prove it falls so short of this
description, that it is not worth the price you must give for it. But how
unable you will be to do the former, shall appear presently, when I have told
you farther, how far short this description is of the incomparable excellency
of this Life.

II.
For this word ETERNAL added to it, may well denote the LIFE we speak of to be
without any intermission, as well as without any intermixture. As there is no
contrary sense of grief in that happy State, so there is no insensibleness of
joy. The blessed Soul will never cease to feel its own pleasures, because, as
there is no night in that heavenly country, so there is no sleep; in which we
can scarce be said to live. The life we shall lead there will be one continued
Act of knowing, loving, rejoicing, praising and obeying God; and there will be
no void spaces wherein we shall do nothing, or wherein we shall do something
else. We cannot conceive how any drowziness should creep upon us, or heaviness
oppress our spirits: and as for other actions besides those now named, what
should there be, since all evil is banished, all sin shut out of that Paradise?

As for all Good works, there will be none of those, wherein we are now
employed, to exercise our Obedience; as not befitting the Nobleness of that
state, wherein neither we nor others shall be in any need of those things,
which now call for our Charity to them, or Justice to our selves. What shall
works of Mercy do in that world, where there is no Misery? How shall we visit
the sick, where immortality and incorruption provides for a continual health?
What hospitality shall we use there, where no poor inhabit nor strangers come?
How shall we cloth the naked, where they are invested with a robe of the
purest and most unspotted light? What Enemies shall we study to reconcile,
where universal Friendship reigns? What differences shall we compose, where
all live in unity and harmonious love? And if these works of Mercy shall be
useless, surely then all works of Necessity, as they are termed, will be
superfluous. There will be no meat, no drink, no apparel or habitation to be
cared for, where there is no hunger, thirst, and cold, or such like wants,
which now continually pinch us. The only work will be, to think of God, to
love him whose love will appear so wonderful, to rejoice in him, to reckon up
his benefits, to thank him for them, to perform him such services as are
suitable to the dignity of that condition, to love all the blessed society, who
will contribute all they can to each other's happiness. And how incomparably
great will that happiness be, when we shall have no other employment but to be
happy?

There are two great defects (as a famous Divine of our own has observed)
which spoil the intireness of all our delights here; but will find no place in
the enjoyments of that happy state. For (1.) all the Capacities we have now are
so narrow and weak, that we cannot long bear any high pleasure: but we are soon
satiated with it, and are fain, even for our own ease, to lay it aside, and
seek some new delight. This makes our best contentments not to be pure and
sincere, without the mixture of some dregs; for of other this fleshly state
will not admit. And besides this, (2.) while we study the satisfaction of one
Capacity, another must be content to go without the pleasure that it desires.
They cannot all be gratified together, but the rest must wait till one has
done. And, which is worse, while we fulfill the desires of the lower Faculties,
the nobler commonly are deprived of their satisfaction. They that are given to
their appetite, and are great purveyors for the grosser senses of the body, not
only defraud the Mind, but even the purer senses, (the Eye and the Ear,) which
are the great Gates of wisdom, of their most delightful enjoyments. Nay,
such is the imperfection of this state, that the Mind it self cannot eamestly
fix in one sort of studies, but commonly it is rendered thereby very unapt to
reap the delight that other parts of knowledge afford. We have seen deep
Contemplatours in several Sciences, prove too unskilful in matters of common
prudence: and others strangely quick in worldly business, to which they have
bent their minds, who have been extreme inapprehensive of Divine Mysteries. But
in the life to come it will be quite otherwise; for our Capacities, as I have
discoursed in the foregoing Chapters, will be there mightily improved; and so
enlarged and widened, that we shall be in no danger to take a surfeit of the
fullest enjoyments that can present themselves unto us. And such will be the
friendly agreement and sweet harmony between the capacities and desires of
every faculty there, that the satisfaction of one can no way turn to the
prejudice of any other; but rather further and set forward its true delight and
contentment. For then, the more we know, the more we shall love; and the more
we love, the more we shall know how good God is. And this we shall do without
any weariness, which now forces us to break off our sweetest enjoyments;
because then we shall not spend, but rather improve, ourselves by exercise and
motion.

Which makes another considerable difference between this state and that which
we expect. All our pleasures here, as you may clearly discern from what has
been said, consisting in a vehement motion, which is very transient, and
quickly slips away; we must rest a while before we can renew it, and begin the
motion again. The duration of the present is short; but there are long pauses
made before another succeeds. For no man can always eat and drink, or every
moment enjoy any other delight: much less can he always attend to what he
enjoys, though the attention is that which makes the delight. But now, quite
contrary, this pleasure that flows from the Vision of God is of such a nature,
that it is always felt and enjoyed. For being firm and steady, fixed and
unchangeable, like God himself, it is not received by piecemeal and at certain
seasons, as our pleasures here are; but is full and all together, without any
space between to disjoyn its parts. Which makes those happy souls live in one
continued complete happiness and joy, which does not pass away, but still
remains. They can always love him, always praise him, always feel a sense of
his goodness trickling down their hearts, and filling them with ineffable joys
without any ceasing.

Who would not then by a short course of Piety here, which must be often
interrupted by sleep and other necessary occasions, (and it is well if not by
many failings,) run toward this never-discontinued life of happiness in the
other world? Who would not wish and strive to enjoy such a Good as will never
suffer him to be out of enjoyment? None, sure, but they who, though they cannot
always eat and drink and take their pleasure, yet have their hearts so sunk
into such delights, that they cannot receive any taste of these celestial
entertainments. Do but spend a serious and steadfast thought upon them, do but
give your selves a true gust of them; and you will sooner cease to eat and
drink, then to hunger and thirst after them.

III.
For this word ETERNAL, you will soon see, in the most obvious acception of
it, denotes the perpetuity and everlasting duration of this uninterrupted and
unintermitted LIFE, or state of highest Happiness. If we should suppose it to
be but of a short continuance, yet such is the pleasure of it, I have shown
you, so satisfying are its joys, that any man of sense would choose rather to
spend seventy or eighty years there, then to pass them in this miserable world.
Nay, one day of that life is better then a thousand of ours: and much rather
should we wish to have the meanest place in those celestial mansions, then the
greatest preferments on this Earth. But besides that it is so transcendently
sweet and delicious, you must now consider, that this LIFE knows no term nor
period; but lasts as long as him that is the Author of it. He never began to
be the Lord and to be Good, (as Clemens Alex. concludes his V. Book,) being
always what he is: (...), nor will he ever cease to do good, though he bring
all things to an end. Still holy Souls will enjoy the sweet fruits of his love,
when all things here wither and perish. He is the Eternal, God blessed for
ever, from everlasting to everlasting, and changes not. And such will the state
of happiness be to which our Lord will bring his servants: to a Crown of glory
that fades not away; 1 Pet. v. 4.
to a building of God not made with hands, 2 Cor. v. 1.
eternal in the heavens; xii. Heb. 28.
to a kingdom that cannot be shaken; to a light that is never sullied with any
cloud, and can never be put out; to a splendor and glory that is neither
eclipsed nor ever impaired; for it is the Glory of God, the enjoyment of his
eternal brightness: which as it is not broken by sleep, nor interrupted for a
time by any of our earthly employments; so much less shall it break off by
death, and cease to be for ever.

This is the very Crown, as I said at the beginning, and the perfection of the
Happiness we expect. This makes it to be absolute Bliss; because it wants not
that continuance which all our enjoyments here desire, but still complain they
cannot have. Which some anciently thought they saw most lively represented in
the History of the Creation of the World: where there is a constant mention, as
the Hebrews observe, Pirke R. Eliezer c. 18.
of the evening and the morning making one day, till the whole six days-work
was ended. The evening and the morning were the first day, says the Text, i.
Genesis 5. And the evening and the morning were the second day, verse. 8. And so
you read of all the other six, till you come to the seventh: wherein God ended
the work which he had made, and rested on the seventh day from all his work
which he had made. ii. Genes. 2. But it is not said here, as it is in the
conclusion of all the former days, that the evening and the morning were the
seventh day. And therefore they looked upon the Six days as a Calendar of the
several Ages of this World, in which there is a continual vicissitude of day
and night, of light and darkness, pleasure and grief, labor and rest, and one
generation goes that another may come, till all have an end. But the Seventh
day, in which they found no mention of evening and morning, they took to be an
emblem of that happy Sabbath and perfect repose we shall have in the other
Life; L. vi. contra Cells. p. 317.
when, as Origin speaks, we have done all our work faithfully, and left nothing
undone. After this, says he, follows the day of God's Sabbath and Rest, (...)
etc. in which all pious Souls, that have finished their work, as God did his,
ascending up to the Spectacle above, and the general assembly of the just and
blessed, shall feast together with God, and keep his everlasting Sabbath of joy
and gladness and peace, without any succeeding sadness and sorrow, or any
conclusion of their happy enjoyments.

Of which also the happy condition of the Hebrews, after they came out of their
Egyptian bondage, was some kind of figure: for it is called by the name of a
Sabbath or Rest which God gave them from their hard labors; and when they come
thither, they are said to come to their rest. In like manner the Apostle,
speaking of the Christian Happiness, calls it by the same name, and proves that
there still remains another Rest for the people of God. iv. Heb. 9. And the
Spirit it self says, xiv. Rev. 13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord,
that they may rest from their labors.

There is nothing we can enjoy in this life, but, besides that it is short, we
must attain that short enjoyment by much labor. We must not have it with
perfect ease, but with toil and pains and the sweat of our brows. Or if it come
at a cheaper rate, yet it will stand us in a great many thoughts, and be paid
for with much care and solicitude afterward to preserve our contentments; which
else will be in danger to be lost, and leave us the more miserable. There will
be many also that envy to us our happiness: and others perhaps that will
endeavor to oppress us, and deprive us of it. And if we can escape all these
troubles, yet we must have a sore conflict with our selves and our spiritual
enemies: which will put us to great pains to keep our selves from being
corrupted with the delights of this world, or poisoned and infected with the
evil examples that are round about us. Therefore this present time may well be
called the time of our labors: after all which there is nothing we have got
but must also have an end and we shall be forced quickly to take our leave of
it.

But now, in that joyful Sabbath that is to succeed, we shall rest from all
these labors, and be at no more pains to attain or keep our happiness. There
will be no danger, as I have said, of our being despoiled of it. No Serpent can
creep into that Paradise, to tempt and allure us from that great felicity: nor
shall we be in any danger from our own Flesh; nor find our selves in a World
where there will be any thing to excite our desires, but what we may freely
take the fullest satisfaction in. By which, and all the rest that has been
discoursed, you may clearly see, there can be nothing wanting to complete the
happiness of that state, but only the never-ceasing duration or continuance of
it. Now in this, as was said at first, the Rest we expect in the other world
differs from that which God promised the Hebrews in the land of Canaan. For by
virtue of Moses his Law they had a title only to a long life in that fruitful
Country: in opposition to which, as well as to our short life here, the
Christian Rest is called an everlasting Life, an inheritance immortal (because
incorruptible) and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
us. 1 Pet. i. 4. So our Lord himself calls it a great number of times in one
discourse he had with the stupid Jews, Joh. vi. where he exhorts them to labor
not so much for the meat that perishes, as for the meat that endures to
everlasting life, which the Son of man came to give them, ver. 27. For this is
the will, he tells them, of him that sent him, that every one which sees the
Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life, ver. 40. And because they
were still sottishly regardless of what he said, he affirms it again with the
most vehement asseverations, ver. 47. Verily, verily I say unto you, He that
believes on me has everlasting life. And 58. He that eats of this Bread
shall live for ever: which is repeated again in sundry other places of the same
Chapter.

And I must tell you, for your more ample satisfaction, that our Savior has
taken care to deliver this Doctrine to us in such words as can have no other
sense or meaning. The word for ever or everlasting in the Old Law sometime
signifies only the duration of several years, or a long compass of time,
which at last might have an end. As the Hebrew servant who had sold himself for
six years, if when they were at an end he chose not to go free, he was to serve
his master for ever: xxi. Exodus 6. that is, till the Jubilee, if his master
lived so long, and he were not redeemed nor released. And there are many
Ordinances of Moses, not now to be enumerated, which are said to be
everlasting, because they were to continue till the coming of Christ. Now lest
any one should imagine, that the Life our Savior speaks of shall be
everlasting only in the same sense, a very long continued happiness, (several
Ages suppose,) which in conclusion might determine and come to an end; he has
prevented such thoughts, by using other words besides this of everlasting life,
that we may be assured it signifies more in the Gospel then it did under the
Law, that is, an Endless Bliss. For (1.) he not only tells the Jews in the
forenamed Chapter, vi. Joh. 50. that he was the bread of which if a man did eat
he should not die: but that whosoever lives (that is, every living man) and
believes in him, shall never die; xi. Joh. 26. Which is as much as to say, He
will give us a Life without any death. And farther (2.) he says, that whosoever
keeps his saying, shall never see death: viii. 51. Which, if it signify any
thing distinct from the former, must denote that he shall never be in any
danger of death, or come near it: which, in the next words, verse. 52. is called
tasting death. How can this be, say the Jews, since Abraham and the Prophets
are dead; and thou say, if a man keep my saying, he shall never taste of
death? That Is the phrase wherein our Savior's Passion is expressed, who tasted
death ( i. e. lay in the grave a while) for every man, ii. Heb. 9. And
therefore may signify here, that our Savior's faithful Disciples, after he
has given them everlasting life, shall not die at all; no, not for the space
of three days, though afterward they might rise again. But I have taken notice
of one expression fuller then this; for he does not only say that they shall
not die nor taste of death, but (3.) that they cannot die any more. xx. Luke
36. (...). There is no possibility, after they have attained that life, that
they should die again; for they are equal to the Angels, and are the children
of God, being by the Resurrection begotten to an immortal life. Hence it is
that the Apostle calls this happy state by the name of (...) immortality, 2 Timothy i. 10. and (...) incorruption, ii. Romans 7. and says that our bodies shall
be raised in incorruption, 1 Cor. xv. 42. and put on immortality, ver. 53. and
bear the image of the heavenly Adam, i. e. of our Lord now he is in glory, who
we know dies no more, ver. 49. Which all signify the Body as well as the Soul
shall enjoy such a solid state of happiness as cannot moulder or be dissolved;
but will remain firm and durable like the Author of it, by whom death shall be
swallowed up in victory, ver. 54. i. e. be so perfectly conquered, that it
shall never recover the least power any more.

Innumerable Ages shall never put a period to this ETERNAL LIFE; but after
they are all past, the whole Man shall be as fresh and beautiful, without any
declension or sign of decay, as if it were but newly risen, and had just then
put on its purest robes of glorious Light. There will be as full a Good, I
mean, and as great a strength to enjoy it, and as perfect a liking also of it,
after millions of ages are spent in the heavenly mansions, as there was at the
very first entrance into them. Death being destroyed by him who is the
Resurrection and the Life, and who dies no more; an immortal Soul shall
inhabit an immortal Body, and they shall be for ever with the Lord. Where they
shall be for ever employed in those happy exercises before mentioned; which
will for ever be to be done again. In the doing of them there will be infinite
pleasure; and in the repetition of them there will be no disrelish, but an
infinite increase of pleasure. As they always know, so they shall always be
knowing more. For new beauties, we may well think, will discover themselves in
an infinite object; and this will excite a fresh love, and that a more vigorous
joy: And so for ever round again there will be knowing, loving and rejoicing
more and more without any end.

It is but a little that can be said of ETERNITY, though we should speak of it
to the end of Time. Nay, in Eternity it self we shall not be able to come to
the End of it in our thoughts, no more then in our being; because it has none.
We can never know it all, because it is still to come. And therefore how little
of it will this leaf of paper contain? or, should we write never so much, how
shall we be able now to reach the description of a thing so sublime? Thankful
acclamations to the goodness of our Savior for bringing life and immortality
to light, and serious admirations at the amazing greatness of what we know of
it, will be far more acceptable, as well as more easy, then a long discourse
about it. And therefore I shall end this Chapter with my wishes, that this
Blessedness I am speaking of may not seem small in our eyes, because we can
relate so little of it; but rather appear the greater and the more desirable,
because we see it is beyond our present understanding. Though this vast Circle
of Eternity cannot be measured by our thoughs; that makes it but so much the
more excellent then our Span of time. And though this LIFE comprehend such
pleasures as we cannot now enjoy; that does but exalt it above the poor
pleasures of this present life, which we can first enjoy, and then contemn. We
are not able, it is true, to conceive, nor can it enter into our hearts, what
God has in store for those that love him: but this should only excite our
longings to conceive it; and make us sigh and say, when we think of enjoying
God himself, and of an eternal enjoyment of him,

O the fullness of God! O the infiniteness of him that is the Life of this LIFE!
Who can tell what thou art, O most Blessed for ever; by whom all things were
made, and who art All that can possibly be? What comforts shine from the
brightness of thy face? How joyful will thou make us with the light of thy
countenance, when we shall see thee as thou art? It will put greater gladness
into our hearts, then if all the glory of the world should smile upon us.

But what eye can be strong enough to behold so great a Splendor? what
excellent creatures must they be made, who shall be capable to SEE GOD? It
casts us into a trance, when we do but think of being eternally beloved of
thee. O what will it do to feel our selves ever, ever, the objects of thy
infinite love? The beauteous frame of the Heavens is exceeding admirable in our
eyes. O what a goodly World is this, in which thou suffer thine Enemies to
live! What a glorious torch is the Sun, which thou have lighted to shine on the
unjust as well as on the just! Who then can hope to know, till he sees, what
the pleasures are which thou have prepared for thy Friends? what a glorious
Light shall shine from thy presence, upon the face of those that love thee?
Their hearts now cannot hold the smallest glimpse of that which shall for ever
bless and ravish them with its joys. But how can we hope to see it, unless thou will raise us above our selves; and make us no longer men of this world, but
children of the Resurrection, and equal to the holy Angels? We believe, and
rejoice to think, that thou will account us worthy to obtain that World, and
the resurrection of the dead. It is the greatest pleasure we have here, to hope
we shall enjoy all the happiness of which we now discourse: nay, far more,
infinitely more then can be conceived.

For how great will that happiness be, August. de Civ. Dei cap. ult.
where we shall neither feel any evil, nor want any good? where all our work
will be the praises of God, who shall be all in all? where no sloth shall make
us cease to praise him, nor any necessity call us to other employment? There
will be true glory indeed, where no man shall be praised, either by the error
or the flattery of him that praises. True honor that will be, which shall be
denied to no worthy person, nor given to any unworthy. Nay, the unworthy shall
not so much as seek it there, where none are permitted to come but such as are
worthy. True peace is there, where nothing shall fall cross to our desires,
either from our selves or any other. There He who gave Virtue, will be its
Reward; having promised that he himself, then which nothing can be greater,
nothing better, will be the portion of it. What else shall we understand by
those words, I will be their God, and they my people; but that I will be their
Satisfaction, I will be all that every one can honestly desire, both life, and
health, and sustenance, and riches, and glory, and honor, and all good? For so
we read, that God will be all in all. He will be the End of our desires, who
will be seen without end, and loved without lothing, and praised without
weariness. This will be the office, this will be the inclination, this will be
the work of all in that Eternal Life, which is common to all. There we shall
sing the mercies of the Lord for ever. There we shall keep that truly greatest
Sabbath, which has no Evening. There we shall rest from labor and see, we
shall see and love, we shall love and praise. Behold what will be in the End
without end. For what else is our End, but to come to the Kingdom which has no
End? Amen.

CHAP. V. Of the Certainty of this ETERNAL LIFE, whose Excellency is a little
farther illustrated out of the Holy Scriptures.
WHen I reflect upon the foregoing Meditations concerning the LIFE to come, and
the ETERNITY of it, I begin to think I have wronged it much, by so poor and
dull a description of so great a Good; and by endeavoring to draw that into a
few particular considerations, which has in it innumerable perfections. It had
been more becoming our ignorance, perhaps, to have admired its fullness, then to
undertake to search how full it is. Alas! what shallow brains have we to
contain a wide and deep Ocean? what weak eyes, to look steadfastly upon the most
glorious Light of heaven? How much too short and narrow are our thoughts, to
compass an Eternal duration? When we have done all we can, the best way, I
think, to our satisfaction will be, to have recourse to a passage from the
mouth of God himself, wherein we must rest our selves contented. It is in the
xxi. Rev. 7. where St. John was told by him who sat upon the throne, (ver. 5.)
that He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my Son.

A most marvellously-large Conveyance is here delivered to us from him, who
has all that can be in his possession. The Great Lord of Heaven and Earth
makes us a grant in these words so exceeding full, that we cannot desire it
should run in more comprehensive terms. For by this promise (1.) He makes over
to us ALL things. Heart cannot wish more to make us completely happy, then he
settles upon us; for there is no good thing that he will withhold from those
that steadfastly adhere to him. And observe (2.) the tenure wherein we shall
hold these vast and large possessions, which is as an Inheritance. We have an
everlasting perpetual estate made us in all things. The terms of this writing
are such as if it had run in these words, By an eternal indefeasible right he
shall possess all blessings. For Inheritances, it is well known, among the
Hebrews never failed, nor went out of the family. They could not be so
alienated by sale or gift, but they returned in the year of Jubilee to their
first owner or his posterity. Which makes the word INHERIT, in the holy
language, to signify the enjoyment of a purchase or possession out of which the
inheritour can never be thrown, and which he cannot quit, but shall remain
settled in him to perpetuity. This St. Paul calls the riches of the GLORY of
his inhehitance, i. Ephesians. 18. to signify, that our celestial Patrimony is not
only exceeding large and firmly settled on us; but also most noble, and brings
along with it everlasting honor and renown. Which is more fully explained, you
may note (3.) and the reason of it given, in the next words, I will be GOD to
him. I will confer, that is, such benefits on him, as are fit for the bounty of
the omnipotent Goodness to bestow. Look what He was to Abraham in this world,
(to whom he promised to be a God, xvii. Genesis 7.) that he will be to us
eternally: In blessing he will bless us, and be our exceeding great reward.

The word (...), GOD, answers to the Hebrew word Elohim; which does not respect
the Essence of the Almighty, but his Providence, as in Psalm. xiv. 1.
Genebrard among others has well observed: and signifies as much as the Judge,
the Moderatour and Governor of the World, (from whence it is that Judges,
Magistrates and Rulers are called by this name,) to whom it belongs to give
rewards and punishments. And accordingly the Hebrew writers observe, that it is
never said the Lord will be the God of any persons, but when he expresses some
singularly-great kindness, and stands in a special relation of love to them.
In particular Abarbinell notes (upon Deuteronomy. vi.) that he is never called the God
of Israel, till he had brought them in a wonderful manner out of the land of
Egypt, the house of bondage. I find, indeed, that he promised to be their God
before, when he told Abraham, that he would give him and his seed the land of
Canaan for an everlasting possession. xvii. Genesis 8. But he did not begin to be
so, till he began to lead them thither; and, in token of their being his, they
had kept the Passover, and received his Law from Mount Sinai. Before this
Moses says, We were bondmen in Egypt, and the LORD brought us out with a mighty
hand: vi. Deuter. 21. And the LORD showed signs and wonders great and sore upon
Egypt, upon Pharaoh and upon all his household, before our eyes: ver. 22. He
does not say in all these words (...) the LORD our GOD; but only, the LORD
brought us out, and, the LORD showed: because he speaks of the time before the
giving of the Law, which was the greatest kindness he did them after they came
out of Egypt. But as soon as he had made mention of that, (says Abarbinel) in
the very next words, ver. 24. he alters his style, and tells them, The LORD
commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the LORD our GOD, for our good
always, etc. And ver. 25. It shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do
all these Commandments, before the LORD our GOD, as he has commanded us. And
so he speaks vii. 1. When the LORD thy GOD shall bring thee into the land, etc.
and ver. 2. When the LORD thy GOD shall deliver them before thee, etc. and ver.
6. Thou art a holy people to the LORD thy GOD; the LORD thy GOD has chosen
thee to be a special people to himself, etc. For from the time of his
appearing on mount Sinai and so forward (says that learned Hebrew Writer) He
was our God, because then we took upon us his Divinity.

And I think I may as truly observe, that till the Resurrection of our Lord
from the dead, (which completed that (...) departure which Moses and Elias
discoursed with him about, and said he should accomplish at Jerusalem, ix. Luke
31.) we never read that the Father Almighty is called the God of those who
believe in his Son Jesus. Then he demonstrated beyond all contradiction that he
was their Savior and mighty Deliverer, who would rescue them from the bondage
of corruption, the fear of death, the power of the grave, and give them
immortal life. And therefore then he bids Mary go and tell his Disciples, whom
he calls Brethren, and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and
to my God and your God. xx. Joh. 17. This is the first time he is called their
God: but ever after there is no language more common. For as St. i. Ephesians. 3, 17.
1 Pet. i. 3.
Peter and St. Paul call him the GOD of our Lord Jesus Christ; (I suppose,
because he had raised him from the dead, and highly glorified him for his
obedient suffering of death;) so they address themselves to him as particularly
related to them, and ready to bestow upon them the like blessedness, saying, i.
Romans 8. 1 Cor. i. 4. iv. Phil. 19. 1 Thessalonians. iii. 9.
I thank MY GOD always, etc. MY GOD shall supply all your need: We rejoice
before OUR GOD, etc. as you may read in many places of St. Paul's Epistles.
Which shows, that this promise in the Revelation, (made after our Savior's
Ascension,) of being the God of those who overcome, includes in it the
bestowing on us the most excellent benefits. Because he will be our GOD in a
more excellent manner then he ever was yet to men: such a GOD as he was to our
Blessed Lord himself. He will prefer us to live with him in great splendor and
glory. He will give us an inheritance in a better Country, which is an
heavenly; where all delights flow, and never cease to spring up to those happy
Souls, who shall enjoy the eternal fruits of his greatest love.

For so he adds, (4.) and he shall be to me a Son. A Son, you know, expects the
Inheritance of his Father; because to him it properly belongs, and upon him it
descends: And therefore to be to GOD a Son, is to be made like him, and to live
with him in that very happiness and bliss which he enjoys. So St. Paul
expresses it, viii. Romans 17. he shall be an heir of GOD, a coheir with Jesus,
who as the Son of God inherits his Glory. He shall participate, that is, with
God in his everlasting life, kingdom, honor and joy: which what it is we are
not able to tell, no more then we can comprehend what his Majesty is who
possesses heaven and earth, and is infinite in all perfections. But we have the
greatest reason that can be to expect so great a bliss, because we know that
God loves his Son Jesus, and has given ALL THINGS into his hand. iii. Joh. 35.
We are sure that God has made him most blessed for ever; He has made him
exceeding glad with his countenance. Honor and Majesty has he laid upon him,
and his glory is great in his Salvation. xxi. Psalm. 5, 6.

Now it is most evident, you may again observe (5.) that the general
intendment of this promise is, to put us in hope of being made like to Christ
our Elder Brother. For he is not ashamed to call us by that name. And this
being his great Prerogative, that he is Heir of all things; when the Father of
mercy assures us that we shall inherit all things, it is as much as to say, we
shall share with Christ in his large possessions. It is easy to note, how the
Holy Gospel describes our expected felicity in the same terms wherein it
speaks of that which Christ our Head enjoys: with whom St. Paul says we shall
appear in glory, and reign with him, and have a glorious body like his, and in
order to it be caught up in the clouds, (1 Thessalonians. iv. 17.) which was the manner
of his ascension to heaven, i. Act. 9. And accordingly here God promises to him
that overcomes, that he shall inherit all things; in conformity still with our
Savior, whom he has appointed heir of all things. i. Heb. 2.

I cannot say there is any allusion in these words to the Olympic rewards,
given to the Conquerours in those Combats: but so it is, that they who overcame
there were accounted (...) equal to their Gods; that is, their Hero's or
deified men: Fabri Agonist. L. ii. c. 11.16, 17.
and therefore had Statues erected to their honor, and an annual Pension
settled on them for their more noble maintenance. But what was this to the
real Divine honor and glory which God will give to victorious Souls? To whom
he promises not a small Pension or Annuity; but an inheritance, and that of all
things: i. e. to shine in the glory of our Blessed Savior; who is King of
kings and Lord of lords, and can prefer all his Subjects to such a greatness,
that they shall be more like Gods then men. So St. Greg. Nazianzen often
speaks, that Orat. xxxvi. p. 592.
we shall be made Gods in the other World, by him that was made Man for us in
this. It is hard to tell what Heraclitus meant by that speech recorded in
Clemens Alexandrinus L. iii. Padag. c. 1.
, (...). Men are Gods, Gods are men: But it is verified in the Christian
Religion, which reveals a Divine state, to which we shall ascend when we leave
the earth, by him who came down from Heaven into a vile condition, that he
might promote us thither.

Let us study then these words very hard, and think often what it is to have
ALL THINGS that the love of the Almighty will bestow, when, in the most eminent
sense and in another World, he shall become OUR GOD: and what it is to have an
estate in him that can never be cut off, but remains as firm as the Throne on
which he sat when he spoke these words. And then, if you believe in him, it
will fill you with unspeakable joy, (without entering into particular
enquiries,) to think that you shall be so happy as to be his Sons and Heirs,
who want nothing that can be desired, or he can give. And indeed these other
words, ETERNAL LIFE, wherein God's gracious promise commonly runs, are of the
same import and force with those now mentioned. All that we hope for is
contained in them. As (1.) Pardon of Sin: without which we cannot take one step
toward so great a bliss. For death, the fruit and punishment of sin, will still
remain, unless sin be pardoned: and then what hope can we have of life, much
less of Eternal life? which is therefore perhaps called by the name of
Righteousness, v. Gal. 5. because it includes our perfect justification and
absolution from the guilt of sin, without which we could not attain it. And
(2.) it supposes the Adoption of Sons; which is begun in this life, but not
perfected till the next: when we shall be made the children of God by receiving
a new life from him at the Resurrection of the dead. And (3.) the Redemption of
the Body is another blessing included in it. For being raised again, it will be
freed from its present weaknesses, alterations and pains, to which it is
obnoxious; and stand in need of not so much as food and raiment. And therefore
the time when he will bestow it is called the day of our Redemption. iv. Ephesians.
30. To which must be added (4.) the carrying of it up to heaven, to meet the
Lord: For being raised a spiritual body, it will not be fit for this World,
but for the other. Where (5.) we shall rest with him in the celestial
Inheritance, and enjoy all the happiness it affords: for LIFE, you have heard,
signifies all good things. And (lastly) the Perpetuity of them is plainly
expressed in the word ETERNAL; which makes the happiness of this heavenly LIFE
appear so exceeding great, that our present Life, compared to it, is (as
Censorinus says of Time in regard of Eternity) no more then a Winter's day.

Let this then suffice us to know, that we shall have a perfect enjoyment of
all the Good we are capable to receive, when we are made greater then we are,
by the change that shall be wrought in us at our departure hence, and at the
resurrection of the dead. And let our pains be more employed to know the truth
and certainty of this, then to know what the Good is we shall enjoy; which will
be best known by possessing it.

And herein now we may admire the Goodness of God, and see how liberal he is
of his bounties, where we are capable to receive them. Though he has said
little to make us particularly understand the LIFE of the next world; yet he
has said very much to assure us that there is such an happy Life. Where we can
understand and comprehend his mind, there he fully expresses himself; and
therefore where he is more silent, it is (no doubt) because, should he speak of
such matters, we cannot understand him. We are able to conceive any thing that
he shall declare for the reason of our hope, and the ground of our faith; and
it highly concerns us to be very well satisfied in the foundation of such
expectations in a future World. And therefore herein our gracious God has not
been sparing to reveal himself; but has granted us the strongest Evidences for
our claim to such an Inheritance. Which makes me conclude that, if we were as
capable to receive instruction concerning the Inheritance it self, and to have
a Terrier (as I may call it) or particular description of that heavenly
Country, of the manner of their Life, and all the fruits growing there,
delivered to us; He that has been so large in the assurances he has given us,
would not have denied us also this satisfaction. Well therefore it is for us,
that this is the only reason why we want it, and know not what we shall be;
because we cannot, till we be changed, be made partakers of so great a
knowledge. And well is it for us, that we have also so good a cause to think
that this is the only reason; because God has manifested himself so fully to
us in other things that belong to our happiness, by giving us the most firm
grounds whereon to build our future hopes.

This is the thing which this present Treatise chiefly intends, to show, as God
himself speaks concerning the promises of the New Jerusalem xxi. Rev. 5. that
these Words are faithful and true. There is no couzenage or deceit in these
promises, no fraud or collusion in the drawing them up; nor any alteration in
God's mind since they were made, and he has set such seals to them: But I may
say, as he there does to St. John, who it is possible might doubt of what the
Angel had shown him, Behold, (or, as Andreas Caesariensis reads it,) (...),
Behold, behold, I make all things new. See here and observe; I my self, who sit
upon my Throne, assure thee of the Certainty of these Visions: If thou will
take my word, I here pass it to thee, that I will fulfill all these promises.
Such, I say, is the unquestionable credit of the Words of ETERNAL LIFE. God
himself has spoken them; He has bid us believe them; yea, he has said, we
must account him a liar, if we do not rely upon them: For this, says St. John,
is the Record, that God has given us eternal Life, and this Life is in his
Son.

Before I come to a particular examination of all that has been said and done
to verify this, let me note these two things, First, that the Apostle says,
Jesus is the Son of GOD, we have no reason to doubt of the Eternal Life he
promises: but upon the very same grounds that we believe the one, we ought to
believe the other. If the Father, the Word, the Holy Ghost, and all the other
Witnesses, have proved the former by undeniable testimonies; then at the
sametime they proved this also, that we shall live by him.

For (1.) it is evident that, if Jesus was the Son of God, sent by him in a
special manner into the world, to act in his stead; we are to believe all that
he says of himself, or that others by his commission and authority have
declared him to be. Now if we look into his Gospel, we shall find that he most
earnestly affirms himself to have been before Abraham was; viii. Joh. 58. and
to have had a Glory with God before the world was; xvii. 5. and to be so one
with the Father, that the Father was in him, and he in the Father: x. 30, 38.
And they who were his inspired Witnesses, whom he said he would send as the
Father sent him, xx. 21. and who were filled by him with the Holy Ghost,
declared him to be God's WORD, who in the beginning was with God, and was GOD;
i. Joh. 1, 2. the image of the invisible God, the brightness of his glory, and
the character of his person; who in the beginning laid the foundation of the
earth, and the heavens were the works of his hands. i. Col. 15. i. Heb. 3, 10.
From all which we may certainly conclude, that he is not only the Son of God
in regard of his Authority, but by Nature; begotten of him before all worlds,
of one substance with the Father. And therefore

We may be confident, (2.) that he being thus nearly related to God, must needs
know his mind, and be acquainted with his most secret purposes and resolutions:
To which he was so privy, that he says he was then in heaven, when he was come
down to reveal them to men. iii. Joh. 13. So that we may safely look upon the
promises he makes us of ETERNAL LIFE, as the declarations of God's gracious
will and pleasure, which shall undoubtedly be fulfilled. No man indeed (as St.
John speaks, i. 18.) has seen GOD at any time; the onely-begotten Son, which
is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. For who could dive into
God's mind, and tell us what was in his thoughts? What man could enter into his
breast, and see what was in his heart to do for us? None but his
onely-begotten Son; who being in his bosom, and privy to his most secret
Counsels, (...), has declared or expounded him, i. e. his hidden will and
decrees, which else had not been revealed to us. It is the opinion of
Maimonides in several parts of his Works L. de Fund. Legis cap. i. n. 10. More
Nev. part. i. c. 37. 54. etc.
, that when Moses prayed God to show him his Glory, he meant his Essence, of
which he desired to have a distinct conception as it is in it self; such as we
have of a man when we have seen his face, and by the image of him remaining in
our mind can distinguish him from all other men. But there are other of their
Learned men, who by his Glory understand the Rewards he will give the pious,
and the prosperity he sometimes bestows on the wicked. Whatsoever it was, God
told him he could not comprehend it, but must be content with the sight only
of his back parts, not of his face. xxxiii. Exodus ult. That is, says
Maimonides, with the knowledge of something of his Essence; or, as he elsewhere
expounds it More Nev. p. i. c. 21.
, of his Works and Attributes; of which he had such an obscure knowledge as we
have of a man whose back parts we have seen, but never beheld his face. To be
so intimately acquainted with God and his mind as he wished, was the privilege
of the Messiah alone, who had the clearest and fullest sight of the Glory of
the Father, both of his Essence, and his Will, and his gracious intentions
toward us: for he is (...) in the bosom of the Father, and therefore sees his
face, as the Scripture speaks; and has not merely some obscure representations
of him, like that of a man when he turns his back to us, but a full view of him
in all his perfections, of which he himself is the very Image. And what he saw,
he has by God's express will revealed to us; and discovered those things which
eye never beheld (but were kept secret from the foundation of the world)
concerning the glorious rewards which his love will give to all pious persons.
For since I have proved that he is his Son, we cannot imagine that he presumed
to say more then he knew, or told us things out of his own mind only, (when he
spoke of ETERNAL LIFE, as he frequently did;) but what he has seen and heard,
that he testifies, as it is iii. John 32.

We cannot believe otherwise (3.) when we look upon him as the Son of God, but
that he must needs speak the very truth to us. As he could not but know the
Mind of God, if he was so one with him; so he could not but speak to us
according to what he knew of his Mind. For as the Father is Truth, so is the
Son; because he is perfectly the same with the Father. We worship the Father of
Truth, and the Son the Truth; who are two in person, but one in consent, and
agreement, and identity of will: as Origin L. viii. contra Celsum.
speaks explaining those words of our Savior, I and the Father are one; x.
Joh. 30. and, I am the Truth: xiv. 6. We may be confident that the words of
both are equally faithful and true. So God the Father bad St. John write of
his own sayings, as I observed before, xxi. Rev. 5. And in the same style our
Savior commands him to write of himself, These things says the Amen, the
faithful and true witness. iii. Rev. 14. John Baptist had said as much before,
iii. Joh. 34. He whom God has sent speaks the words of God. To which the
words of our Savior, in another place of that Gospel, perfectly accord, xii.
49, 50. I have not spoken of my self; but the Father which sent me, he gave me
a commandment what I should say and what I should speak. And I know that his
commandment is EVERLASTING LIFE: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the
Father said unto me, so I speak.

And (4.) he has no less Power then he has Truth; but being the Son of God,
the heir of all things, can make good his gracious promises, and put us into
the possession of the Eternal Inheritance, which we expect as coheirs with
him. He was declared the Son of God with power by his resurrection from the
dead; i. Romans 4. according to his own prayer just before he offered up himself
to God, Father, the hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify
thee: As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal
life to as many as thou have given him. xvii. Joh. 1, 2.

And can we think (5.) that he will not faithfully execute this trust, and
employ his power for the end to which it was given him? He would not then be
like his Father, who keeps Truth for ever: As he also most certainly will;
being the same Jesus yesterday, and to day, and for ever. xiii. Heb. 8. For if
Moses was faithful in the house of another, wherein he was but a Servant: no
doubt our Lord, who is a Son over his own house or family, (iii. Heb. 6.) will
not fail to discharge his royal office with all exactness; but manifest
himself to be like his Name, The Word of God, xix. Rev. 13. Faithful and true,
ver. 11.

This RECORD concerning him St. John thought so weighty and secure an evidence,
that he concludes all good Christians as sure of Eternal Life, as if it were
already in their hands. For after he had said here, (in the words I am
explaining) that God has given us, i.e. made us a promise of, Eternal Life,
which is in his Son; he adds immediately, (which is the Second thing I intended
to note, we have eternal life. Which cannot signify less, then that we have
such a good right to it, that we may account it ours. The reason is, because he
that effectually believes in Jesus, has him in whose power it is to give it,
and who has passed his word, many a time, that he will bestow it. So you read
ver. 12. He that has the Son, has life. He may be as sure of it as if it were
in his present possession: for by faith in Christ he is united to him who is
the fountain and wellspring of life and bliss, and stands engaged diverse ways
to make all the Members of his Body happy with himself. For to as many as
received him he gave (...) power, or authority, to become the Sons of God: i.
Joh. 12. who may legally claim the consummation of their adoption, in the
Eternal Inheritance. They are by his grant unquestionable heirs of it, and
have such a strong title to it, that they can never be defeated of it. This
heavenly Estate is in them, as Lawyers speak, though they be not in it. They
have an indisputable right, I mean, to it, and may call it theirs; though they
be not yet seized of it, and have not taken possession; which in due time none
can hinder or debar them of. So the Apostle would have the Faithful steadfastly
believe; for this was the very end for which he recorded the Evidences
forementioned, that they might know they have eternal life, ver. 13. which he
repeats often in his Gospel, as you may read iii. Joh. 36. v. 24. vi. 47.
where he asserts this in the most earnest manner, and assures them that he
spoke of this matter out of certain knowledge, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
He that believes on me has everlasting life. He is a most happy man, and may
look upon himself as owner of more then all this world is worth. Which he can
never lose, though he be not yet entered upon his inheritance; because it is in
the custody of him who has all power in heaven and earth, and has said, as it
there follows, ver. 54. I will raise him up at the last day.

Well then, seeing that these are the things we expect, to have our sins
blotted out when the times of refreshing shall come, to be made children of the
resurrection, to be delivered from the wrath to come, to have glorious bodies,
to reign with Christ, and to be made heirs of all things; and seeing we are
said to have this bliss, i.e. to have a certain right to it, if we believe on
him; and seeing also that our right is apparent from the same Records or
Witnesses whereby it was proved that Jesus is the Son of God: All that I can
apprehend remaining to be done, to give us a fuller certainty of these
promises, is to make particular inquiry what every one of those Witnesses,
which testify to Jesus, say to this point, that God has given us eternal
life, and that this life is in his Son. This is the RECORD, St. John says,
i.e. this is the matter of it. Let us examine, if you please, all these Six
Witnesses one after another upon this matter, and see if they do not give the
same evidence of it that they have done of the other; and make as infallible
proofs that God has given us this blessing, and that it is in him, as they do
that Jesus is the Son of God, and came from him.

There is no way like to this (that I know of) to attain a strong faith and
hope of Eternal Life: which it infinitely concerns us all to make sure, and to
have a well grounded persuasion of, both that we may live comfortably in the
midst of all troubles; and that we may be able to overcome all temptations; and
that we may be willing to die; and, when nothing else will give us the least
comfort, we may lift up our heads with unspeakable joy.

For what can deject their hearts, Macarius Hom xxxiv.
whose hope is firmly fixed in Heaven? What should make them complain, who have
for their Inheritance everlasting Life? Unspeakable, unconceivable are the
glories, innumerable are the good things, which God has prepared for those
that love him. As in things visible, the plants, the seeds, the flowers are so
numerous that none can count them, nor is it possible to cast up the sum of
all the other treasures of the Earth; or as in the Sea, the wit of man cannot
comprehend the creatures in it, either their number, or their kinds, or their
differences, or take the measure of its waters, or of its place; or as in the
Air none can number the Birds, or in the Heavens tell all the Stars: So it is
impossible to tell or conceive the riches of Christians in the invisible world;
their unmeasurable, their infinite, their incomprehensible Riches. For if these
Creatures are so infinite and incomprehensible by man, how much more He that
made and formed them all?

And therefore it ought to fill every Christian heart with the greater joy and
exultation of spirit, because the Riches and Inheritance prepared for them so
much surpasses all that can be uttered. And with all diligence and humility
should we buckle our selves to the Christian Combat, that we may be partakers
of their Riches. For the Inheritance and the portion of Christians is God
himself. They may say, with David, The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance;
My lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea I have a goodly heritage.
Glory be to him who gives us himself. Glory be to him for ever, who mixes his
own Nature with Christian Souls.

(...) effable kindness of God, who free(...) less then himself upon us! O the
ineffable happiness of such Souls, who are wholly in joy and mirth and peace,
as so many Kings, and Lords, and Gods! Behold here thy Nobility. Christianity
is no vulgar or contemptible thing. Thou art called to the dignity of a
Kingdom; not like that of earthly Princes, whose glory and riches are
corruptible and pass away: but to the Kingdom of God, to Riches divine and
celestial which never decay. For there blessed Souls reign together with the
heavenly King, and in the heavenly company.

Since such good things therefore are set before us, such glorious promises are
made us, such great good will of our Lord is manifested toward us; let us not
despise his kindness, nor be slack in our motion toward Eternal Life: but
give up our selves entirely to the good pleasure of the Lord. And let us call
upon him, that by the power of his Divinity he would redeem us from the dark
prison of dishonorable affections, and vindicating his own Image and
Workmanship, cause it to shine most brightly; till our Souls be so sound and
pure, that we be made worthy of the communion of the Spirit, giving glory to
the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost for ever. Amen.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Testimony of the FATHER.
WE must begin, as we did before, with the Witnesses in Heaven: the first of
which, you know, is the FATHER; who spoke three times from Heaven by an audible
voice, to testify to our Lord Jesus. And if you examine again all that he has
said, you will find both these things recorded in his words, that he has given
us ETERNAL LIFE, and that this LIFE is in his Son.

I.
The first time that God the FATHER spoke from Heaven was at our Savior's
Baptism; when the Heavens were opened, and a Voice came from thence, which
said, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased. iii. Luke 22. In
which words there are two things very remarkable, which plainly testify to the
Truth of those two now mentioned, that LIFE is in his Son, and that we shall
partake of it.

I. That He calls Jesus his SON, and his beloved Son. Which being spoken from
heaven in such a glorious manner as the Gospel describes it, must needs
signify him to be his SON in the most eminent sense; for it was never said to
any Angel in this sort, Thou art my Son, my beloved Son. This declared him to
have the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him bodily, to be invested with his
own authority and power, and to be that Seed promised who should bless all the
World: which is a thing too great for any one to do but for GOD himself. It
was by an audible voice from heaven that the Angel of the Lord called to
Abraham, to tell him the LORD had sworn by himself, that in his seed all the
nations of the earth should be blessed. xxii. Genesis ver. 15, 16, 18. And so now,
to show us the Seed was come who should be such a great Benefactour to mankind,
the LORD himself speaks by a voice from Heaven, declaring Jesus to be his SON,
the Author of that Universal Bliss which he had promised. Which tells us
plainly enough that LIFE is in him: (which is one of the things that St. John
affirms upon this Record:) for else he would not be such a Son as he now
declared him, able to bless all Nations. Who it is manifest had him not for
their visible Leader, as the Israelites had Moses and Joshua to give them a
temporal inheritance; and therefore were to have his spiritual Divine
Benediction in another world, where He is the author of eternal Salvation to
all that obey him.

And lest you should imagine this to be merely a collection of mine own, which
I have forced out of these words, I will refer you to our Savior's own
interpretation of them in that speech of his v. Joh. 26. For as the Father has
life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in himself. Here he
teaches us to argue, that, if he be the SON of God, as this voice said he was,
then he is by the same voice declared to have LIFE in himself; because the
Father has so, whom his SON, his only SON, does perfectly resemble. And he
teaches us withal, that this is a power communicated to him, as he is the
Christ: for he says the Father has given him to have life in himself, and
that (as you read in the next verse) because he is the Son of man; that is,
the great person he promised to send of the seed of Abraham. Now we read of no
other time when the Father might be said to have given him this power, but now,
when he owned him for his SON, and anointed him, as you shall hear, with the
Holy Ghost, to preach the glad tidings of immortal life. Now God the Father
sealed and authorized him to be the person, to whom we must repair for the meat
that endures to everlasting life. vi. Joh. 27. He declared him now to be the
bread of God, as he calls himself, which gives life to the world, ver. 33. the
bread of life, ver. 35. the living bread, ver. 51. the manna which came down
from heaven, and nourishes to eternal life: in short, to have all things
committed to him, that whatsoever things the Father does, these also, you may
be sure, the Son does likewise. v. Joh. 19. He does them (...), after the
same equality and perfect likeness of power: (as Greg. Nazianz Orat. 36. p.
584. D.
. expounds the word (...) likewise in this place.) So that we need no more
doubt of his ability, then we do of God the Father's, to give eternal life to
all his followers.

II. And that he will employ his power to make us partakers of it, (which is
the other part of the Record concerning this Eternal Life,) is manifest from
the next part of this voice of God the Father, which said, in thee I am well
pleased. He expresses here, that he takes a singular delight in this person,
and bears such a dear affection to him, that there is nothing he will deny him.
Now that hereby is denoted also his exceeding great love and good will toward
all those that belong to his Son, you may be soon satisfied, by observing that
these are the very words wherein God declares his lovingkindness toward his
Church in the days of Christ, lxii. Isa. 4. There the Lord calls her (...)
Hephzi-bah, (...), (as some Greek versions render it,) my delight is in her.
That Is the reason he himself gives of her name, as it there follows, for the
LORD delights in thee. Where the LXX use the very word in which this voice
from heaven is recorded, (...), for the LORD is well pleased in thee. From
whence I think it reasonable to conclude that, the same thing being said of
both, God declared his delight in all Christians, and the pleasure he will take
in bestowing his benefits on them, when he declared himself to be well pleased
in this his dear Son, whom they acknowledge for their Lord and Master. He tells
us by this voice, that he will be reconciled to us, and, forgetting our ill
behavior toward him, will espouse us to himself (as it follows in the
Prophet) in the tenderest love, and rejoice to bestow his choicest favors on
us.

And that this is no inference merely wrung from these words, or a notion of my
own contrivance, you may presently agree, if you consider that thus John
Baptist, in all likelihood, understood them. For seeing Jesus, a little after
he had baptized him, coming toward him, he cried out, Behold the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world. i. Joh. 29. And again, the next day
after this he pointed two of his Disciples unto Jesus, and said in part the
very same words, Behold the Lamb of God, ver. 36. Now what is it to be the Lamb
of God, but to be a Sacrifice of God's own appointment, so pleasing and
acceptable to him, that it obtains all the ends for which it was offered? And
what is it to take away the sins of the world, but by overcoming all the
temptations to which Adam yielded, and being obedient even to the death, to
restore us unto a right of entering Paradise again, from whence our Sins have
excluded us? to open the Kingdom of heaven to all believers, by removing, as I
may say, the flaming Sword; that is, taking those obstacles out of the way that
debarred us from approaching to the Tree of life? This, no doubt, is the
complete meaning of Carrying away the sins of mankind, which are the only
impediments that hinder us from the enjoyment of immortality: and therefore
being gone, we have free leave to return to it. Now John the Baptist had no
other ground that we can find for this Conclusion, but only this Voice, which
I proved he heard, from the Father, concerning the pleasure which he took in
his Son. Whereby he did as good as affirm, that his delight in Jesus, who
delighted to do his will, was so great, that he would restore us into his
ancient love for his sake, and be perfectly appeased and reconciled to us by
his means: so that we should be no longer banished from his blessed presence,
but by the forgiveness of our sins be placed again in that happy state, from
which we had stood so long exiled.

II.
Now from hence let us pass to take a review of the Second Testimony of the
Father to him; where we shall find the same thing recorded again, that He has
given us eternal life, and that this life is in his Son; i.e. it is in his
power to give it. The places are well known where we may meet with it, in xvii.
Matt. and other Evangelists, which tell us that Jesus, being on an high
Mountain with three of his Disciples, who were wont to attend him on particular
occasions, was transfigured before them, and a voice came from Heaven, which
said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear him. It would be
too tedious to speak of this Mountain, and his Transfiguration there, in such a
glorious manner that his Countenance shone as the Sun: (though this may
reasonably be thought (as I showed in the former Treatise) to be a
representation of his Ascension into heaven, where he shines at the right hand
of the Father, and is the Lord of glory.) And therefore I shall only observe
two things: first, the words now added to the voice formerly delivered;
secondly, the manner wherein they were spoken in the audience of those Apostles.

I. As for the words now added in this second voice to those of the first,
(wherein he had declared him, as he does here again, his beloved Son, in whom
he delighted,) they are these, HEAR YE HIM. Which are the very words that Moses
spoke to the Children of Israel when he prophesied of the Messiah, and said,
(xviii. Deuteronomy. 15.) unto him ye shall hearken. And it may be one reason why
Moses was now present when God spoke these words in the Mount; that he might
consent to this truth which was now so solemnly pronounced in his hearing, that
Jesus was the Great person of whom he had prophesied. Now God bidding the
Apostles HEAR HIM, and Moses himself, to whom they had hearkened all this
while, being content that he should take his room; it is an argument of
something to be declared by him that Moses had not spoken. And what should that
be, but only the words of Eternal Life, which was but obscurely intimated and
shadowed in the ancient Law; but by him was preached so clearly and distinctly,
that the voice of the Heavens is not more audible?

There is nothing, I shall show in due place, that our Savior preached so
frequently, nothing upon which he insisted so long and earnestly, and took such
pains to settle in men's minds, as this belief, that Eternal Life shall be the
portion of all that do well. And therefore when God the Father bad them hear
him, who made it his principal business to publish this glad tidings to the
World, it was the very same as if this Voice had said in express words, This is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; believe it, He shall give you
eternal life.

This is the Commandment his Father gave him, as you heard before, xii. Joh.
50. This is the will of him that sent him, vi. Joh. 40. This is the promise
that he has promised us, even eternal life, 1 John ii. 25. And therefore he
stands engaged to bestow it, and we agree with him for it when we enter into
his service. For you may observe farther, that as to hear Moses was to embrace
the Covenant that God made with them by him: so we can understand no less by
hearing the Son of God, then our entering into the New Covenant, of which he is
the Mediator; which is founded upon better promises then the former, whereby
we have a title to a celestial, not an earthly inheritance, whereof he is the
Lord, and to which he has engaged himself to be our Conductour.

And indeed Moses and Elias, who were never called the Sons of God, much less
by a voice from heaven so termed, appearing now with our Savior in glory, it
was a notable sign that He should be taken up to a far greater glory then
theirs, and have power of changing men into such a condition as that wherein he
was now transfigured; and in the mean time should preach that life and
immortality, which they saw conferred upon those two persons to honor him.

Whom the Disciples, you may observe again, saw in a glory so much greater then
the Lawgiver himself now had, that if the voice from heaven had been silent,
it would have been an argument our Savior should be the Lord of glory. For
when they desired to make their abode there, and for that purpose to build
three Tabernacles, they say, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for
Elias; putting him in the first place before the other two: which they would
not sure have done, had not Moses and Elias done reverence to him as a greater
person then themselves.

I shall end this with a Tradition among the Hebrews, which, if it signify any
thing, may serve to show that Jesus is their long-expected Christ. For R.
Bechai says in xlix. Genesis 10.
, that when Jacob speaks of the coming of Schilo, he comprehends not only the
last Redeemer, (the Messiah,) but the first Redeemer also, i. e. Moses, who
shall have the honor then to attend upon the Messiah, and enter into the holy
land: according to what the Masters say upon xv. Exodus 1. where the words are,
then Moses (...) shall sing. And in the great Commentary upon Deuteronomy they
write, (as the same Author goes on,) that God said to Moses, Because thou
did give thy life for them in this world, (desiring that God would blot his
name out of the book of life, to preserve theirs,) in the world to come, i.e.
the days of the Messiah, when I shall bring Elias to them, you two shall enter
in together. Which may possibly be the meaning of those words i. Joh. 21. Art
thou Elias? and he said, I am not. Art thou that Prophet? i. e. Moses, who
alone was worthy of the name of (...), the Prophet, above all others. Now if
there were any ground of such expectation, that these two should come in their
own persons, you see it here fulfilled on this holy Mount; where Moses, who was
so much in mount Horeb, and Elias, who used mount Carmel, now appeared, and had
communication with him about his (...) departure out of this world, unto his
heavenly Kingdom. ix. Luke 31.

The Mount where they met, and where Jesus was transfigured, is generally
believed to be Tabor; as Hermon, a little hill near Jordan, there is a
tradition, was the place from whence Elias was taken up to heaven. In these two
Mountains, says Proclus Orat. viii.
, our Lord Jesus was proclaimed the Beloved Son of God, from whom we may expect
immortal bliss. At Hermon, when he was baptized in Jordan; on Tabor, when he
was transfigured, and appeared in a glory as much greater then Elias's, as the
high mountain Tabor was above the little hill of Hermon. And so was fulfilled,
says he, that prophecy of the Psalmist, lxxxix. 12. Tabor and Hermon shall
rejoice in thy Name. In both places was published this joyful news, that God
had sent his Son to be the Savior of the World. First in the mount from whence
Elias was transported into heaven; and then in the mount where he came to
attend on our Lord when he was transfigured, God the Father, (...), confirming
his Sonship, proclaimed again with a loud voice, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased; hear him. For he that hears him, hears me, as
Proclus there glosses; and he that is ashamed of him and his words, of him will
I be ashamed in my glory.

Let us listen to him therefore: and since we hear him say, as I noted before,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my words, and believes on him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but
is passed from death unto life; (v. Joh. 24.) let us take it for as express a
declaration from God the Father, as if that voice which required them to hear
Jesus had said, You that are obedient to my Son have everlasting life, and are
in no danger to perish, being translated from the dominion of death to be heirs
of life.

II. And now from the consideration of the words that were spoken, let us pass
to the manner wherein they were delivered: which is so vastly different from
that wherein God spoke formerly to Moses and the children of Israel from
another mountain, that I cannot but think it was intended to signify something
of the grace of Eternal Life, which Jesus brings to us. When he was
transfigured, and his face shone as the Sun, the Evangelist tells us moreover,
that his raiment became glistering, exceeding white as snow, and that a bright
cloud also overshadowed them, out of which the voice before named came, saying,
This is my beloved Son, etc. Which, if it be compared with former divine
Manifestations of the same kind, we may reasonably look upon as an indication,
that this Person came to discover (1.) something more glorious then Moses had
done, and (2.) something that expresses more abundant love and kindness of God
toward men; which is nothing else but Eternal Life.

First, I say, something more glorious and resplendent, or, as the Apostle
speaks, 2 Cor. iv. 6. the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, which we
behold in the face of Jesus Christ. For the Mount to which Moses went up, and
where he and the people heard God speak to them, was all covered with clouds
and thick darkness. Thus God himself told him beforehand he would appear. xix.
Exodus 9. And so he did when the day prefixed for it came: verse. 16, 18. Unto
that thick darkness Moses drew near: xx. 21. And the people also stood
underneath the mountain, beholding it burn with fire into the midst of heaven,
with darkness, clouds, and thick darkness. iv. Deuteronomy. 11. xix. Exodus 17. All
which places the Reader may be pleased to consult; together with xxiv. Exodus
18. where we find that Moses went into the midst of this cloud, and there was
covered and quite obscured from their sight. A very fit emblem of the obscurity
of the knowledge which they then had of God and of his will; and of the
terrors of the Law, which was a ministration of death, as the Apostle speaks,
and so astonished them with the thunders and lightning, which came out of the
cloud, that they fled and stood afar off. xx. Exodus 18. As on the other side,
God appearing now to our Savior in a quite contrary manner, on the top of
another Mountain, where there was no black cloud, (though it was in the night,)
no smoke or sulphurous vapor, much less a thick darkness hiding him from his
Disciples sight, nothing but a bright and lightsome cloud which overshadowed
them, and showed them the glory wherein he shone; it was a lively
representation of the light which he (the Light of the world) came to give to
them that sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, and of the glory and
bliss whereof he was the Minister; unto which he invited mankind in words of
grace and sweetness, as he did his Disciples to stay here on the mountain by
those cheerful beams wherewith the glory of the Lord surrounded them.

For this manner of appearing (as I said Secondly) plainly suggests some
greater manifestation of the love and kindness, the goodness and bounty of
Heaven to mankind, then had been made before in that way of revelation to
Moses, which was so much different from the sweetness and amiableness of this.
When Moses conversed with God upon mount Sinai, he descended thither in Fire,
as the places before mentioned tell you; And the sight of the glory of the Lord
was like devouring fire, in the eyes of the children of Israel. xxiv. Exodus 17.
v. Deuteronomy. 22, 23. But when our Blessed Lord took his Apostles with him to a
sight of the Divine Glory, there was only the appearance of a wonderful
bright and cheerful light; some mild rays from heaven, which had nothing of
terror in them, but ravished them with joy to find themselves in so glorious a
Presence. And therefore they were not left at the foot of this high mountain,
as Moses left the Israelites at the bottom of the other; but he brought them up
with him. xvii. Matthew. 1. And they were not put into a fright, as the
Israelites were, who removed their station at the sight of the fire on mount
Sinai; nor did they shriek, as their Forefathers did there, who cried out,
saying, Why should we die? for this great fire will consume us; if we hear the
voice of the Lord our God any more, we shall die. Speak thou with us, and we
will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we die. v. Deuter. 25. xx. Exodus
19. But they were ravished out of themselves with the glory of this sight;
which was so inviting to their eyes, that they wished for no other station, but
desired to remain perpetually fixed there. They were so far from running away,
that they said, Let us make here three Tabernacles; as if they meant to pitch
there the place of their abode, and never take their eyes from so beautiful a
Light.

It is observable also, that in the dark Mountain where Moses was, together
with the fire and thunder and lightnings, there was the noise of a Trumpet
exceeding loud; which made not only all the people tremble, but the whole
mount quaked greatly. xix. Exodus 16, 18. And God spoke likewise to the people
with a great voice; (v. Deuteronomy. 22.) wherewith both they were so astonished as to
wish never to hear it more, and Moses himself also (so terrible was the sight
together with the noise) said, I exceedingly fear and quake. xii. Heb. 21.
Whereas on the Mountain where our Lord was transfigured there was not one such
frightfull flash, nor the least dreadful sound; nothing but his own glistering
Body, the splendor of Moses and Elias, the brightness of a heavenly cloud, and
this one sweet voice, which proclaimed nothing but love and grace in their
ears, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear him.

St. Matthew indeed tells us that, when the Disciples heard, they fell on their
faces, and were sore afraid: xvii. 6. But this does not signify that they were
seized with any horror at the dreadfulness of the sound; but only amazed at
the suddenness of the voice, and the mavelous splendor of the Light. And
therefore the other Evangelists do not mention any such terror after the
voice; which, being accompanied with a glory they had never beheld, might well
amaze them, but did not make them tremble. The very apparition of Angels was
wont to be so surprising as to dazzle men's eyes, and make them bow their faces
to the ground. xxiv. Luke 5. And therefore such a glorious splendor as this,
equalling that of the Sun, might well make the Apostles fall prostrate upon the
earth, in great fear or amazement. But then our Lord presently came and
comforted them by a gracious touch, bidding them arise, and not be afraid,
though they saw such a light, and heard such a voice as this: to which indeed
they had not been accustomed, but was the most amiable, and ought to be the
most welcome, of any that could salute the eyes and ears of mankind.

St. Mark, it is observable, says that, before this voice came out of the
heavenly glory, they were sore afraid; ix. 6. i. e. were so amazed at such an
unwonted sight, or, as Proclus Orat. viii. in Transfigur. Domini.
calls it, (...), the strangeness and unexpectedness of the Divine Brightness
shining on them, that it put them quite beside themselves. But that it was a
sweet mixture of those devout passions, fear and joy, is manifest from the
foregoing verse, with which those words cohere: where you read, they were so
delighted and ravished with the sight, that they thought not of going down from
thence any more; but were projecting for their perpetual habitation in that
happy place. Which Rapture seems to have been a foretaste of the joy which they
were to expect, when he should ascend to that glorious state, which was now
represented in his Transfiguration on the Mount.

Before I conclude this, I shall here take notice, as I pass to what remains,
of something that may help to prove, our Lord Jesus is the person by whom God
always intended to speak his mind to the World. For it was at this very time
(when the Israelites, by reason of the terrible sights and thundering noises,
desired God they might hear his voice no more,) that he promised to speak to
them by such a Prophet as Moses, and in a more familiar manner; requiring them
to hear that person, when he came and spoke, as they themselves desired. So you
read xviii. Deuteronomy. 15, 16, 17, 18. where, when they say, Let me not hear again
the voice of the Lord my God, neither let me see this great fire any more, that
I die not; the Lord said, They have well spoken, I will raise them up a Prophet
from among their brethren like unto thee, and I will put my word in his mouth,
and he shall speak unto them all that I have commanded him. Which was perfectly
fulfilled in our Blessed Savior, (whatsoever lesser meaning it might have
before,) who spoke the words of God, and not of himself, but as the Father gave
him commandment; and was a Prophet like to Moses, as in other regards, so in
this, that he was with God upon the Mount, heard him speak there to these
Israelites his Disciples, is commended to them as the person they should hear;
but in a voice so sweet and in a way so agreeable, that they did not wish never
to hear it more, but rather always to be so happy, as to have such friendly
converse with Heaven, and receive such tokens of God's Fatherly love.

For as the fire and smoke and darkness, together with those terrible noises,
were testimonies from God to Moses, that they who would not hear him, but
transgressed his Laws, should be the objects of his dreadful displeasure, and
be destroyed from among their neighbors: So this universal light and
brightness which smiled on them, in the cloud and in his raiment, and in his
countenance and in his company, when these gracious words sounded in their
ears, were most manifest tokens from heaven of the extraordinary favor of God
toward those that obey the Lord Jesus; who shall be saved from death, and made
exceeding happy and glorious.

The far greater part of the Precepts of the Law being negative, as is evident
even from the Ten Commandments, (to say nothing of the computation which the
Jews have made of the whole,) it abounds more with Threatenings and fearful
denunciations of Judgment, then it does with gracious and inviting Promises.
But most of the Precepts of the Gospel being affirmative, obliging us to do
all the good we can, and to be abundant in the work of our Lord; you read
therefore more frequently of exceeding great and precious Promises to encourage
our labor of love, then of Threatenings to deterr us from evil doing. And
consonant to this, as that frightfull appearance of old on Mount Sinai, was to
show God's anger and fiery indignation against offenders: so this comfortable
Presence now on Mount Tabor, was to represent his loving kindness and tender
mercy to all obedient persons. And as the anger of God, declared by the fire
and smoke, was his inflicting Death upon them: so his good will, declared by
this friendly light and clearness in the heavens, is his bestowing upon us
Life. And as by the former Moses was noted by God to be the Minister of death
to all transgressors: so our Lord was hereby represented as the Minister of
Life and Righteousness to all that in him live godly.

Now that all these Observations are not the product of mere fancy, but have
some real truth in them, this is none of the least arguments; That the Jews
themselves Pirke Eliezer c. xl.
make it a Question worth the answering, why God uttered his voice to Moses out
of the midst of the fire and darkness, and not rather out of the midst of
light. Which is a plain acknowledgment of the nobleness and perfection of this
way wherein God manifested himself upon the Holy Mount, (as St. Peter calls
it;) and that it was far more desirable then that wherein he appeared to Moses;
else they would not have moved this doubt, and endeavored so laboriously to
solve it: pretending that it was only to show in what a dismal condition they
were without the Law, which was not to be sent till after forty days were past;
during all which time the Court of the heavenly King was hung with black, and
not with white. Which as it is a frivolous conceit, so has no truth in it. For
God spoke the Ten Words or Commandments out of the fire and smoke, before Moses
went to stay in the Mount forty days; where he only received the pattern of
God's House (which he was to make) and all belonging to it, together with the
Two Tables whereon those X Commandments were engraven. All the rest of the Laws
were spoken to him out of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, after he had
built it: (i. Levit. 1.) and we do not find then the heavens hung with white,
(to use their phrase,) as they were now when he spoke concerning our Savior,
and bad his disciples hear him.

But I intend not to trouble my self with confuting their idle fancies. The use
that I make of this Question is, That if they would have thought it a
disparagement to their Master Moses, (did they not satisfy themselves with
this ridiculous reason for it,) to be spoken unto after such a manner as the
Scripture of truth relates; then, by their own confession, it is a great honor
to our Lord and Master, and argues his high dignity, that the Divine Majesty
spoke to him in such a way as they cannot but esteem most perfect, and
agreeable to his Divine Goodness. And we may look upon this pure Light (in
which God is said to dwell) as a sign that Heaven was to be opened by this
Person, and that he would restore us to the Glory of God, of which we we all
fallen short; and bring mankind to that joy and satisfaction of heart, which the
Disciples began to feel in themselves at this most comfortable sight.

And I make no question, had not the holy Books told us so expressly, that God
spoke to them in clouds and fire and vapor, they would have fabled that he
appeared to their Master in pure light, and shone about him in the brightness
of his glory, without the least darkness to obscure it. For I find that many of
those things which the holy Story of the New Testament reports in honor of
John Baptist or of our Blessed Savior, they have thrust into the Story of
Moses, (where he himself in his Books has not confessed the contrary,) to keep
him in the greater credit with their Nation in this time of their calamitous
desertion. It being recorded, for example, that John Baptist was born when his
parents were very old, and could not believe it was possible for them to have a
child; (which makes his birth a wonder, being out of the course of Nature;)
they have made bold to tell the same of Moses, (but with a large addition of
years,) whose mother Jochebed, they say, was no less then an hundred and thirty
years old when she was delivered of him: which Aben Ezra, in his Notes upon the
text A. Ezra in ii. Exodus ver. 1.
, is desirous should pass for a current truth. And as we read that, when our
Savior came into the world, the Glory of the LORD (an exceeding great light
from heaven) shone round about the shepherds who had the first news of it;
(which was intended as a note of his Divinity and heavenly descent:) So they
have devised R. Solomon in ii. Exodus 3.
that, at the Nativity of Moses, the house where he was born was filled with
such a light, that they could not see by reason of its splendor.

In like manner the Apostle proves our Lord to be greater then the Angels, far
above all principality and power, etc. (i. Heb. 3, 4. i. Ephesians. 19, 20.) and
therefore Moses, forsooth, must be raised to this wondrous pitch; ^ Moses
Haccozi.
whom some of their Rabbis (all are not so immodest) will have to be higher
(...) then the Angels of Ministry; far above all creatures (as another
expresses it) both superior and inferior. R. Joshuah F. Sobib in xxx. Exodus
As if they meant to equal him with that great Lord who we believe is raised
far above every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that
which is to come. And because also our Lord we affirm, and are sure, is now the
Minister of the heavenly Sanctuary, where he presents his own blood before God
for us, as Aaron did the blood of beasts in the earthly Sanctuary: therefore
they likewise have feigned (as Maimonides relates from the mouth of their
Doctors Ludov. Capell. ex pr^fat. in Talm. Not. in xvii. Matthew. 3.
) that their Master Moses is not dead, but ascended, (...) and ministers to God
in the heavenly places. And because our Lord is here said to be transfigured on
this Mountain, and his face shone like the Sun: they have therefore transformed
Moses also; who, they say, was found by the Angel of death (whom God sent to
the Mountain whether he was gone up, to take away his life,) writing the great
Name of God; and his face was as the Sun, and he himself like an Angel of the
Lord. I have observed the same before about the Bath kol voice from heaven,
which spoke to our Savior, whose glory they study to eclipse by spreading
abroad a number of tales concerning the like approbation given to their
Doctors.

I am bold to call these reports by that name, and to ascribe them to that
cause, because there are no footsteps of such things in the history which Moses
wrote of himself; (who by all just ways endeavored to beget in them a belief
that he was a Prophet sent of God;) and because such inventions might easily
come into the minds of those obstinate persons, who knew not how to confute
Christianity, which interest and prejudice would not let them receive, but were
desirous by any means, though never so false, to raise Moses to the same degree
of greatness and esteem with the Author and finisher of our faith. But it is
to be considered then, that they suppose such things to be a notable sign of
the excellency of that person to whom they really belong: and consequently,
that our Lord Jesus, who has these very marks upon him which they would
ingrave on Moses, being thus described in those Books that are certainly Divine
among us, as clearly as Moses is in any other regards commended in those that
are truly holy among them, is a Great Prophet indeed, far greater then Moses,
(who never durst say any such thing of himself, nor is so magnified by any of
the succeeding Prophets,) the Author of a better Covenant, and of more divine
Promises, such as this of ETERNAL LIFE; which it is most agreeable for him to
bestow, whose Kingdom was not in this world, (as Moses's was,) but he reigns in
the other world Lord of all for evermore.

III.
To him God the Father has given a third Testimony; (unto which it is now time
to pass;) and it is a very express Record of this Truth, that we have Eternal
Life, and that it is in his Son. It is set down, you know, in the xii. Joh. 28.
where, upon our Savior's request to God that he would glorify his own Name, a
voice from heaven gave this answer, I have both glorified it, and will glorify
it again. The particle ( it) has nothing answering to it in the Greek, but is
put in by the Translatours to supply the sense. And some are of the opinion,
that the word (...) is to be understood, and the meaning to be thus rendered, I
have both glorified thee, and will glorify thee again. But there is no need of
this; we may as well refer the word glorify to Name, as our translation does,
and it will come at last to the same sense: for God's name was glorified by
glorifying his Son, Fragment. L. viii. in Joh.
as appears from xi. Joh. 4. And so St. Cyrill of Alexandria observed long ago:
Whether the Scripture be, glorify thy Son, or, glorify thy Name, (...), it is
all one in exact contemplation of things.

Now if the truth of these words be thoroughly examined, how he had glorified
him, and how he would glorify him again, we shall meet in both with a plain
testimony that Eternal Life is in his Son, to bestow on us. Let us consider
them briefly apart.

I. As for the former, I find that God had already glorified him, before he
spoke these words, three ways.

1. By his Transfiguration, of which I now discoursed; for then St. Luke says,
ix. 32. they saw his glory. And that by this Glory which they saw the Father
testified he should be made glorious in the heavens, and able to make us so; I
refer you to what I have said already on this Argument.

2. And I need not use many words to show, that he had also glorified him very
frequently by the many wonderful works which he had wrought; for in them it is
likewise expressly said, ii. Joh. 11. he manifested forth his Glory: and the
multitude were excited by them to magnify him with Hosanna's, and to cry out,
Glory in the highest. xix. Luke 37, 38. By these also he showed the power
wherewith he was endued to do any thing that he had promised: and they moved
his Disciples hearts, as you read in the place now mentioned, (ii. Joh. 11.)
to believe on him.

3. But there was a third glorification of him, to which I believe these words
have a more special reference; because it was very famous, and but newly
passed: Which was his raising Lazarus from the dead. By this Jesus said
expressly that glory should redound to God the Father, and that He, the Son of
God, should also be glorified thereby. xi. Joh. 4. For this very end, he there
teaches his Disciples, Lazarus fell sick, and he therefore delayed to go and
recover him, (though his great friend,) that there might be a fit opportunity,
by the miraculous resurrection of so noted a person, (as Lazarus was, it
appears by the coming of such numbers to comfort his sisters, verse. 19.) and in
a place so nigh to Jerusalem, (verse. 18.) where the greatest opposition was
made against him, to do honor to Jesus; and to make it known, that he assumed
not more glory to himself then God the Father gave him. This was a very great
testimony from God, that indeed LIFE was in him, and that he did not vainly
call himself (verse. 25.) the resurrection, and the life; because he now, with
his almighty word, restored one to life who had been so long dead, that there
was no possibility of his reviving but by the very LIFE it self.

Hereby he declared that, as the Father has Life in himself, so he has given
the Son to have Life in himself. v. Joh. 26. What he had said before in his
preaching, he now justified by his works; according as he himself foretold he
would, when he said, Verily, verily, the hour is coming, and now is, when the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: ver. 25. The hour which was then
coming, yea was just at hand, seems to be this time when he raised Lazarus up
out of his grave: declaring thereby both the truth of what he had said, (v.
Joh. 26.) that he had life in himself; and likewise that there would be another
hour, (as it presently there follows ver. 28, 29.) wherein all men whatsoever
shall rise out of their graves at his voice, and they that have done good shall
come forth unto the resurrection of life, as they that have done evil, unto
the resurrection of damnation. They might well believe it, because he said it
who proved himself to be the Truth, by such works as none could do but he that
was the Life.

II. But this is not all that we are to consider in this Testimony of the
Father; who does not only say that he had glorified him, but that he would
glorify him again: which was done also at three several times.

1. At his Death, when many of the graves of the Saints that slept were opened.
xxvii. Matthew. 52. For the very rocks rent, and the earth did quake, and the
veil of the temple was torn in sunder from the top to the bottom, and the Sun
refused to give its light; and such an amazement came upon the Centurion, who
was then upon the guard, that he glorified God (xxiii. Luke 47.) by confessing
that Jesus was a righteous man, and no pretender to a title that did not belong
to him; but, as other Evangelists express it, the Son of God. To these
wonderful things concurring at his death to glorify him and do him honor,
the voice from Heaven seems to have had some respect, because of what follows,
ver. 31, 32, 33. Now shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be
lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. This he said, signifying
what death he should die. For even now, when he seemed most weak, he began to
tread the Devil under his feet. Now he began to draw not only the Jews to
him, but other men, the Romans also; one of whose Captains, in the midst of his
reproach, confessed him to be the Son of God. The very opening of the graves
served to adorn the triumph he was about to make over the powers of darkness;
being a sign that he had now despoiled him who has the power of death, which
is the Devil; and that he had Life in himself, and will give it us, especially
now that he has finished his triumph, and is glorified at God's right hand. Of
which the rending of the veil also was no obscure token, showing that we have
liberty (as the Apostle speaks x. Heb. 19.) to enter into the Holiest by the
blood of Jesus.

It may seem indeed an uncouth form of speech, to call his Crucifixion by the
name of (...), lifting up from the earth, or exaltation: but one may say, and
with great truth, that Christ's death upon the Cross (as S. Fragment. L. viii.
in Joh.
Cyrill of Alexandria speaks) (...), was his promotion, contrived for his fame
and glory: for he is glorified perpetually for this, having procured many
benefits to mankind by its means. This is one part of the Record of the Father
to this Truth, when he said he would glorify our Savior. Which you see was as
much as to say, He would make it appear, even when he hung upon the Cross, that
he was able to open men's graves, and unloose the chains of death, and in due
time raise them up to everlasting life. For,

2. God farther glorified him at his Resurrection; which was attended with the
resurrection of the dead bodies of those Saints whose graves were opened at his
death. xxvii. Matthew. 52, 53. There were several witnesses of this in
Jerusalem, to whom those persons deceased appeared; as there were of his own
resurrection, which was attested by chosen persons to whom he showed himself
openly. And then he was lifted up from the earth in another more noble and
sublime sense, then he had been before upon the Cross. Then Angels came in
bright array to testify to him what he had said of himself, xiii. Joh. 31, 32.
that God, having been glorified in him, had glorified him in himself. This was
a very glorious testimony that indeed he has Life in himself, and shall be the
Author of eternal Life to us. And therefore he is called the Prince (or
Author) of life, iii. Act. 15. because by that which overcame death (his
resurrection) (...), etc S. Cyril. ib. in xii. Joh. 28.
. we know him to be LIFE, and the Son of the living God. But of this more
hereafter.

3. Another Act whereby this saying (I will glorify thee again) was verified,
I take to be his Exaltation by God's own right hand to the throne of glory in
the heavens. This he prayed for with the greatest ardency and the most assured
expectation, xvii. Joh. 1, 2. because God the Father, he says, had given him
power ( i. e. the promise of it) over all flesh, that he might give eternal
life to as many as God had given him. This promise, I understand it, was made
to him when God uttered this voice from heaven, I have both glorified thee, and
will glorify thee again. Then God gave him a power to raise up all, as he had
lately done Lazarus, and to give them immortal happiness: of which as he had
then the grant, so he now desires in this prayer to be put in possession. And
therefore when he says verse. 1. Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son,
etc. I take the meaning to be as if he had thus spoke, Now is the time to do
that which thy voice from heaven assured me should be done, viz. to glorify me
in so complete a manner, that I may glorify thee, and give eternal life to
all the faithful. This he spoke with eyes lifted up to heaven, from whence
that voice came, which bare witness of him that he should be glorified more
then ever, and gave him authority to lay claim to the highest power, of
bestowing immortality.

Which power when God the Father had actually put into his hands, according to
this prayer and his own promise, (of which he could not fail, having engaged
himself before a multitude to glorify him,) then, being made perfect, he
became the Author of eternal Salvation to them that obey him. v. Heb. 9. Then
he was made a Priest for ever, (vii. 16, 17.) not after the Law, which was but
a weak institution, but after the power of an endless Life: whereby he is able
to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him. He can raise up us,
and all that succeed us, as well as he did Lazarus and others: in whom he gave
only a little taste of his power to give us Life, that shall never die.

This now is the Third Testimony of the Father, who, in the audience both of
Friends and Strangers, said, He had both glorified him, and would glorify him
again. That he had, was then very well known; and it was as certain (because he
said it) that he would do the same again. By the testimony also of sufficient
persons it appears, that he made good this promise, even at his Death; after
which he raised him out of his grave, and lift him up far above all heavens:
that he may be glorified once more (2 Thessalonians. i. 10.) by raising us up from the
dead, and promoting us to eternal glory with himself.

O wonderful News! Athanasius in Assumption. Christi.
He that was lifted up to hang on a Cross, is preferred now from his grave to a
glorious throne! And to come at it, he takes a journey through the air! the
clouds running under his feet become his chariot! the sky opens to him, and the
heavens with open arms receive him! the troops of Angels join together in
triumphall Songs; and persuade his amazed Disciples to keep that day a
festival on earth, as they did in heaven! Do not stand gazing here, say they,
any longer, but go and preach this wonder to the world. By his departure,
represent his coming again: for so shall he come, in like manner as ye have
seen him go into heaven.

O how wonderful are thy works, O Lord! which give us hope (as the blessed St.
Paul said when he thought of these things) that we shall then be caught up in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we be ever with the Lord.
We can do no less then, to those voices which came so often from heaven to
testify this, add our poor voice of praise and thanksgiving; saying with the
Angels, when He came into the world, GLORY BE TO GOD IN THE HIGHEST; and with
the multitude when they met him at mount Olivet, Blessed be the King that
comes in the name of the Lord, PEACE IN HEAVEN, AND GLORY IN THE HIGHEST.
Cyrill. Hieros. in occurs. Domini.
Glory be to him who is the Fountain of Life, coming from the Fountain of Life,
the Father. Glory be to him who is the River of God, proceeding from the Divine
Abyss, and inseparably one with it: the Treasure of the Father's Goodness, and
of ever-springing Blessedness: the Water of life, who gives Life to the World:
the increated beam of the Father of Lights, from whom he is undivided: who
being in the form of God, took on him the form of a Servant; not lessening the
dignity of his Divinity, but sanctifying the mass of our Humanity.

Him the Angels praise, the Archangels worship, the Authorities reverence, the
Powers glorify; the Cherubims do him service; the Seraphims acknowledge his
Divinity; the Sun and Moon minister to him: who has broken in pieces the gates
of Hell, and opened the gates of Heaven, and abolished Death, and confounded
the Devil, and dissolved the Curse, and made Sorrow cease, and trodden Sin
under foot, and restored the Creation, and enlightened the World. And therefore
let us sing hymns to him with the Angels, and rejoice in the light of the glory
of God with the Shepherds, and adore him with the Wise men, and joyfully
magnify him with the blessed Virgin, and confess him with Simeon and Anna, who
were glad to see his Salvation: that so we at last may also be possessed of
eternal good things, through the grace and the bowels of mercy, and the
loving kindness of our Lord and God and Savior Jesus Christ; to whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Testimony of the WORD, the Second Witness in Heaven.
IF we had no farther Witness of this Truth but that which has been already
produced, we might well rejoice in the comfort which God the Father has given
us; and rely upon Jesus as the Author of Eternal Life to all those that obey
him. The testimony of worthy men, as the Apostle here observes, is readily
received by us: and therefore we ought to be afraid of being so rudely profane
as to reject the testimony of God; which is of far greater weight then theirs,
and has been solemnly given, you see, more then once for the confirmation of
our Faith. But God the Father, willing more abundantly to show (if I may borrow
those words in vi. Heb. 17.) unto the heirs of this promise the immutability of
his counsel, has graciously vouchsafed us farther assurance; and by his WORD
has told us as much, as He himself declared by those voices from heaven.

What we are to understand by the WORD in this place, I have: shown in the
Former Treatise, viz. the Lord Jesus himself, God, Man, or God the WORD made
flesh; Orat. contra Gentes, p. 49.
who, as St. Athanasius speaks, is (...), The Interpreter and Ambassador of
his own Father. For as by the word a man speaks we understand his Mind, which
is the fountain from whence it comes: so (but by a more lively representation,
and after an incomparably more excellent manner,) we beholding the power of the
WORD, come to the knowledge of his Father; as our Savior himself says, xiv.
Joh. 9. He that has seen me, has seen the Father also. From him this Eternal
WORD came down and was incarnate, not only to reveal his will, but to die for
our Sins, and to seal what he had preached with his Blood. After which God
raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the Heavens;
from whence he testified as loudly that he has in him ETERNAL LIFE for us, as
he did that he is the SON OF GOD. This Witness therefore let us now examine,
and look over again the old Evidences which we formerly searched; wherein I
doubt not, we shall find this Truth most clearly contained. And the Testimony
of the WORD, you know, as well as that of the FATHER, was threefold; once to
St. Stephen, a second time to St. Paul, and a third to this beloved Disciple
St. John.

I.
For the First of these, it stands upon record in so many words, that St.
Stephen being full of the Holy Ghost, and looking up steadfastly to heaven, saw
the heavens opened, and beheld the glory of God, and Jesus standing at his
right hand. vii. Act. 55, 56. Thus he declares, not to some simple people, who
perhaps might believe him for his confidence, but to the great Council of
Jerusalem, who he knew were very much disaffected, nay perfectly opposite, to
this truth. To them he protests in open Court, when he was upon his trial, and
bids them mark it, ((...), Behold, take notice of what I now tell you,) I see
the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God. And
he said it, though he knew he stood in certain peril of his life for this
declaration. It was for no other reason that Jesus himself was put to death,
but because he said He was the Son of God; and that they should see the Son of
man sitting at the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. And
therefore for him to confirm so peremptorily this odious Truth, after they had
killed Him, and thereby make them guilty of innocent blood, yea of the blood of
their great King, was a Crime he might well expect they would punish with as
great severity as was in their power to express: which we may be confident he
would never have provoked, had he not been so sure of the Glory of our Savior,
that he could not hold his peace. For who is there so frantic, as to expose
himself to death for such an unprofitable lie? It is not in the nature of man
to suffer so shamefully as he did in his own person, merely to bring a little
false honor to another. To fansy a person of his Wisdom guilty of such
madness, is a kind of distraction in him that supposes it: who, were he sober,
would be taught otherwise by the abhorrence he feels in himself to throw away
his life for a trifle.

Since there is not the least reason then to question, but that this Holy man
beheld the glory of God, and Jesus standing at his right hand, ( i. e. the
gates of Heaven being set open, that he might have the favor to look into the
celestial palace, the Majesty of God was there represented to him sitting on a
Throne, as it used to be in the prophetical Visions; and he beheld the Lord
Jesus the very next person to the Divine Majesty:) we may clearly see in this
Vision both the things that St. John here asserts, viz. that Eternal Life is
in Jesus the Son of God, to give to those that effectually believe on his Name.

I. As for the first, the power wherewith he is invested to give Eternal LIFE,
it is visible from his standing at God's right hand: which denotes his
Omnipotent Virtue to effect what he pleases. For by the right hand of God Jesus
himself was exalted to the right hand of power, as you read ii. Act. 33. v.
31. and therefore being placed there, it signifies that he can do for us what
God has done for him; that is, exalt us to the like glory in the heavens where
he is. And as this is a clear proof of one of the things here recorded, that
LIFE is in him; so the other,

II. That God has given the faithful a right to this Eternal LIFE with him,
and that he will bestow it on us, is no less evident from the very End of this
Vision. For we can see no other reason of this glorious appearance of our
Savior to him, but to encourage him in his preaching, and incite him to
witness a good confession, as he himself had done before this great Council
and before Pontius Pilate; in hope that if it cost him his life, as it had done
our Savior, he should live and reign with him in that glorious place where he
now beheld him. This was the purpose of the heavenly WORD's coming now to him,
that he might not doubt of his promises, nor shrink in the least from what he
had preached, though he should die for it; which would do him no greater harm
then to dispatch him presently to the celestial habitations. In the very
beginning of his history we read, that he had no sooner heard the Indictment
read which they had drawn up against him, but, before he spoke a word for
himself, the whole Council behold his face as it had been the face of an Angel.
vi. Act. 15. There appeared, that is, such a bright and sweet Majesty in his
countenance, as made him look like one of the celestial inhabitants, who had
already prevented the glorious state to which he was going. And his Answer to
their charge being ended, their barbarous rage was not more apparent, then it
was that the heavens opened to receive his Spirit, and let it into the dwelling
of God, as soon as he should put off his mortality.

There he beheld Jesus standing (whereas he is commonly represented as sitting)
at God's right hand; that he might know, He was ready to meet his Spirit, and
entertain it into his heavenly mansions; as well as that He was coming to
destroy his persecutors, and put an end to their power and nation. And he saw
also the Glory of God, as the Crown he should win by his Martyrdom: which had
as sensible an effect upon his heart for the confirming of his faith and
constancy, as if he had heard the Almighty call to him and say, (...), Be not
faint-hearted, O Stephen, nor suffer any degenerous thoughts to enter into thy
breast. Though there is no man to stand by thee, no Friend on earth to assist
thee in this distressed season; yet I with my beloved Son behold what is a
doing. A happy Rest and repose is ready for thee. The gates of Paradise stand
wide open to thee. Have patience a while, and, leaving this temporary life,
make have to that which is eternal. Still thou see God is in humane Nature;
a thing beyond all worldly thoughts. Thou have been taught by the Apostles,
that the Father has a genuine beloved Son: behold, I show him to thee, as much
as thou can bear. And he stands at my right hand; that by the very site of
the place thou may know the dignity he has. It was a scandal heretofore to
many, that God should be on the Earth clothed with flesh. But behold him now
with me on high in a celestial, supercelestiall condition, still having the
form of man; to confirm thee in the belief of the gracious dispensation which
is now completed. Be not disturbed, be not dejected, though for his sake thou
be stoned. Beholding the Dispenser of Rewards, do not fear the combat.
Forsake thy body, and despising it as an earthly Prison, as a ruinous house, as
a potter's vessel easily broken, come, run hither, being set at liberty, to the
portion and inheritance here reserved for thee. For the crown of brave
achievements is ready and expects thee. Step over from the earth to heaven,
and take it. Leave thy body to the bloody murderers, as a morsel to dogs.
Leave the mad enraged multitude, and come to the quire of Angels.

In these words Asterius expresses the sense of this heavenly Vision, Encomium
in Protomart.
wherein God showed himself to this valiant man, that he might not be struck
with any fear by the greatness of the danger. For this cause he did not send an
Angel to assist him, as to the Apostles in prison, nor any ministering power and
fellow servants, as he speaks; (...), but he presented himself; that being the
first fruits of the Martyrs, he might leave a noble example to all that
followed. And indeed what could more encourage them, then to hear so holy a man
departing the world with these words in his mouth, I see the heavens opened,
and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God? This was a notable
Testimony which the heavenly WORD gave, that he was possessed of ETERNAL LIFE;
whereby he animated this blessed Martyr, from what he saw Him enjoy, to do as
He had done. Which could have no force in it to persuade him, unless his
meaning had been, that he should no sooner leave the World, but ascend up
thither where he was. And so St. Stephen understood it; for as they were
stoning him (the greatest punishment the Jews could inflict) he called upon our
Savior, saying, Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit. vii. Act. 59. He doubted not of
audience, when he beheld him who is sat down at the right hand of the majesty
on high, i. Heb. 3. in another posture; Proclus Orat. xvii.
not sitting, but standing there. What was the business (to use the words of
another ancient Bishop) that made him rise thus out of his Father's throne? He
saw this noble Combatant in his Agony, and rose up to crown his victory. And it
was as if he had said, Fear not, Stephen; there is none shall beguile thee of
thy reward. I am risen out of my throne, to reach thee my right hand. Beholding
me who was crucified, grapple with the danger that presents it self to thee. I
am he whom thou saw hanging on a tree: by virtue of that crucifixion I will
reward thee. I preside in these Combats, and deal the Crowns to Conquerours.
Fear not therefore those that go about to stone thee; they do but rear thee a
ladder, against their wills, to heaven. Do not fear them; the stones will be
but as so many steps to that blessed place where thou see me. It is not for
thee to fear the stones, who art built on me the chief Cornerstone; and
therefore can not fare worse then I do, who am in glory for ever and ever.

With such thoughts as these this good Man laid down his life: which is as
great an argument as any of this nature can be, that Jesus both can and will
give Eternal Life to his followers. For else a person so full of Wisdom that
they were not able to dispute with him, (vi. Act. 10.) would not have ventured
his life, and endured the worst of deaths, having nothing to comfort him in his
agony but only the hope he had from Jesus, that he would receive his Spirit.
This was it that gave him such boldness and full assurance of faith. With these
words in his mouth he would have died, but that he pitied those who did not see
as much as he did. Which made him expire in prayer for his persecutours;
wishing them no worse, then that they might not be hindered by this sin from
believing in Jesus, and going thither where he hoped presently to be received.

So the same Asterius rightly understands those words, LORD, lay not this sin
to their charge. He does not wish them absolute impunity, which had been openly
to oppose (...) the Divine Ordinance and constitution, and to correct the
judgment and decree of the most Just, who has appointed a deserved punishment
to murderers: but he begs of God that, notwithstanding this crime, he would
give them true compunction, and bring them to repentance. It being as if he had
said, Do not let them die in their uncircumcision. Draw them by repentance to
the acknowledgment of thee. Kindle the flame of the Spirit in their hearts. By
the means of my blood let them be converted; that being washed in the laver of
thy grace and in thy blood, they may be delivered from their iniquities. A most
pious conclusion of this bloody Tragedy; one of the principal Actours in which
was presently after so miraculously touched from heaven, that it was visible
our Lord had heard the devout prayer of his Martyr in this particular: and
therefore had not denied his other request, but received his Spirit also unto
himself.

II.
For if any thing could be clearer then this to demonstrate the truth I am
endeavoring to prove, the great love of our most Blessed Lord would not deny
it. Who appeared again, as I showed in the former Treatise, to a very learned
person, of great note and great sanctity among the Jews, and as great an enemy
to him; being consenting (as he himself confesses, xxii. Act. 20.) unto his
death, when the blood of his Martyr Stephen was shed. St. Paul I mean, who
traveling toward Damascus in a burning rage and fury, and with a sharp
commission, against Christians, (and therefore in no fit disposition to receive
a truth, or to fall into a fancy directly opposite to his present temper and
interest,) was suddenly surprised with a great light from heaven; and beheld
that Jesus, whom he no more thought to be so glorious, then he did the Thieves
that were crucified with him, presenting himself, and distinctly speaking to
him, in such a splendid manner, that he fell down to the ground, and could not
see for the glory of that light: verse. 7, 11. Whosoever will carefully observe
what he was, and how far, as I said, from any such thoughts, and how
desperately he had been lately engaged against St. Stephen, and now was
prosecuting other of Christ's Disciples, will easily conclude that he had now a
real sight of the Majesty of the Lord Jesus at whose feet he fell; whom
otherwise no man should have despised and blasphemed more then He. Now if the
Vision be considered, you will find that it contains in it this Truth, that
Jesus is possessed of Eternal Life to give unto us; as well as that he is the
Son of God. For,

I. He beheld him appearing in such a brightness as that before mentioned, far
exceeding the splendor of the Sun at noonday, according as he himself tells
the story, xxvi. Act. 13. Which plainly declared him to be the King of Glory,
clothed with the Majesty of God, and possessed of an heavenly Kingdom; and
therefore able to give ETERNAL LIFE to his servants: which is one of the
things that St. John here says God has testified to us. How should he come by
such a robe of light, and how should he appear thus, first to St. Stephen, and
now to St. Paul, and how should he present himself thus near to him, and
perfectly astonish his bold spirit, if he had not power to do what he pleased?
And therefore St. Paul is told by our Lord, at this very time when he saw him
in such Majesty, that he should be a witness of what he had seen. Which had
been to no purpose, unless this Apparition had something remarkable in it, to
prove that he was what he pretended to be in his lifetime, the Son of God most
High, whom, according to his word which he passed by a voice from heaven, he
had glorified, and given him power over all flesh.

II. And accordingly you find that the thing St. Paul witnessed was, that Jesus
was over all, God blessed for ever, (ix. Romans 5.) and had sent him to preach
the Resurrection, and everlasting life. xiii. Act. 46. xvii. 18. These
doctrines our Lord himself had taught him, when, appearing and speaking to him
in such a glorious light, he said, I am Jesus. As much as to say, I am he whom
you buffeted; Afterius (...), etc.
whom you scourged; whom you dragged about, first to Caiaphas, then to Pilate;
whom you called continually the Carpenter's son; whom you number among the
dead, laughing aloud at those that preach the Resurrection. It is I that speak:
and therefore believe that which my servant Stephen saw; though when he told
you so you would not believe it.

Thus he learnt, says Asterius, by experience, that Christ was alive; and was
neither corrupted by death, nor stolen away secretly by his Disciples, but risen
from the dead, (...), and reigned over the whole world. This he preached with
as great a zeal, as before he persecuted. He was such an Auxiliary, as before
he had been an enemy; (...), both, strong and resolute.

III. For you may observe, that he did not merely rationally conclude from the
glory wherein Jesus was, that all he had said was true, and that he was able to
give Everlasting Life: but he heard him also say expressly at this time, when he
appeared to him, that he would bestow this celestial Inheritance upon us, even
us Gentiles, who were shangers to the promises foreiners and aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, having no such hope There was nothing against which the
Pharisaicall spirit was more imbittered then this, that other Nations should
share with them and be equal to them in the blessings of the Messiah. The
Religion wherein St. Paul had been bred was concerned in no principle more then
this, that the rest of the world were all unclean and never to be united to
them; unless they would be circumcised, and observe the Law of Moses. And
therefore had he not been pressed with undeniable evidence, he would never have
consented to this truth, which was so much against the grain of that spirit
which possessed him; and which he but once mentioning to his Countrymen, they
were ready to tear him in pieces. xxii. Act. 21, 22. And yet he reports this
for a certain Truth from the mouth of Jesus himself, who bad him (as he relates
this glorious Vision to Agrippa, a Prince well skilled in the Law,) go unto the
Gentiles, to open their eyes, (as He had done his,) to turn them from darkness
unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God; that they might receive
forgiveness of sins, and INHERITANCE among them that are sanctified by faith in
him. xxvi. Act. 17, 18. And accordingly he went and preached everywhere, in
obedience to this heavenly Vision, the comfortable doctrine of the Resurrection
and Eternal Life, to us Gentiles as well as others: witnessing both to small
and great that, as the Prophets had foretold, Christ ought to suffer, and
should be the first that should rise from the dead, and show LIGHT unto the
people (of Israel, that is,) and to the Gentiles: verse. 22, 23. By Light in the
holy language is meant the gladsome discovery of God's good will and pleasure.
For as by Darkness it expresses ignorance, sorrow and heaviness; so by its
opposite, knowledge, joy and cheerfulness. And the Light which we have by
Christ's sufferings and rising from the dead, can be nothing else but the
blessed hope of immortality. This St. John tells us is the light of mankind:
(i. 4. In him was LIFE, and the life was the LIGHT of men; that is, their
singular comfort and satisfaction, which makes their life not to be irksome to
them:) and with this Light St. Paul endeavored to fill the world, that they
might all know how much they were indebted to Jesus, who brought Life and
immortality to light by his Gospel.

And can it enter into any man's thoughts, that he would have set himself to
preach this doctrine of happiness to us, (which his own people so abhorred we
should partake of,) if God the WORD had not made him infallibly assured of it?
Nay, how could he have preached it so long, unless, as he there speaks, he had
obtained help of God; who countenanced his preaching, and approved this
testimony of his concerning his Son Jesus, by the mighty power of the Holy
Ghost? He himself also testified the strong belief he had of the Resurrection,
and of the Glory that shall be revealed, by his laboring so abundantly as he
did in the work of the Lord; to whom he was desirous to express an
extraordinary affection, because his grace and love had so abounded toward
him. He thought he could never in the least requite his kindness; and therefore
would not gain one farthing, not so much as a bit of bread, by this preaching:
But, though he might have lived by the Gospel, chose rather to work with his
own hands, to support himself and those that were with him; that he might win
the more Souls to his Master, by making Religion without charge to them. A
great argument of his zeal to serve his Lord, and promote his honor, and of
his firm belief of immortal life, where he desired only to have his services
rewarded. Which is excellently expressed by the forenamed Asterius, when he
says, that he refused so small a recompense of his infinite labors, as a daily
provision for his body, which was so often beaten and bruised, (...), that
receiving nothing upon Earth, he might lay up all in Heaven.

VI. And therefore you may observe, that his service was so acceptable to our
Savior, that he gratified him here in this world above our mortal condition:
and to give him an earnest or pledge of the good things to come, and the honor
should be done him there, he did him the favor to transport him into the Third
heaven, and another time into Paradise; where he saw Visions and heard words
too glorious for him to utter, or us to understand in this present state. 2
Cor. xii. 3, 4. This was a farther confirmation which the Eternal WORD gave of
his power to give Eternal Life, and of his intentions to take us up unto
himself. For he was carried thus above the clouds by the power and favor of
Jesus; who hereby bare witness to himself how glorious he is, and how able to
advance his faithful Disciples to the same height of heavenly felicity. For he
says it was a man in Christ, one who by the happiness of belonging to him had
this noble privilege bestowed on him: And he gives this as an instance of the
Visions and Revelations (...) of the LORD, (ver. 1.) which is the title of
Jesus most frequently in the New Testament, who is LORD of all. x. Act. 36. He
snatched him up into the Heavens. He transported him, no body knows how, to the
celestial habitations. And either by a (...), (as St. Greg. Naz Orat. ii.
(...), p. 550.
. distinguishes them,) a rapture of mind in the body, or the ascension of his
mind quite out of the body, or the assumption of both for a time into those
regions above, he let him see strange sights, and hear such words as are not to
be spoken with our tongues. Which was a very full demonstration of the Majesty
of our Blessed Savior, and of his ability to translate us to those heavenly
places, and of his purposes likewise to make us at last so happy.

Behold here the glory of the Christian Religion, whose Author is so highly
exalted, that he exalts this Minister of his far above the greatest persons in
former times. The translation of Elias (as the often named Asterius speaks Ib.
(...), etc.
) out of this world wherein we are, is everywhere celebrated as a wonder. But
(...) how far he went, no Revelation has explained. Perhaps he was not carried
very high above the Earth by that power which lifted him up, to the place which
was destined for his habitation. But the translation of St. Paul was far more
illustrious and famous; the very place being noted to which he was carried: and
that no inferior one, but almost half way to the highest heavens of all. Let
the Hebrews hereafter cease to pride themselves in the honor that was done to
Moses; who alone went up to the top of mount Sinai, and was in the midst of the
clouds and darkness which appeared there. My Paul, in stead of a mountain,
ascended into heaven; and in stead of a cloud, was carried beyond the air that
is above the clouds. And very fitly; for it became a Man of Christ to outstrip
Moses as much, as the Old Law was excelled by the Gospel that St. Paul
preached: which he calls the Mystery hid from ages and generations, but now
made manifest to the Saints, (or Christians) to whom God would make known what
is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ
in us, the hope of glory. i. Col. 26, 27.

III.
And here now let us leave the history of this great Man, and pass to the Third
Testimony which the WORD gave of this truth, to St. John. Who as he is the
only person that (after the other Evangelists had set down the genealogy of
our Lord according to the flesh) expounds (...), as Proclus (...).
speaks, the Eternal subsistence without any beginning of God the WORD, and
his generation of the Father before all worlds: so he has gathered here
together, more clearly then any of the rest, all the Evidences and grounds of
the Christian Faith; and also received the most full and pregnant
demonstrations of what he has particularly recorded, concerning Eternal life
in the Son of God. For when our Blessed Lord, (the WORD made flesh,) whom he
beheld ascending into heaven, appeared to him from thence in a most glorious
manner, you may observe,

I. That he sufficiently declares his power to do what he pleases, by taking
to himself that very Name and Title whereby God the Father Almighty sometimes
revealed himself to the Prophets. You read in the xli. Isa. 4. xliv. 6. the
Lord, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, says, I am the first and the last:
which is the very same with those words i. Rev. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending, says the Lord, etc. those two being the names of the
first and the last letters in the Greek Alphabet, as A and Z are the first and
last in our Christ-cross-row. Now if you look farther into this book of the
Revelation, you will find that in this very style our Blessed Lord speaks of
himself. In the very beginning of the Visions there recorded, St. John heard
one call to him with a loud voice, as of a trumpet, saying, I am Alpha and
Omega, the first and the last: (i. Rev. 11.) and turning about to see who it
was that spoke to him, our Savior appeared in the form and shape of a King and
Priest shining in glory, as you read verse. 12, 13, etc. And thus he concludes
his Revelation as he had begun: xxii. 13, 16. I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end, etc. I Jesus have sent my Angel to testify unto you
these things in the Churches. Which is a demonstrative argument that Eternal
Life is in him, and that he wants no power to effect any thing he has
promised; being equal to the Father Almighty, whose Name else he would not
have assumed.

II. And if we examine the sense and meaning of this Name, we shall still be
farther convinced, that he will undoubtedly employ his power to bestow upon us
that Eternal Life which is in him. For when the Almighty calls himself the
First and the Last, he either declares that he is the ETERNAL, who gave being
to all things, and remains after they are all dead and gone: or else, (as
Oecolampadius and Calvin understand those words in Isaiah,) that he is the
IMMUTABLE, from first to last constant to himself and his promises. Which is
the gloss of R. Solomon upon the words; who refers them to the help and
assistence which God would give to the last as well as the first of Abraham's
children. What he had been to Israel, the same he would still be. He had at the
first taken them to be his people; and therefore in the latter days he would
still own them, and show his special affection to them.

I see no reason why these two expositions should be thought so inconsistent,
as to exclude one the other; when they may both be very well joined together.
And then our Lord intends by the assumption of this Title, that St. John and
all the Christian Churches should look upon him as the Eternal God, able to
perpetuate his love and mercy toward them world without end; and as always the
same unchangeable Wisdom and Goodness, whose mind and will is no more
alterable then his power, but remains as firmly fixed as God the Father
Almighty does. So that look what God the Father now is or has been, or what
himself has ever been to the body of his Church; the same He will still
continue immutably to our endless happiness. If God the Father was, and is, and
will be the Alpha or beginning; the same is He likewise. All things come from
him to his Church, of which he is the Founder; by him it subsists and
continues; and he has such a creative power in him, that he can give all
blessings, even Life everlasting, to it. For though we die, yet he is the
Omega, who remains still in being after all the world is buried in its ruins;
and therefore can quicken our dust and ashes, and gather them up to himself,
and make them glorious. God the Father raised him from the dead, and gave him
glory: and therefore, seeing He has the same power, (as appears by these
titles,) He can do as much for us, and give us a glorious resurrection. In
this God the Father faithfully fulfilled the promises he had made him, of
glorifying him with himself: and therefore we may be confident he will be as
true to us, and make good all the promises he has left us for our
encouragement in his obedience; because he is perfectly such as his Father is.

And, to come a little nearer to that interpretation which Rabbi Solomon gives
of the words of the Prophet, (where this expression is first used,) our Lord
would have us think that, as God the Father Almighty, having begun to show
mercy and favor to Israel, would not fail to go on and continue the same
kindness to the end: so He, being likewise the ALPHA, having begun, that is, to
raise himself a Church, and to do great things for it, even to die and
purchase it with his blood, would undoubtedly be the OMEGA, finish, that is,
his own work, and bring that of which he had laid the foundation to an happy
conclusion; never ceasing his kindness, till he had perfected his Saints in
that Life he had begun to bestow upon them. Or, as he began in this world to
raise men from the dead, to bestow upon them other great benefits, to make them
very precious promises of greater favors, and to seal them with his blood: so
he would have them rest assured, he would continue to the end to do them good,
and at the last raise all his faithful servants from the dead, and take them
up to live with himself; and in the mean time perform every other promise he
had made, for their present satisfaction and support in this troublesome world.
As he died for them, so he would have them make account he lived for them;
because he is always the same, at last the very same that he was at first: And
therefore since he lives, they might expect to live also.

III. But he did not leave them merely to draw these inferences themselves from
that great Name whereby he now made himself known to St. John; but immediately,
after he had told who he was, he more clearly and particularly declares this
very thing, that he has Life in himself. For you read that St. John,
beholding him in such glory, with a countenance as bright as the Sun when it
shines in its strength, (which was a sight too strong for our weak eyes to
look upon, i. Rev. 16.) fell at his feet, as one dead. He was as much
astonished at his presence, though he knew Jesus loved him, as St. Paul was,
while he was a persecutour of him. Which shows that our Lord appeared now in a
most amazing glory; too splendid for the capacity of his best Friends to endure
long, without the danger of ceasing to be men. For so far were those words
which our Lord spoke from giving him life, that, like to those who heretofore
beheld the glory of God, he was more astonished at what he saw, then comforted
with what he heard; and thought, it is probable, he should die presently and
give up the ghost. But in this trembling fit Jesus was pleased graciously to
approach, and laying his right hand on him, bad him not fear, nor let that
Majesty of God which he beheld in him cast him into such a great consternation.
It is true indeed, (says he, verse. 17.) I am the first and the last, as I said
before; that is, am invested with all the power of God, bearing his Name and
Authority: but there is so much comfort in this, that it ought rather to have
transported thee with joy, then struck thee with terror. For (as it there
follows, verse. 18.) I, who call my self Alpha and Omega, the first and last, am
he that lives, and was dead; I, the very same person who loved thee and the
rest of mankind so well as to die for you, and never made use of my power to
your hurt, am risen from the dead; and after all my sufferings (such as you
must endure for my sake) am alive, as thou see, and in a far better condition
then I was before, when thou wast not thus afraid of me. Though in my first
attempt to raise a Church I suffered death, and laid the foundation of it in my
blood: yet it is apparent I have overcome death, and now live in greater
splendor then ever.

If our Lord had stopped here, and said no more, this had been sufficient to
convince him of his power to present to himself a glorious Church; and from the
lowest and most afflicted condition, to raise it to the greatest honor here,
and to eternal glory in the other world. But he proceeds for the stronger
confirmation of his faith, and says, Behold, more then this, I am alive for
evermore. I have Eternal Life, and can never lose this power: and therefore
thou may believe me when I say that I am the Omega, whom thou know to be
the Alpha; for I can perfect what I have undertaken, and bring to an happy
issue all the good I have begun to work for you. The latest posterity shall
find that I am alive, and able to promote them to everlasting bliss. Fear not,
these words are all true, and therefore I conclude them with an AMEN;
(wherewith I was wont, thou may remember, to confirm my sayings;) that thou
may rest assured I now say nothing but the certain indubitable truth, when I
tell thee, I am he that was dead, and now am alive, and that I live for
evermore. (...); (as Andreas Caesariensis conceives his meaning,) How can
thou imagine then that thou art in danger to suffer any harm by my appearing to
thee, since the power which thou see me have is to give life, not death, unto
my servants? I never used, thou may remember, to kill men, but to save them;
and therefore thus thou may be confident I will still employ my omnipotent
power; for I am Alpha and Omega, the same at last that I was at first: I am
come that you might have life, and that you might have it more abundantly.

And indeed, as he still goes on, I have the keys of hell and of death; or (as
we render the word (...), here translated hell, in 1 Cor. xv. 55.) the keys of
the grave and of death. I can open the graves, as I did at my death, and can
loose the bands of death, as I did at my resurrection. I can bring you out of
that dark estate where no body sees you, and restore you to life again; nay,
raise you to that Light wherein thou beholdest me shine.

And here again it is observable, that our Savior takes to himself that very
power which is ascribed to Almighty God by Hannah; who says in her Song, 1 Samuel
ii. 6. The Lord kills, and makes alive; he brings down to the grave, and
brings up. Whereby he would suggest to St. John, that all things are
committed to his trust, and are in his power: (for that is frequently denoted
in the holy language by Keys, the badge of a Steward's authority and power in a
family:) and therefore it is not too hard for him to overcome the great
Conqueror of all men, to open the prison-doors that have been so long shut and
fast locked, to loose the chains of death, and overthrow him quite who has the
power of it, that is, the Devil. But this he would have us steadfastly believe,
and therefore immediately bids him (not lie as a man dead, but get up and)
write the things that thou have seen: ver. 19. That is, Let my Church know that
I am alive, and that I bear the same affection to them that I ever had. Send
them this comfort from me, that I not only live, but always live, and have all
power committed to me, even over the grave and death: so that if any man lose
his life for me, I can give it him again, with such an increase of dignity and
glory as thou see me enjoy.

And we must needs confess that there is an exceeding great comfort in this
assurance, which he gave thus in his own person and with his own mouth to this
holy Apostle; who knows, as he speaks in another case, xix. Joh. 35. that he
says true. For hereby we rest satisfied of one part of the Record which is to
be proved, that Life is in Jesus; and see moreover much reason to believe the
other part, that he intends to bestow it on us.

VI. But for a fuller evidence of that, you may consider, in the last place,
that this WORD of God gave frequent testimonies of it to St. John in the
following Letters to the Seven Churches of Asia. Where they are so obvious,
that I may leave it to the most careless hand to gather them. To one he says,
I will give to him that overcomes to eat of the tree of life, which is in the
midst of the paradise of God. ii. Rev. 7. To another, I will give him a crown
of life: and, He shall not be hurt of the second death: ver. 10, 11. To a
third, I will give him the white Stone, etc. a certain knowledge and assurance,
i.e. (as I hope to show in another place,) of the promised reward: ver. 17. To
another, He shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his
name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and
before his angels: iii. 5. And, to name no more, he promises to grant to him
that overcomes, to sit down with him in his throne: ver. 21. Which, though it
may have some respect to the high place and dignity he should enjoy in the
Church in this world, yet, had not its full completion but in the other life;
where he will crown the fidelity of all victorious Souls with the greatest
glory and honor.

How can we doubt of it, when we hear such express promises of immortal bliss
so often repeated, from the mouth of the WORD of God himself, after he went to
heaven? Great is our assurance, great is the confidence we may take from such a
Record as this; if we be in the number of those that overcome: remain constant,
that is, and fixed in our Christian resolution, notwithstanding any assaults
that are made upon us, either by the good or bad things of this world, to tempt
us to revolt from our duty. For St. John saw and heard these things from the
Lord Jesus himself, upon his own Day, (the day of his resurrection from the
dead;) and in a glory so bright, that it was an emblem of the happiness he will
bestow upon us; and with such earnest asseverations of their truth and
certainty, as are sufficient to awake the dullest and most lethargick Souls to
attend to what he says. For thus he begins his Letter to the Church of
Laodicea, who were grown strangely chill and indevout, These things says the
Amen, the faithful and true Witness, the beginning of the Creation of God.
iii. 14.

By the name of AMEN, which he gives himself, he would have them understand,
that by him all the promises made to the Church shall undoubtedly be fulfilled;
according to that of St. Paul, 2 Cor. i. 20. In him all the promises of God are
Yea, and in him Amen. He may be believed, for he is a Witness who affirms and
testifies nothing but the very truth, which can never fail: because, he is the
Efficient cause of all things, by whom they were at first created, and by whom
mankind is now repaired; and therefore is the Head of all creatures, especially
of all Christians, who shall rise again from the dead to immortal life. So I
expound the last words, [the beginning of the Creation of God,] as Andreas
Caesariensis does; who takes in both senses of the word (...), (as I have of
the word Creation,) which signifies not only Principium, the beginning or
original, but Principatum, the principality or dominion which the Son of God
has over all creatures, of which he is the Author. What may we not expect
from so great a Prince, who has such an absolute command over all things? And
why should we doubt of his Sovereignty, who appeared in such an amazing
splendor to St. John, and proclaimed in these and other such like Titles the
supereminent glory of his Majesty? Or why should we question his truth, who had
approved himself so many ways the true and faithful Witness; especially by
sending the Holy Ghost (as you shall hear presently) to bear witness to him,
according to his promise? We ought to rely upon his word; and to fear nothing,
but lest we should reject or distrust the testimony of a Person so great and so
just; whose power appeared, from his very first entrance into the world, to be
so far transcending all creatures, that the Apostles might see before his
ascension to the glory wherein St. John beheld him, that as he had the Words of
eternal Life, so he had that Life in himself, which in due time he would
bestow upon them.

For though He had all the passions of a man, Greg. Nazianz. orat. xxxv. p. 575.
yet he had all the perfections likewise of God: that none might be so
profanely contumelious, as to contemn his Deity, because he took upon him the
grossness of our Humanity. He was born of a woman; but she a Virgin: that was
humane, this Divine. He was wrapped in swaddling-cloaths when he was an infant;
but shaked off the clothes that wrapped him in the sepulcher when he was dead. He
was laid in a manger; but then glorified by Angels, pointed to by a Star, and
worshipped by the Wise men. He was driven into Egypt; but there drove away the
errors of the Egyptians. The Jews saw no beauty in him; but he shone upon the
mountain brighter then the Sun, prefiguring the glory to which he should
ascend. He was baptized and tempted, as Man; but he took away the Sins of the
World, and got the victory, as God. He was hungry; but fed many thousands, and
is himself the heavenly Bread which gives life. He was thirsty; but gave the
waters of life, and made rivers of living waters flow from those that believed
on him. He was called a Samaritan, and they said he had a Devil; but he put
Devils to flight, and tumbled whole legions of them into the deep, and made
the Prince of Devils fall like lightning from heaven. He was sold for thirty
pieces of silver; but purchased the whole World with the great price of his own
blood. He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; but was the Shepherd of Israel,
and now is of all the World. He was dumb as a lamb before the shearers; but is
the WORD preached by the voice of one crying in the wilderness. He was wounded
and bruised; but healed every sickness and all manner of disease. He was lifted
up on the tree, and there fixed; but restored us to the tree of life, and saved
the thief who was crucified with him. He laid down his life; but had power to
take it again, and the veil rent, the rocks were cleft, and the dead were
raised. He died; but he gives life, and by death extinguished death. He was
buried; but rose again out of the grave. He went down into hell; but he brought
up Souls with him, and ascended into heaven, and will come again, to judge the
quick and the dead, and to examine all such discourses as detract from his
glory.

O my Soul, for ever praise him, and let thy heart rejoice in his holy Name.
Love him as thy Life; confide in his word; depend on his power; and expect from
him the blessing of Eternal Life. For he is the AMEN, the faithful and true
witness, who cannot lie; the beginning of the Creation of God, whom all
Creatures without a voice confess to be their Lord. The Heavens cry, Proclus
Orat. xiii. (...).
that it was God who bowed them, and came down to be a man for our sakes. The
Sun cries, It was my Lord who was crucified in the flesh; at the light of whose
Divinity I was afraid, and withdrew my beams. The Earth cries, It was He that
formed me, who suffered; which made me quake and tremble at the horrid fact.
The Sea cries, He was not my fellow servants who walked, with one of his
Disciples, upon my back. The Temple cries, He that was worshipped here is now
blasphemed; and therefore I rend my garments. Nay, Hell cries, He was not a
mere man who descended hither; for whom I received as a Captive, I found to be
the Omnipotent God. And if we ask the heavenly powers, and desire the Angels
and Archangels and the whole host of heaven to tell us, Who was he that
appeared on earth, and was crucified in the flesh? they will all answer aloud,
in the words of the Prophet David; The Lord, the God of hosts, he is the King
of Glory. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Testimony of the HOLY GHOST, the Third Witness in
Heaven.
NOW I proceed to examine the Testimony which the Third Witness in Heaven gave
concerning this future state; which is the HOLY GHOST, the Third Person in the
Blessed Trinity. Who openly assures us, by as many ways and by the same means,
that we have eternal Life in Christ Jesus, as he did that Jesus is the Son of
God. And, that I may not be tedious in a business wherein we have already
received such satisfaction, let us take but a small taste of those three
Testimonies of the Holy Ghost, which I alleged in the former Treatise.

I.
And first, you know that there was a visible appearance of the HOLY GHOST at
our Savior's Baptism: when the Divine Glory came down from heaven, and rested
on him in the sight of John the Baptist; whereby he was persuaded that this was
the Messiah, the King of Israel. And if we carefully enquite into it, we shall
find it to have been as clear a Witness, that it is in his power and in his
purpose to give Eternal Life to all his faithful subjects.

I. For first, the very end of its appearing was to invest him with the highest
office and dignity; which from this time he took upon him and exercised,
whereas before he had lived as a private person. So you read x. Act. 38. that
he was anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power. Which being a ceremony
whereby Kings are created, we are to understand that by the coming down of the
HOLY GHOST he was appointed our Lord and Sovereign: one part of whose office
is, to bestow rewards on those that do him good and faithful service. Now his
Kingdom not being of this World, as he professed, and as was apparent by his
life and death; and yet he constantly asserting that he was a King, and
exercising several acts of Royal Authority, as I have formerly proved; we
must conclude, that by this Unction he was designed to be a King in the
heavens: where he disposes of all places and preferments, and will promote all
his loyal subjects to the greatest honors and dignities.

There is no reason to doubt of it, for the Glory of the Lord which at his
Baptism descended on him, so as it had never done on any man, was the Seal, or,
if you will, the Crown of God upon him; which marked him to be the Lord of
Glory, from whom we may expect the blessing of Eternal Life. The very opening
also of the Heavens, at the descent of the HOLY GHOST upon him, signified as
much, (as St. Chrysostom thinks,) and was a plain declaration of the exceeding
great favor of God toward us. Who now opened to us, as he speaks Homil. xii.
in Matthaeum.
, (...), those gates above; and sent the Spirit from thence to call us to our
celestial Country: and not simply to call us, but with the greatest
prerogative: for he has not made us Angels and Archangels, but making us the
Sons of God and his beloved Sons, so he draws us to that heavenly portion.

II. Which we may with the greater confidence expect, because the HOLY GHOST,
as I observed heretofore, not only came down upon him; but rested, or took up
its abode in him. It did not only overshadow him, as the Glory of the Lord did
the blessed Virgin; but descending on him settled it self in him as its
habitation: insomuch that every day one might see the Glory of the Lord shining
in him. Thus John Baptist, who was a careful observer of it, relates in i.
Joh. 32, 33. where he twice takes notice of the abiding and the resting of the
HOLY GHOST with him. In which Isaac Abarbinel himself, in xi. Isa.
a known enemy to Jesus, confesses the excellency of Christ's prophecy
consists; This being one of the Ten privileges which the Messiah, he says,
shall be endued withal, that the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him. xi.
Isa. 2. So it did upon our Savior, (as an undoubted Prophet testified,) in
whom all the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily: and therefore He must needs
have Life in himself; and out of his fullness, as St. John speaks, we may expect
to receive grace for grace.

For he that bad John baptize, you may farther consider, told him, that this
person who had the HOLY GHOST not only descending on him, but residing in him,
was He that should baptize men with the Holy Ghost. Be a King, that is, in the
heavens, and have all power committed to him; as he would demonstrate by
sending the Holy Ghost upon others, as now it came upon him. And till that time
came, it was as visible as the Light wherein the HOLY GHOST appeared, that it
did inhabit in him, by the constant sensible effects of his Divine power
everywhere. St. Luke, as I observed in the First Part, remembers how he
returned immediately from Jordan, where he was baptized, full of the Holy
Ghost. iv. Luke 1. As was manifest, not only from a number of miraculous
operations, but from the no-less wonderful wisdom whereby he spoke, and
opened the ancient Oracles of God. For to this end also he was anointed, (and
herein he exercised the authority of a King,) as the very first place of the
Prophetical Books which he expounded clearly tells us. iv. Luke 18, 19. Where
you may note, that the great business for which he was anointed by the Spirit
was, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. The time of grace, that is,
wherein the good will and pleasure of God was shown to the world; which
consists principally in giving remission of sins, and eternal Life. This he
came to proclaim and publish with the power of the HOLY GHOST; having all those
divine gifts, mentioned in xi. Isaiah, to qualify him for this high office:
four of which belong to the Mind, (and was well represented by that luminous
body which came down upon him at his Baptism,) and one to the Will, and another
to the power of action; viz. Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, Might,
Knowledge, and the Fear of the Lord. He was able on all occasions to speak most
divinely, to teach as one that had authority, to evade all the secret plots
which his adversaries had upon him, to search into their very hearts and
desires, to show the straight way to that bliss which he preached, to foil all
the power of the Enemy, and to raise even the dead to life again. Which were
evident demonstrations that the Spirit of the Lord rested on him, and made him
the greatest Prophet that ever was; not only the Preacher, but the Giver of
ETERNAL LIFE.

III. For as by this power of the Holy Ghost it was manifest he had Life in
himself; so God's intention to give this Life to us was apparent from the
manner of its descent; which is said to have been like a Dove. The phrase,
indeed, is dubious, and may signify only, that this glorious Body which came
down from heaven was, in its descent or falling, like the coming down of a Dove
with its wings spread abroad. Yet since St. Luke says that it came in a bodily
shape; and the Church, though the words do not necessarily enforce it, has
thus understood it; we may most probably conclude, the word Like has relation
not only to the coming down, but to the Dove it self: telling us, that the
form or figure of this celestial glory which now appeared, carried the
resemblance of that creature.

Now to think that this form was assumed without any design at all, would be
very contrary to common reason: which leads us rather to conceive, that God
would show, at the very first entrance of our Savior upon his office, by this
known emblem of meekness and love, what great favor and kindness he intended
to show to mankind; and with what a tender spirit of gentleness and sweetness
our Lord should exercise the Ministry committed to him, toward the poor, and
the broken in heart, and the miserable captives, to whom he preached the
acceptable year of the Lord. Or else, as St. Chrysostom's words are, He
remembers us hereby of the old history. For the whole World being once
shipwrecked, and humane kind being in great danger to be totally lost, this
Creature appeared with an Olive Branch in her mouth, and brought them glad
tidings that the tempest was over, and that there was now an universal calm.
(...), All which things were a type and figure of what was to come. For now
when the affairs of mankind were in a worse condition, and they were all in
danger of a soarer punishment, the unspeakable grace of God in our Savior
steps in for our rescue. And therefore a Dove appeared again, not bringing an
Olive Branch, but showing us our Deliverer from all evil, and administering
unto us good hopes. For it does not bring merely one man and his family out of
danger, but appeared to lead all the world to heaven; and, in stead of an
Olive Branch, brought the adoption of Sons to all mankind. And where the
dignity of this adoption is, there is the destruction of all evil things, and
the gift of all things that are good. To the same purpose speaks Theophylact,
who contracts his sense in fewer words. As the Dove brought to Noah the news
that the waters of the flood were gone; so now the HOLY GHOST brought the
joyful news of the doing away of Sin. There was an Olive Branch; and here was
the mercy of God.

And thus John Baptist understood it, who having seen this sight cried out,
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world; that is, Death
the punishment of Sin; and consequently restores us to immortal life. i. Joh.
29, 30, etc. This, he thought, declared God to be reconciled; and looked upon it
as a token that the heavens had laid aside their displeasure, and would be at
peace with the sinful sons of men. The windows, you know, of heaven were
opened in the old World; but dark and pitchy clouds were all that appeared,
which poured down nothing but a flood of rain upon mankind. Whereas now, quite
contrary, when the heavens were opened again, there was no dismal sight
presented it self, but only a pure light and glorious brightness shone from
the face of God. And the HOLY GHOST in the form of a Dove appeared, not like
that of Noah after the deluge had swept all mankind (very few excepted) from
the face of the earth; but, to give notice to the World, that God would not
take such vengeance upon men for their wickedness, but be graciously reconciled
to them, by saving them from death, and giving them the blessing of Eternal
Life. One might well gather as much from this sight; especially when there was
such an Olive Branch of peace (if I may so call it) in the mouth of this Dove,
as that voice from heaven which came along with it, saying, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased. One of these illustrates and explains the
other: and both of them tell us, that the heavens now look upon us with a
serene countenance; and that we are no longer shut out of them, but God is so
well satisfied, that he will admit us into those celestial habitations.

II.
This was farther declared afterward, when the Apostles, according to his
promise, were on the day of Pentecost baptized with the Holy Ghost: whereby
they were sent by him, as he was by the Father. Then the Heavens poured down
such a large shower of the Divine grace, as presently overflowed the World with
a comfortable sense of ETERNAL LIFE. This was one great end of the coming of
the HOLY GHOST, which then witnessed to our Savior, and openly showed him to
the World as the Prince of life. iii. Act. 15.

For, (1.) it was a plain demonstration that He whom the Jews had murdered was
alive from the dead; and had not lost his power, which was so eminent in him
all the while he was on earth, to do good, and bestow benefits upon mankind.
And (2.) the greatness of the benefit shows that he was greater in power then
ever, having ennobled all his Servants, and raised men of the lowest condition
to the highest dignities, by bestowing on them the gift of the HOLY GHOST. It
was his gift, as he foretold in his lifetime, when he said, I will send the
Comforter from the Father; xv. Joh. 26. and, He shall receive of mine, and show
it unto you: xvi. Joh. 14, 15. And therefore the Holy Ghost declared his
greatness and power over all; as St. Peter discourses in the very first Sermon
he preached after our Savior's resurrection on the day of Pentecost. ii. Act.
33. Where he tells the Jews, that what they saw and heard, and were amazed at,
was shed forth and poured on them by Jesus, who had now received the promise of
the Holy Ghost. And therefore, says he, ver. 36. let all the house of Israel
know assuredly, that God has made that Jesus whom ye crucified both Lord and
Christ. Which is as much as to say, You ought to look upon this as an undoubted
argument that he is Lord of all things, (the Christ or King whom God the Father
has appointed,) because he has sent such royal gifts to his servants as none
but the Lord of the world could possibly bestow.

And by the way we may take notice, that the better sort of the Jews themselves
expect the Messiah should bring such grace to men. For Abarbinel, in the place
forementioned, acknowledging Miraculous works to be a note whereby the Messiah
shall be known, reckons this for one of them, the effusion of the Spirit of God
spoken of by the Prophet Joel. Our Lord therefore sending this down in a
plentiful manner on the day of Pentecost, thereby manifested, if they would
have seen it, that he had the mark of their King upon him; and indeed could do
that which they all confess is the Work of God alone, who only can pour out
the gifts which the Prophet there promises. There is no reason to question the
power of such a King as this, to do what he pleases; even to prefer his
subjects to his heavenly Kingdom. They may be raised, when he thinks good, to
reign with him above; as now they began to do upon the earth. It depends upon
his will alone to exalt them to that very place, from whence this mighty power
of the Holy Ghost came down upon them.

But that we may be satisfied the HOLY GHOST was an express Witness of his
being the Prince of life, (a King that has Life in himself,) a Prince and a
Savior, (as it is v. Act. 31.) who can deliver men from the oppression of all
their Enemies, the greatest of which is Death, you may consider, (3.) that the
miraculous change which was wrought on a sudden in the minds of very ignorant
men, is an evident argument what he can do for our Souls in the other World.
He inspired them with such Understanding by the power of the Holy Ghost, that
the greatest Doctors in Israel were not able to resist the Wisdom whereby
they spoke. They understood clearly all the ancient Prophecies: There was no
veil or cloud any longer upon them, but the Holy Ghost made them see the whole
Mystery which was wrapped up in them. It revealed all Types; explained all
Figures; led them into the Sanctuary and Most holy place; showed them the true
meaning of the Mercy-seat; and laid all those things, which did but obscurely
point at ETERNAL LIFE, so open and naked, that none could choose but see, if he
did not shut his eyes, they were not the same men that they had been but just
before, and were made thus learned without any humane helps of instruction. A
convincing argument of his power to raise our Minds when we depart this World,
and have not the clouds of this Body before our eyes, to as great a pitch of
knowledge as I discoursed of in the beginning of this Treatise. And the
suddenness of this change was as clear an argument that he can do it without
difficulty; and that there is not so great a distance between this present
state and that which we expect, but he can presently translate us to it.

And (4.) this Knowledge, you may consider farther, being accompanied with a
mighty Power, whereby the Holy Ghost enabled them not only to give eyes to the
blind, feet to the lame, health to the sick, but life also to the dead, (as was
very well known in those days) was an undoubted testimony, that He from whom it
came is able also to change these vile bodies, and make them like to his own
most glorious body. For it is visible he has a power, whereby he can subdue
all things to himself. To take away life, you may think is no such great
matter, that we should take any notice of it: yet to do even this with a word
for lying to the HOLY GHOST, was an argument of a mighty power residing in the
Apostles. And when Abarbinell speaks of the power of the Messiah to work
Miracles, from that Prophecy of Isaiah xi. he alleges these words to prove it;
(verse. 4.) He shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the
breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. Which was never literally
fulfilled during our Savior's stay on Earth; (where he did nothing but good to
men;) but was made good after he went to Heaven by his power in his Ministers,
who smote that wicked couple mentioned Act. v. without any hands, merely with
the breath of their mouth. What shall we think then of their restoring men to
life after they were dead; for which they were more notorious? We cannot but
look on this as a great witness of the wonderful power of Jesus in them; and
consequently of the life and glory he intended to bestow on sinful dust and
ashes. He would not have filled them thus full of his Spirit, if he had not
meant thereby to raise their expectations above all that even by its power they
at present felt. Had it not been his design to make them hereafter like to God,
he would not have preferred them to such a resemblance of his Wisdom and Power
here in this World. They that could raise others from the dead, had no reason
to doubt of being raised up themselves. When they saw themselves made the
conveyers of such great blessings to all mankind; they must needs stand fair,
they could not but conclude, for a very large portion of his favor to their
own persons.

For the truth is, (5.) these gifts which were then given to men proclaimed
aloud the mavelous bounty of our Savior, as well as his power: and would not
let them doubt of a far more glorious exercise of it in the other World, then
they saw, and were the instruments of, in this. And if any imagine that, though
this might be a testimony to them of Eternal Life, yet it is none to us; the
contrary will soon be evident, if you do but consider, (6.) that our Lord
having made a promise of Eternal Life, not only to his Apostles, but to all
that believe on his Name; the HOLY GHOST puts us in strong hope of it, by
demonstrating his faithfulness to his word. For the Effusion of it was the
performance of a promise which he had frequently made when he was with them;
both before his death, (xiv. Joh. 16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give
you another Comforter,) and after his Resurrection, xxiv. Luke 49. Behold, I
send the promise of my Father upon you, etc. i. Act. 4, 5. Being assembled
together with them, he commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but wait
for the promise of the Father, which, said he, you have heard of me: For you
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, not many days hence. And therefore we
have great reason to look for the promise of Eternal Life with much
confidence, because He who made it was so faithful and just in fulfilling his
former promise, at the time appointed. Especially since he thereby
demonstrated, that he has sufficient power to do for us according to his
word. For he who made such an extraordinary change in them on the day of
Pentecost, that they were able in an instant to speak all languages, to
prophesy, and understand the secret counsels of God, can change us, we need not
question, from glory to glory; and at last transform us so perfectly, as to
make us like to himself.

And I may add, to strengthen this consideration, (7.) that our Lord declared
he would send the HOLY GHOST for this very purpose, that they might believe the
rest of his holy promises; particularly this great one, of Eternal Life. Which
is the meaning of that which you read in xiv. Joh. 12. where after he had told
them (ver. 9, 10, 11.) that God appeared to them and showed himself in the
Works that He did, which demonstrated that the Father dwelt in him, and
consequently that he would go and prepare a place for them, and take them up to
himself, he adds these remarkable words; Verily, verily, I say unto you, He
that believes in me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works
then these shall he do, because I go unto my Father. As if he had said, Mark
now what I farther declare to you, and rely upon it as a certain truth. The
works that I have done are sufficient to convince you: but for a greater
confirmation of your faith, that I am going to the Father, and am the Way, the
Truth, and the Life, I tell you, that after I am departed these wonderful
things shall be repeated, before the eyes of the world, by those that believe
on me. Nay, some things shall be done which your eyes have not yet seen;
because I go to my Father, i. e. have power in the Heavens, and have reserved
something peculiar to be given as a testimony of it, over and above what I have
done my self. And that was their speaking with all tongues on a sudden, and
their prophesying; whereby they were enabled to preach to all Nations, as he
had done to the Jews alone, and work the same wonders among the heathen, which
he had wrought only in that Country. A mavelous evidence this was of the
power and glory of Christ to give eternal life; in that being absent he did
those things by his Apostles, which were not performed whilst he was present
with them.

And therefore (8.) upon this account the HOLY GHOST thus given to the
Apostles, and those that believed by their word, is called the earnest of the
inheritance in their hearts, until the redemption of the purchased possession.
2 Cor. i. 22. i. Ephesians. 14. It was something given them in hand, before his
second appearing for full redemption, to assure them they should as certainly
receive all that was behind, as they had already received this pawn and pledge
of his mighty love.

And indeed we have all much reason to think that he will do very great things
for us when he appears in his own person, (as the Holy Ghost assures us he
will, iii. Act. 19, 20.) since he has done so much good to the world by the
Apostles, his Deputies, who were men like to our selves. If his Servants
brought such blessings to men, then what will the Lord himself bring with him
at his coming? If his Ministers restored dead men to life again; the Master
sure will bestow a life as much excelling that which they restored, as he
excells his Officers. In short, if the people looked so earnestly on two poor
Fishermen, when they had cured a man lame from his mother's womb; iii. Act.
12. much more will the Lord of glory draw the eyes of the world to him, by
doing astonishing things for his people; when he shall come (as the Apostle
speaks 2 Thessalonians. i. 10.) to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all
them that believe. He will give such a glory to us, as will be much for his own
credit, and reflect glory on himself. He will not so much consult what is fit
for us to receive, as what is fit for such a Prince as he to give. He will
cloth us with such honor and glory, that it will be an honor to him to have
his followers appear in such rich and shining liveries. It will set men into
admiration to behold the bounty of his royal favor to them; and much advance
the greatness of this Prince, to see such subjects attend him, the meanest of
which are Kings. Nor do we strain our fancies, and exalt our hopes above what
we can reasonably expect, when we look for such high dignities: for that we
shall be admitted into his heavenly Court, and be thus sumptuously apparelled,
and magnificently entertained by Angels to wait upon us, and carry us to him,
we are assured by the testimony of the HOLY GHOST: which clothed poor men here
with a power greater then the most absolute Monarch on earth ever enjoyed; and
enabled them to deal greater and richer gifts to men, yea, to scatter them
abroad every day as they past along the streets, or did but spread their shadow
over them, then Kings and Emperors could do at their Coronation, or
Conquerours at their most magnificent Triumphs.

III.
And as a farther proof of this, we must observe once more, that the HOLY GHOST
gave its testimony of the Life that is in Jesus, and shall be given to us, when
it fell down upon the common sort of believers, as it had done upon the
Apostles: who were not desirous to keep the miraculous gifts of it to
themselves alone, but readily communicated them to others. It was a great
wonder to hear the Apostles speak with tongues and prophesy, to see them cure
the lame, and restore the blind to their sight, nay, raise the dead to life,
only by bidding them live and be well in the Name of Jesus: (things which no
Potentates on Earth, as I said before, could bestow, though they were forward
to take to themselves the name of Gods, and affected Divine honors:) But it
was a greater wonder, to see other illiterate Christians receive the same gifts
by the laying on of their hands, and invocation of the Name of the Lord Jesus;
who presently filled them with the HOLY GHOST.

This was a thing so strange, that they could not but look upon it as a token
of the most extraordinary Love of God to mankind; from whence they might expect
as much happiness as the word ETERNAL LIFE, I told you, imports. For, (1.)
nothing ever discovered the capacity of humane Souls so much as this effusion
of the HOLY GHOST: which showed how large and wide they are, and how much they
can contain, and to what degree of excellence they may be improved and raised,
and that on a sudden, by the power of God. This gave them a strong taste of what
was to come; and both made them relish immortal life above all other things,
and also put them in hope to attain it, by the favor of that person who had
promoted them to such a sight of it, in this vast measure of wisdom and love
wherewith they were endued. For, (2.) it could argue nothing less, they might
very well think, then that they who wore such eminent marks of his favor, as
to have a Crown of life and glory set upon their heads in this world, should be
raised to far greater honors in the next, when they should be more capable of
his kindness, and nearer to himself. And indeed, (3.) since hereby he dwelt in
them, and they became the Temples of the Holy Ghost, they might be confident he
would not suffer so holy a place to be pulled down, but in order to the
building of it better. And since the Holy Ghost also (4.) wonderfully enlarged
their hearts, and made them exceeding desirous as well as isntrumental in
conveying such exceeding great benefits to others; they could not but look upon
it as an undeniable argument of the most bounteous goodness of God; who is far
more inclinable to do good then Men can be, and more ready to reward our
services then we can be to do our work.

And considering moreover (5.) the promise he had made of ETERNAL LIFE, the
gift of the Holy Ghost was a mavelous earnest of it, and a kind of beginning
of it in their Souls. What? shall an ignorant Seaman be made a Prophet, and
speak with all tongues? a poor Tentmaker unlock Mysteries, and indite
spiritual Songs and Hymns? a man that yesterday could mend nothing but his
Nets, now cure a man of a bloudy-flux, or mend a lame leg? a rude Soldier
command Devils, and storm his strong holds more easily then a town without
walls? Lord, what light is this, might they justly say, which shines in our
dungeon! what power is this wherewith we see frail flesh armed! what might
which thou have given to grass and hay! As well may a butterfly think of
mounting up to heaven, or a flower attempt to pluck up a cedat, as we poor
wretches conceive a thought of effecting such wonderful things. This sure
signifies that men are very dear to God, or else he would not thus dwell among
them. It may well make us believe there is nothing so great, nothing so
glorious promised by Jesus, but he will work it for us; having already
transformed us into such noble creatures. As Manoah's wife said to him, xiii.
Judge. 23. If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a
burnt-offering and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have showed
us such things as these: so might they in this case say, and with greater
advantage then she, If the Lord would let us still remain under the power of
death, he would not have given such gifts into our hands, (for that is more
then to receive the poor oblations we make to him,) nor would he have revealed
such secrets to us. He would not have sent us the spirit of wisdom and
knowledge, nor raised us to the degree of prophecy, nor put new tongues into
our mouths to declare his wonderful works, nor made all diseases submit to our
word. All which gifts, with diverse others, they had reason to look upon as the
earnest of the Spirit, and the Seal of the Holy Ghost, whereby they had an
assurance given them (as I hope to show elsewhere) of the everlasting
inheritance which Jesus has promised in the heavens. For they demonstrated,
that He who had power thus to alter and advance mean men, and to make them
Stuporem mundi the wonder and amazement of the world, could also give that Life
which he had promised, by that very power which they felt already working in
them.

And they also made it evident (6.) that he would bestow it. For there is no
more reason that he should thus bestow the Holy Ghost at present, then that he
should hereafter give us Eternal Life. His faithful promise is the security
for both; our hopes are built upon that sure foundation. If there be any
difference between the ground there is for one more then the other, the
advantage lies on the side of the hope of Eternal Life. Which there is more
reason now that he should give us, then there was for giving the Holy Ghost;
even because he has already done so much for his Church: and there is more
reason we should expect it; because, as I said before, we have seen a
remarkable instance of his fidelity, in pouring out such rivers of living
water, when he sent the Spirit which he promised.

And here it comes to my mind, in xi. Isa.
that another Wonder, which Abarbinell says the Messiah shall work at his
coming, is a Miracle like that of dividing the Red sea when Israel came out of
Egypt. Which he endeavors to prove from xi. Isa. 15. The Lord shall utterly
destroy (or dry up) the tongue of the Egyptian Sea, etc. that is, says he, of
Nile, the great River of Egypt. This our Lord has done more excellently then
they imagine. For it was nothing near so great a wonder, that Israel should be
baptized into Moses in the Sea; as it was, that the people who followed Jesus
should be baptized into him with the Holy Ghost poured down upon them from
heaven. The passing through the Sea, and the Cloud to boot, was not such a
certain argument, that Moses would bring them out of the great affliction
wherein they had been plunged, and lead them to Canaan, their rest and
inheritance; as these rivers of living water, the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and
the admirable effects thereof, filling the world with the Glory of the Lord,
were an undeniable proof to those who were under its conduct, that Jesus was
the person who would lead them to a better rest, in a more heavenly Country,
which flows with far sweeter delights then milk and honey. This did, as it were,
dip their souls into this belief, and made them sensible that Jesus is the
Author of Eternal Salvation; far more then the Sea it self could baptize
their forefathers into Moses, i.e. persuade them that he was the Prophet of God
who would deliver them, and bring them to the peaceable enjoyments they desired.

And therefore, I observe, after the Jews, who quarrelled at St. Peter's
preaching to the Gentiles, were satisfied that the Holy Ghost was fallen upon
them, even as upon themselves, they had no more to say but this, then has God
also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. xi. Act. 18. This they looked
upon as the beginning of God's favor and lovingkindness to them, which would
conclude in nothing less then the ETERNAL LIFE of which we are discoursing.
And so this very Apostle St. John, after he had put the Disciples in mind of
the UNCTION they had received, and exhorted them to continue in that Doctrine
which it taught, (Chap. ii. of this Epistle, 20, 24.) immediately adds that
this is the promise which he has promised us, even Eternal Life, ver. 25.
Which was as much as to say, that the Unction by the HOLY GHOST had so
perfectly instructed them in the certainty of this great happiness, that it was
sufficient to move them to abide in the Doctrine of Jesus: none being able to
teach them better, or to put them in hope of any thing greater then this
ETERNAL LIFE which he promised, and by the HOLY GHOST assured.

It is true indeed, which some are forward to object, that we in these days see
not such evidences as those Believers had; the Holy Ghost not inhabiting thus
in every one of our Souls as it did in theirs. Nor is there the like reason it
should; we being engaged in no such hard services as theirs, which stood in
need to be encouraged with the strongest hopes of a glorious reward. They were
in deaths often, (as St. Paul speaks,) and therefore were in danger to faint,
without a most lively gust of immortal Life. The whole World was their enemy,
and with the greatest rage opposed their preaching; which required a clearer
sight of the World to come, and a more sensible descent of invisible powers for
their assistence and support. From whence we also derive no small benefit:
because the more sensible demonstration they had of it, the firmer grounds of
hope are laid for us; whose faith relies upon their testimony, and the power of
the HOLY GHOST in them. This is sufficient to hearten us in our duty, that our
Lord has given to those, whose testimony we have the greatest reason to
believe, such visible and palpable evidences of his being alive, and of his
intentions to quicken his servants to Life everlasting with himself. Let us but
heartily apply ourselves, upon these grounds, to live by the faith of the Son
of God; and we shall find the same Spirit that wrought in them operating in us
also, to confirm our Faith and Hope, and make us rejoice in hope of the glory
of God.

And so much may suffice to have been said of the Witness of the HOLY GHOST,
which perfectly agrees with the other two of the FATHER and of the SON: who are
all one, you see still, in their Testimony, as well as in their Nature. So I
expressed my self in the Conclusion of my former Discourse about these Three
Witnesses Chap. iv. page 235.
; supposing these words, though few, would have sufficiently testified my right
belief in the Holy Trinity; and that none would have imagined, I waved the
farther explication of that passage, THESE THREE ARE ONE, because I entertained
a sense of it differing from that of the Catholic Church. I was not conscious
to my self of any such Heresy; and therefore had no reason to be solicitous to
prevent this accusation, by diverting from the subject I had in hand, unto
another Argument. But some, I have heard, have been so unkind, (to say no more)
let them examine their hearts from what grounds, as to whisper such suspicions.
And therefore I judge it necessary to take occasion here to declare, that I
believe these three to be one, in the same sense that all Catholic Writers
have done, who have treated of the ever-blessed Trinity. And St. Augustine
assures me L. 1. de Trin. c. 4.
, that every one who meddled with this argument before him, intended to teach
this according to the Scriptures, That the Father, Son and Holy Ghost enjoy the
divine Unity of one and the same Substance, in an inseparable Equality. Haec
mea fides est, quia haec est Catholica fides; (as he concludes that Chapter)
This is my Faith, because it is the Catholic Faith. We have but one God,
because there is but one Godhead; and they that are of him have relation to
One, though we believe them to be Three. For this is not more God and that
less, nor is this before and that behind, nor are they separated in will or
divided in power, nor are any of those things to be found there which belong to
divided Beings; but, to speak all in a few words, there is One undivided
Godhead in several Persons, as in three Suns cohering together there is one
commixture of Light. They are the words of St. Greg. Nazianzen, Orat. xxxvii.
p. 601.
(whom these Whisperers sure, if they have read him, take for a Catholic
Writer,) in his Discourse concerning the HOLY GHOST. To which I will add what
St. Aug. again writes in his Book of Faith to Petrus Diaconus, Chap. i. If
there should be one Person of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as there is one
Substance, there would be nothing that could be truly called a Trinity. And
again, if as the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are distinct from each other in the
propriety of Person, they were also severed by diversity of Nature, there would
indeed be a true Trinity, but this Trinity would not be One God. But because it
is the Trinity in one true God, it is true not only that there is one God, but
also that there is a Trinity; therefore that true God is in Persons Three, but
in one Nature One.

Thus our Blessed Savior, Cateches. xi.
St. Cyrill of Jerusalem observes, does not say, I am the Father, but, I am in
the Father. And again, he does not say, I and the Father (...) am one, but,
(...) are one: That we may neither exclude the Son from the Godhead, nor
confound him with the Father. One, as to the dignity of the Divinity; because
God begat God. One, as to their Kingdom: for the Father does not rule over
some, and the Son over others; (as Absalom who opposed his Father;) but over
whom the Father reigns, over those reigns the Son. One, because there is no
difference, nor any distance between them: for the Father does not will one
thing, and the Son another. One, because the Son does not make one thing, and
the Father another; but there is one Workmanship of all, the Father making all
things by the Son. I suppose this excellent Man will pass for orthodox among
our Censurers, though he mention many other regards wherein the Father and the
Son (I may add the Holy Ghost) are one, besides that of their Divinity. And
therefore I may justly wonder why any should find fault with me (if they be so
well skilled in Christian Writers, as, no doubt, they would be thought,) for
saying, these three are one in their Testimony, as well as in their Nature. I
took it for a Catholic Exposition; else I would have rejected it. And if this
was its only fault, that it was too short; I hope they will rest satisfied now
that I have made it longer. Unless they be in the number of those, whom a late
Pamphlet speaks of, who judge their Brethren as if they had a faculty to see
into their hearts; and resolve not to be satisfied with any words they can
speak, though in all appearance they have no other design in the world, but
only, according to the best of their understanding, sincerely to serve God and
his Church.

As for those who would have a farther search made into this Mystery, I leave
it to themselves, if they please thus to employ their time, after they have
considered what the most Catholic Writers have thought of such inquiries. We
ought to acknowledge, says St. Gregory Nazianzen Orat. xxvi. p. 445.
, One God the Father of himself and unbegotten, and One Son begotten of the
Father, and One Spirit having its Substance of God: of the same nature, the
same dignity, the same glory, and the same honor; in all things the same, but
only that he is not unbegotten as the Father, nor begotten as the Son. These
things are to be known, these things are to be confessed, within these things
we must fix; leaving that long babbling, and profane novelty of words, to those
who have nothing else to do. And the forenamed St. Cyrill passes the same
sentence on those who curiously pried into this Secret in his days. He that
begot, says he, only knows him that is begotten: and he that was begotten of
him, knows him that begat him. Believe then that God has a Son; but how, do
not enquire; for if thou do, thou shall not find. Tell me first who he is
that begat, and then I will tell thee who the begotten is. But if thou can
not know the nature of him that begat, do not curiously ask after the manner of
the Son's being begotten.
It is sufficient to piety, to know that God has only one Son, one naturally
begotten, who did not begin to be when he was born in Bethlehem, but was before
all worlds. The Holy Ghost has in the Scripture revealed no more; he has not
told us any thing of the generation of the Son, out of the Father. (...); Why
then do thou pragmatically inquire after those things which the Holy Ghost it
self has not mentioned in the Scripture? Thou who know not all that is
written, why do thou busy thy self curiously about those things which are not
written? Let it suffice thee to know, that God has but one onely-begotten Son.
Be not ashamed to be ignorant of the rest; for thou art ignorant of it together
with the Angels.

Which is the same with what a more modern Writer has said, Nescire velle,
quae Magister Ma^imus
Docere non vult, erudita est inscitia.
To be willing not to know what our Supreme Master will not teach, is a learned
Ignorance. With which I shall content my self; and not envy to those, who have
a list to handle these things more nicely, their ignorant Learning. They may
venture as far as they please, if they think it safe; but ought not to be angry
with those who had rather expect farther discoveries in the other world: where
we shall be more knowing by a purer and more perfect illumination of the most
high Trinity; O^at. xi. (...), etc.
(as St. Greg. Naz. speaks elsewhere;) and yet more modest, and apt to adore
the incomprehensible God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Whose Testimony is
so full to satisfy us there will be such an happy State, that before I pass to
the other Three Witnesses on Earth, I cannot but rest a while and consider,
what a great way we are advanced toward a strong and settled belief of
Eternal Life, if these things be well digested in our minds.

If we would but always lay before our eyes these Records, and were as well
acquainted with them as we are with our Evidences for our Estates; if they were
as fresh in our minds as the words of a Record which we are to plead in some
Court, where we have a Cause to be heard, or the Title to our whole Estate
tried and determined; I do not see how we should possibly doubt of this Promise
which our Lord has made to his followers, nor how we should lose the joy and
comfort of it in this world of sorrows. Let all those who have taken the pains
to read thus far in this Treatise be so kind to themselves, as on all
occasions to recollect what they have read, and in their quiet thoughts to put
themselves often in mind, that the Father has said this is true, by a voice
from heaven at several times: when Jesus was baptized, when he was upon the
holy Mount, and before a multitude of people, He testified that ETERNAL LIFE
is in him. The Word also has shown us this glorious State, when he appeared to
St. Stephen, to St. Paul, to his beloved St. John; who have all communicated
their knowledge to us, and told us that he assured them He lives, and that we
shall live by him. The Holy Ghost likewise has declared this, by coming down
upon Him, and upon his Apostles, and upon his faithful ones. And then they
cannot choose but rely most firmly upon such ample and unquestionable
Testimonies; and be very much affected with this full assurance of Faith which
God works in us. There would be no reason, I am sure, why they should not as
strongly believe and expect the glory that Jesus will give us, though they do
not now see it; as we all do the performance of the promise of any person of
known honesty and ability, though at a great distance from us. No doubt the
faith of Christians would be immovable, did they ponder these things; they
would never call it into dispute, after such demonstrations, whether there be
another Life or no. Yea, they themselves would become immovable, and steadfast,
and abundant in the work of our Lord; because the very same Witnesses tell them
that this is the only way to eternal Happiness, which cannot be compassed by
any means but by patient continuance in well-doing.

How well then would it be with them, could we but prevail with all Christian
Souls to spend some time every day, in calling to mind what they have heard
these Heavenly Witnesses say? If they would but cast up their eyes every
morning toward heaven, and think, There Jesus is; there he lives in great
honor and glory; there he sits at the right hand of the Throne of God; there
St. Stephen saw him; in such glory St. Paul and St. John beheld him; from
thence they heard him speak, and make most gracious promises to them; he sent
the Holy Ghost from thence to be his Witness; there he is preparing a place for
all them that have the heart to follow him; thither he will receive our Spirits
to behold his glory; and with him shall all good men live for ever in
unconceivable joy: How would these thoughts inspire and ravish their hearts?
How would they change and transform them into quite other things? How mean and
contemptible would our petty enjoyments, which now so tempt us, seem in
comparison with that divine condition? How impossible would it be to persuade
us to yield to the breach of any of his commands, and thereby forfeit such
happiness? Yea, how easy, sweet and pleasant would it be to do as he bids us,
in hope of such an incomparable recompense? I leave every one to make trial of
it, that he may be able to tell, if he can, what power and force there is in
this settled belief.

It is reported by him that writes the Life of Laurentius Justinianus, that
when he was a youth, about nineteen years old, which is an age you know most
slippery and subject to danger, he thought he saw one day or night (I know not
well whether) a very beautiful virgin approaching toward him, and thus
addressing her speech to him: Why do thou, O young man, thus disquiet thine
heart, and wast thy strength, in a vain pursuit of many things, whereon thou
pourest forth thy affections? why do thou seek for rest in such trivial
enjoyments? That which thou art so desirous of, is in my power to bestow upon
thee. And if thou will resolye to take me for thy Spouse, I promise to bring
with me such a portion of peace and contentment, as no other person can enrich
thee withal. The young man, you may well suppose, was much taken with so rare
a feature, and such fair promises; which moved him to crave that he might know
her name, and the family from which she was descended. To which she answered, I
am the Wisdom of God; that is my Name, thence is my Parentage: if thou will
accept of the offer, I will be thine, and give all I have to thee. The youth,
says the story, instantly consented; and after he had drawn a contract between
them, thought she took her leave of him, and went away to provide for the
wedding. Upon this he awaked, and imagined the Vision instructed him to betake
himself to a Monastical life. Which he presently vowed; concluding that in
that retirement he was to complete his marriage to the Wisdom of God, when he
had quitted the empty pleasures of the World.

However fabulous this Story may prove, (which seems to have been composed in
imitation of that Vision of Hercules which many Greek Writers mention,) you may
make it true if you please. For, behold how the true Wisdom of God, our
Blessed Lord and Savior, presents himself to you. He has appeared in most
admirable beauty and a glorious form to many of his Servants, which they have
described and left us the picture of. In his Gospel he is so lively expressed,
that we cannot, if we look upon him, but behold him as the onelybegotten of the
Father, the brightness of his glory, and the character of his person. Would it
would but please you to listen to the offers he makes you, the portion of Life
and Glory hereafter, together with true peace and contentment here, which he
will assure to you. O that you would but draw a lively image of these things in
your mind; and represent the King of glory as soliciting your heart to his
service! Do you not believe that it would be infinitely more obliging, then
such an apparition as that now named? Would it not more easily make you abandon
the sinful pleasures of this world, then the other made him forsake the
lawful? Would not the beauty of our Savior, and the splendor of his glory in
the heavens set before your eyes, be more inamouring then any imaginary or
real beauty whatsoever? Would not these words of his be more piercing then any
other, I will give to him that overcomes, to inherit all things; and, I will be
his God, and he shall be my Son? Would it not transport our hearts with joy, to
hear that he will be contracted to us; and assure us of such a dowry with
himself in the heavens? Would it not make all his commands so far from being
grievous, that we should think them sweet and delicious above all the pleasures
wherein sensual men are drowned? He can make no doubt of it, that has not
lost his reason; and is able to understand what the difference is between such
a certain truth as this, and a dream; and between the commands of our Lord, and
the obedience which that youth undertook to perform.

Jesus is certainly in the heavens, He sits at the right hand of the Majesty on
high, He unfeignedly wishes we would be espoused to him, He will settle an
eternal inheritance upon us: and He does not require us to go into Monasteries
and deserts, to live like Hermites and Anchorets, to immure our selves from all
society; (though if he did, we should have no ill bargain of it;) but only to
retire seriously into our selves, and there often meet with him, to live
soberly, righteously and godly while we are in the world, to let no company
draw us from his precepts, nor suffer any creature to rob him of our affection.
And what a reasonable demand this is, you will then see, when you heartily
believe this ETERNAL LIFE which he has promised. Believe, and then you will
think there is nothing too much or too hard to be done or suffered, for the
attaining such a glorious Life with our Savior. Which moved St. Stephen to
suffer stoning, and St. Paul to be in deaths often, and St. John to endure
banishment in a most desolate Island, and worse things afterward, that they
might be so happy.

And let us with honest hearts, desirous to be what God would have us, beg the
assistence of the HOLY GHOST to guide us in this way of understanding; which we
shall find incomparably the best, to settle in our mind a sense of the
happiness to come. For when the Soul comes to the perfection of the Spirit,
Macar. Hom. xvi. xviii.
wholly purged from all affections, and united to the Spirit, the Comforter, by
an unspeakable communion, so that by this heavenly mixture it becomes worthy to
be a spirit; it is all Light, all Eye, all Spirit, all Joy, all Rest, all
Exultation, all Love, all Goodness and Sweetness. It becomes hereby privy to
the Counsels of the Heavenly King, and knows his Secrets. It has a confidence
in the Almighty, and enters into his Palace, where the Angels and the spirits
of the Saints are; though it be as yet in this world. For though it has not
attained the entire inheritance prepared for it there; yet it is secure from
the Earnest it has received, as if it were crowned and possessed of the
Kingdom.

Who would not labor then to be so happy, not only hereafter, but also here?
Georg. Nicomed. in concept. S. Annae.
there in possession, and here in hope? What a work is it to ascend up into
heaven? What laborious steps can lead us to so great an height? What are the
sweats of this mortal life to those eternal recompenses? By what pains shall
we be worthy of friendship with our Maker? How shall we make our selves a
proper habitation for him to dwell in? For he has said, I and my Father will
come and dwell in him that loves me and keeps my Commands. This is the end of
the Good we have in hope: this is the heavenly Kingdom: this is the enjoyment
of eternal pleasure: this is the never-ceasing joy; the perpetual triumph;
the retribution transcending all our labors, nay, all understanding. There are
no labors, no not in thought, equal to this recompense of reward. They all
fall so infinitely below it, that for mean, for inconsiderable pains, our
transcendently-good Lord will give an enjoyment far surpassing all our
thoughts. All humane endeavors are of no account, though we should wear out a
whole life in them, compared with the future Blessedness. Though we should
sustain a perpetual combat all our days, though they should be prolonged to
an hundred years, or to twice as much, or thrice, or a thousand times, and all
this while we should contend in a virtuous course; we shall seem to have done
nothing, when we come to confer it with what we shall receive.

And therefore let us gladly, by such small and poor labors, strive to
purchase these super-sublime recompenses, and treasure up these never-consuming
riches. I call those poor and small, which not only seem so to all; but the
perpetual combat of an whole Age, the most unwearied pursuit of virtue, the
most incessant and fervent pains in its service. For such are the Goods which
our munificent Lord will give in exchange for them, such are the superabundant
riches of his retributions, such is the Hyperbole of his loving kindness and
goodness, that for few things, he will give infinite; for beggary, the greatest
riches; for perishing things, Goods that last for ever.

These let us seek, and, dedicating our selves wholly to the Lord, make haste
to the obtaining so inestimable a Good. Let us consecrate Soul and body to him,
and be fastened to his Cross; that we may be worthy of his Eternal Kingdom,
giving glory to the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever.
Amen.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the Witnesses on Earth; and first, of the WATER.
YOU have seen already how many there are that solicit our affections, and
persuade us to believe in the Lord Jesus, and heartily consent to him in
whatsoever he requires. So many, that how we should deny him, after He himself
has appeared so often with the promises of Eternal Life, and the Father also
and the Holy Ghost have commended him to us as the Prince of Peace and the Lord
of Glory, it is harder to give any reason, then it is to prove that he is the
Son of God, and that in him is ETERNAL LIFE. For, as if these Witnesses were
not sufficient, or that we may be born down by numerous Testimonies, there are
Three more, who are our Neighbors, (as I may say) with whom we are well
acquainted, and whose witness none could ever deny, that speak the very same
thing, and affirm it as strongly as the other, that God has given us Eternal
Life, and that it is in his Son Jesus.

Let us call them in too, and hear what they say, in the same order wherein we
examined them before, in the former business: first taking the Testimony of the
WATER, then of the BLOOD, and then of the SPIRIT.

Of the WATER.
BY Water, I have shown, we are to understand, either that Purity whereof it is
the Instrument, which was most eminent both in Christ's Doctrine and Life: or
else Baptism, both John's and his own, by which he appeared to be the S^n of
God. Let us have so much patience as to hear all these once more, and consider
what they say to the point in hand.

I.
And as for the Purity and Holiness of his Doctrine, there is much in it to
persuade us, that he has Life in himself, and will bestow it upon his
Followers. Certain it is that, (1.) it naturally lifts up the Mind toward
heaven, and disposes those that entertain it to look for Eternal Life; for
which it is but a preparation. For it teaches us to abstract our hearts from
this Flesh wherewith we are clothed, and from this World wherein we live, as
not worthy of all those thoughts and that care which we are apt to bestow upon
them. The very intent and purpose of it, we cannot but see, is to wean our
minds from earthly enjoyments, and to take off our affections from the
pleasures of sense; to make riches and the praise of men seem little things,
and to give us contentment with our portion of present goods, though never so
small; in short, ^o render us something like to God himself, whilst we are at
this distance from him. What can any man make of this, but that it is a
preparation for another life; an Institution which designs to form men, and
make them fit for an higher World? Do but take a review of that Compendium
which I have drawn of this Doctrine, in my former Book, and you will be
satisfied, that it is nothing else but a contrivance to make us heavenly; and
intends to guide us to such a Life as is a prevention of Heaven, a beginning of
the celestial state, whereby we shall live, in part, as men of another World,
and not of this.

Which future World, (2.) it is manifest, his heavenly Doctrine supposes; or
else it would be so far from that Wisdom which was eminent in him, that it
would be the greatest absurdity that can be imagined. For it teaches us, if his
service require it, to deny our selves even in the most innocent and lawful
enjoyments of this life; to forsake father and mother and houses and lands for
his Name's sake; yea, to lay down our very lives, rather then forsake his
Doctrine, and violate his commands. These are express Lessons which his Sermons
teach his Disciples: but are things so sublime, so much above the reach of
flesh and blood, that it would be the vainest thing in the world to propose
them to men's observance, without the hope of something in another life to
reward such hard services. He would have had no followers on these terms; had
he not made it as plain and evident as the rest of his Doctrine, that He would
be the Author of Eternal Salvation to them that would obey him. Men were not
so fond of troubles and torments and death, as to expose themselves to the
danger of them, if they had not seen the greatest reason to believe, that their
Master would recompense their present Sufferings with a future happiness so
incomparably greater, that it would be the highest folly to avoid them. None
can suppose the Author of such a Religion to be so weak as not to understand,
that men would never embrace this profession; unless at the same time that he
called them to this high pitch of piety, he called them also, as the Apostle
speaks, to his kingdom and glory. And therefore, without all doubt, our Lord
took care to preach this as the principal thing, and to give good assurance of
a blessed state to come; because without this it had been the most ungrounded
and foolish undertaking that ever man went about, to persuade the world to be
so mortified, to quit all present possessions, and to part with their lives for
his sake. He must have been the most unreasonable of all other men in preaching
such Doctrine, and supposed the World void of all reason, if he expected to
have it believed; had he not been certain himself, and been able by evident
proofs to persuade others, that all those who hearkened to him should be no
losers, but exceeding great gainers, by quitting all things upon his account.
If he had not held this truth in his hands, as clear as the Sun, that they who
would follow him should be immortally happy; he might have stretched them out
long enough before he had drawn so much as one follower after him. The Trees
would as soon have followed him as Men: who would never have stirred a foot in
such a narrow path, unless he had shown them plainly that it led to Everlasting
Life.

Let us consider and illustrate this a little. Would not he expose himself to
laughter and scorn, that should earnestly persuade his neighbors to go and
labor hard in his fields all day, by which they should get just nothing for
their pains at night? Would it not seem a piece of strange mockery and contempt
of us, and as strange a folly in him that should invite us to enter into his
service, which he confessed would make us sweat, and engage us in many toilsome
employments; and when we inquired what wages he gave, should be able to assure
us never a farthing that lay in his power or will to bestow upon us? Would they
not be equally ridiculous, he that should make, and they that should embrace
such a proposal? Might not such a trifler expect rather to be kicked, then to
be followed by the multitude? Should we not hear them expressing their
indignation in such speeches as these? What? Do you take us for arrant fools?
Do you think we are mere Mushromes? that our brains are made of a sponge, or
our heads stuffed with wet straw? What do you make of us? or what have we done,
that argues us to be such blocks and trunks as you suppose us? And yet such was
the constant preaching of our ever-Blessed Savior, that if he had not made his
promises as plain and certain as his commands, he would have been liable to
such language. For he calls men, as you read in that Parable xx. Matthew. to a
laborious life of piety. From the beginning of his preaching to the end of it,
he had no other design. Early in the morning, (verse. 1.) when he first appeared
in the world, he went out: and what was it to do, but to hire laborers into
his vineyard? At the third hour he went out again, and said to those whom he
found idle, Go ye also into the vineyard: (verse. 4.) At the sixth and the ninth
hour of his life he still followed the same business. At the eleventh also
(verse. 6.) he finds other loiterers, and says to them also, Why stand you here
all the day idle? Would they have moved from their place, think you, if he had
not agreed with them to pay them for their pains? Would they have returned no
other answer but that, No man has hired us; and not have also added, What will
you give us? what shall we gain by our labor? had he not satisfied them about
that matter? If there had been no wages to be expected, they had better have
stood idle still, or have staid for some other Master. Had it not been evident,
that the Lord of the vineyard was a wealthy person, able to give every man his
penny, i. e. a reward for his service; he might have called long enough, and
seen his ground all overrun with briars and thorns, before he had procured any
laborers to go into it. Certainly, if we will but allow our Savior to have
been a person of ordinary reason and common capacity, we cannot imagine he
would have endured so long toil and travel, and walked all the country of
Judaea over, to win proselytes to him; if he had not made it as visible, that
he would bring men to the blessed sight of God in eternal rest and peace, as
it was, that he called them to a God-like life of piety, righteousness and true
holiness during their stay in this present world. We must depress him into the
rank of the most witless men; or else believe that He who required so much work
from his servants, demonstrated he was a good Master, rich, and furnished with
the most ample rewards.

And therefore (3.) we may well believe that He came with such Testimonies from
above, from the Father and from the Holy Ghost, and intended Himself to appear
from heaven as the Author of Eternal Life; without which he could not have
gone about to establish such a Doctrine; or if he had, would not have
succeeded. One of these Witnesses exceedingly justify the other; and are not to
be divided. We have reason to think, a person of his Understanding, who spoke
as never man spoke, (his very enemies being judges,) would not have attempted
the settlement of such a strict rule of life as his Doctrine contains, without
such countenance from Heaven as I have mentioned, to persuade the world that he
would lead them thither. Though I must add, (4.) that the strict purity and
holiness of his Doctrine singly considered is of great weight and moment to
persuade us that ETERNAL LIFE is in him: because this is a part, nay, a
principal part, of his Doctrine. Which He, who in all other things that he
said was unreprovable, would not have affirmed so expressly and constantly, if
he had not been fully assured it was true.

Do but observe how this Doctrine is constantly intermixed with all his
Sermons. It is the very strain of his Preaching, that if any man would follow
him, and do as he did, he should find rest for his Soul; and that God the
Father of all would honor those who did him service. xii Joh. 26. This he
proclaims in the plainest terms, and the clearest manner. viii. Joh. 12. I am
the Light of the World: ( Illuminator and Deductor humani generis, as
Tertullian excellently expresses it Apolog. cap. xxi.
, the Inlightner and the Conducter or guide of mankind:) He that follows me
shall have the light of life; the wisdom, that is, which shall lead him to
immortal blifs. And to make this more manifest, let it be noted, (1.) how he
proclaims this to every man, iii. Joh. 15, 16. that the Son of man must die,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. For
God so loved the world, that he gave his onely-begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. And (2.) he
asserts it with the greatest earnestness, with the strongest and most vehement
asseverations. vi. Joh. 47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes
on me has everlasting life. He tells them also (3.) with the same assurance,
that God had sealed him for this purpose; or set a plain mark upon him, whereby
all might see that he was to be the Author of everlasting life. vi. Joh. 27.
And observe (4.) that, having told them it was visible, if they pleased to open
their eyes, that God the Father had designed him to give them immortal
satisfaction, he repeats this Doctrine a great many times in that Chapter;
verse. 33, 35, 39, 40, 47, 48, 51, 54, 57. Insomuch that St. Peter concludes at
the latter end of that Sermon, there was no Master comparable to him, who had
the words of eternal life: ver. 68. And it is farther observable, that he
affirms (5.) he came to bring his followers to the greatest happiness. x. Joh.
10. I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly. And (6.) that he tells them again, he came to publish this glad
tidings by the appointment of the Father. xii. Joh. 50. I know that his
commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the
Father said unto me, so I speak. And (7.) that he affirms, he has power to
make good what he promises. x. Joh. 28. And I give unto them eternal life; and
they shall not perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. xvii. 1, 2.
Glorify thy Son, as thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should
give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. And, lastly, he tells
them that he was such a person as might well be credited in all this; since he
came down from heaven, and was at that moment in heaven. iii. Joh. 13. Which he
repeats again viii. 23. I am from above, I am not of this world: and ver. 38. I
speak that which I have seen with my Father: and ver. 42. I proceeded forth and
came from God; neither came I of my self, but he sent me. For which reason he
does not discourse of immortal life as a Philosopher, going about to prove it
by reasons and arguments; but only asserts it as one that had Divine
Authority, (for which he was to be believed,) and could himself make men
eternally happy. This was the only thing that could be disputed and needed
proof, that he came from heaven to illuminate the world by his instructions.
And this he did not desire they should take upon his bare word, but abundantly
demonstrated it: and told them, ver. 28. that after his death they should still
see it made more evident that he did nothing of himself, but as the Father had
taught him, he spoke these things. For then, as you shall see in due place, God
the Father declared all these words to be true by raising him from the dead.

These things he said so often, so openly, so confidently, and with such
appeals to God, (who bare him witness, as you have heard, and never in the
least contradicted what he said,) that we have great reason to believe he did
not forge all this: but delivered the mind and will of God as sincerely when he
said he would give men Eternal Life, as he did when he charged them to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world. Certain it is, that He
himself believed what he preached, and had no doubt, but a perfect assurance of
it; as will appear if we pass to the Second thing which we are briefly to
consider,

II.
His own most holy Life, in the strictest obedience to God the Father. This
Abarbinell, in his discourse upon xi. Isa. which I have so often mentioned,
makes one of the marks of the Messiah; the perfect temper of his desires and
affections, and the direction of them according to the measures of the Divine
Law. Which he thinks is the meaning of those words, ver. 3. He shall be of
quick understanding in the fear of the Lord. This was so remarkable in Jesus,
who was so truly, so completely and constantly pious, that there never was any
person so qualified to lay claim to this Dignity as he was. His Life was so
free from all blame, such a perfect abstinence from all the pleasures of this
world, such a contempt of all that which we think most worthy of our
indefatigable labors; that it has a strong force in it to persuade us, that
he indeed sought Eternal Glory, and was fully assured he should be possessed
of it for Himself and for all His.

Who but a man so persuaded of his Doctrine would have lived in poverty, when
he might, no question, by the multitude and devotion of his followers, have
made himself incredibly rich? What should incline him to remain all his days
without an house so big as a fox or the smallest bird is owner of, but an
expectation of that house which is eternal in the heavens? Could any thing
move him to give away to the poor all that was given him, but a certain
knowledge of great treasures above? We cannot conceive what should make him
refuse the dignity of a King, when the people intended to proclaim him; if it
were not this undoubted persuasion, that he was the King of Heaven, and should
sit down at the right hand of the Throne of God. Would any of those that doubt
this, labor as he did, night and day, for nothing? Would any poor man cure
multitudes of all diseases, and take not a farthing for his pains? Would any
body live, if he could help it, and not know where he should eat the next
meal's meat? And who is he that can find in his heart to endure the hatred of
the chiefest of the people, and to be in perpetual danger of snares and
treacherous designs for the taking away his life, without any hope to be a
gainer by it? Is there any likelihood that our Lord would have labored in such
sort, as not to have leisure so much as to eat, and after all that kind pains
be content to be called Deceiver and Devil, and to run the hazard of being
stoned and killed; and yet have no assured expectation to reap some fruit
hereafter from all his toil and trouble? Let him believe it that loves to sting
his fingers with nettles, or to roll his naked body in snow: we that have a
more tender sense of our own pleasure must have leave to be of another mind.
Let any man try to persuade himself to lead such a life; and by his
unwillingness he will easily be convinced, that our Lord, who could look for
nothing in this world from what he did and suffered, would never have so
cheerfully, freely, and without any regret, followed such a course, had he not
known as surely that he should be made glorious thereby hereafter, as he knew
that he must be made miserable by it here.

Ask his Poverty then, and that will bear witness that he laid up treasures in
the heavens. Ask his Humility, and that will tell you that he sought for the
Glory of God only. Inquire of his Charity and Bounty, his wonderful bounty to
all men, and that will bear Record both that all fullness is in him, and that he
will not envy any thing he has to his followers. Let his Contentedness speak,
and that will assure you he was possessed of something greater then all worldly
goods; which he could tell better how to live without, then others to live
comfortably withal. Examine his Labors and pains, his travells and journeys,
trace his steps over sea and land; and they will all confess that he sought a
better Country, which is an heavenly. Ask him what he meant by his Patience,
his willing endurance of all reproaches, calumnies, hatreds, persecutions; and
they will likewise conclude in the same testimony, that he had a joy set before
him, which made him despise them all. In short, consult his Fasting forty days,
his enduring so many temptations of the Devil, slighting his offers, rejecting
his counsels; and you can have no account of them but this, that he had indeed
the meat that endures to everlasting life; that he verily believed the voice
from heaven, which said he was the Son of God; and that he knew he had a
greater Glory, then all the Kingdoms of the world which the Devil offered him.

And after all this, I suppose there is no considering man but will think the
unquestionable belief of such a person as he was, to be of very great moment to
settle ours in this weighty business. It is safest for us, without all dispute,
to follow the judgment of one so well able to discern truth from falsehood, that
he was of as quick understanding in all things else, as he was in the fear of
the Lord. We have great reason to think that he was in the right; and was no
more deluded himself, then he intended to delude others. There was not the
least flaw, as I showed in the former Treatise, that appeared in his
Understanding; nor could he be seduced into this belief by any earthly appetite
or desire: and therefore we ought to conclude, he was abundantly satisfied, by
the most evident demonstrations, that he should live for ever, and be the
Author of Eternal Life to others: which, among other reasons, should very
much satisfy us.

III.
Who may farther consider also the Baptism of that famous person St. John the
Baptist. That is, his whole Ministry, which is comprehended under the name of
his Baptism; as Circumcision sometimes includes the whole Law of Moses. In this
we shall find, if we examine it, a plain testimony to the great truth we are
treating of, that ETERNAL LIFE is in Jesus for all the faithful. All that
Nation who persecuted our Savior held John for a Prophet, and went to be
baptized of him. Insomuch that the wisest of them durst not affirm that his
Commission was from men, (or that he taught and baptized the people from a
private motion of his own,) but rather that he undertook this office by
authority from heaven. Upon which account they were bound to receive his
testimony concerning our Savior, as unquestionable: which they themselves
clearly discerned to be a good consequence; and therefore would not reason this
matter out with our Savior, but let it fall to the ground, when they
themselves had begun the dispute.

Now He testified as plainly that by him we shall have Eternal Life, as he did
that he is the Son of God. For, (1.) as soon as ever he began to preach, he
told them the Kingdom of heaven was at hand. iii. Matt. 2. Which language the
Jews understood well enough, and therefore never asked what he meant: for so
they had learnt, out of the Prophet Daniel, to call the Kingdom of Christ.
Whose throne was to be erected by an heavenly power, and not by any humane
means; and under whose government they expected the greatest blessings that
heaven ever meant to bestow upon them. Now that under this name the Baptist
comprehends the Eternal Felicity which Christ should bring, is apparent from
the exposition which he makes of it, in the following part of the Chapter.
Where he tells those who were dubious, that he was not the Christ, but they
might shortly expect him; and that when he came, he would gather the wheat into
his garner, as well as burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire. iii. Matt. 12.
This he said when the chief of the Jews came to his Baptism: which was a
testimony that Jesus, who presently came after him, was to open the Kingdom of
heaven, and gather all pious men thither, as wheat into a garner. Which though
it denote first of all the Church of Christ, yet must needs include in it the
notion of a Church to be made exceeding glorious; because the King of it has
his seat and throne nowhere but in Heaven.

And then, (2.) after this the Baptist gave a more express testimony of what
they were to expect from Jesus, when he said, Behold the Lamb of God that
takes away the sin of the World. i. Joh. 29. Which words must needs intend (as
has been said already) that He is to restore us to the favor of God wherein
our first Parents stood, to take away that which separates between God and us,
and to make us capable of Paradise again.

And still more expressly (3.) he says, iii. Joh. 36. He that believes on the
Son has everlasting life: and he that believes not the Son shall not see
life. Unto which testimony our Blessed Savior himself appeals v. Joh. 33.
after he had been discoursing (ver. 25, 26, etc.) of his power to give life to
mankind. Indeed there was a witness, he shows, which in itself was far stronger
then this; and that was the Works which he did: but this was a better witness
to them, (and therefore our Savior uses it,) who durst not affirm John's
Baptism was not from heaven; whereas they boldly said the works of our Savior
were not from thence, but from the Devil. This is the meaning of those words
that follow ver. 34, 35, 36. after his appeal to John's witness; But I receive
not testimony from man: but these things I say that ye might be saved. He was a
burning and shining light: and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his
light. But I have greater witness then that of John, etc. That is, Though I do
not chiefly rely on any humane testimony, such as John's was, and indeed do not
need it, (having one more immediately divine and heavenly:) yet for your sakes,
who have a good opinion of him, and own him for a Prophet, and whom I would
willingly convince and save by any means, I instance in him so much, and
re-mind you of what he said concerning me. That which makes me first of all
speak of his testimony, and so often refer you to it, is not, because it is the
first and chiefest in its own nature, much less the only testimony I have; but
because I think it will be most effectual to do you good: He being in himself
a most excellent person, shining among you in great wisdom and zeal; and also
by you so esteemed, and received among you (at least for a season) with a great
deal of satisfaction.

And to this now add (4.) another thing, which I took notice of in the former
Treatise, and must here just call to remembrance; that our Savior himself was
baptized of him at Bethabara, a place that denoted him to be the person who
should lead men to their Rest, the Joshua that should conduct them into the
land of promise: and you will confess this WATER we are speaking of to be the
Water of life, which, if we drink of it, will revive and cheer our fainting
spirits. If we do but receive, I mean, the Doctrine of the Lord Jesus into our
hearts; if we seriously consider it together with the strain of his Life; if we
mark the office of St. John Baptist, the end of his Ministry, and the testimony
which his Baptism gave to our Savior; we shall find them all leading us into
this comfortable belief, that He is the Prince of life, and that none can
miscarry who live as he taught, and tread in his steps; but have good hopes in
this world, which shall not make them ashamed in the world to come.

IV.
This Jesus himself also bad his Disciples believe, by the same Authority
whereby he baptized and gathered Disciples to himself. Which none could do, I
showed you, as he did, but the Christ; in whose days the Jews expected an
Universal Baptism and cleansing of the people. Now the very end and intention
of his Baptism was, it is very well known, for the Remission of sins, and
consequently for Eternal life. This he taught men to believe, and then
authorized his Disciples to receive men to these high and noble Privileges, by
baptizing them in his Name. Upon which followed such a mavelous change in
their Souls, they were so enlightened, renewed and transformed, that Holy men
doubted not to call this Baptism, (a) S. Cyprian. epist. ad Donatum, and ad
Magnum.
the Water of Salvation, the Water of Life, and the immortal Nativity (b)
Optatus L. v.
Nay, St. Augustine informs us, that the Punick Christians called Baptism by no
other name then SALVATION; which he thought so proper, that he ascribes it to
an ancient and Apostolical tradition (c) L. i. de Peccatorum merituis, etc. c.
24.
. And Paschasius calls it LIFE, in his Book of the Body and blood of our Lord;
where he says of those who died shortly after Baptism, that post perceptam
vitam, after they were made partakers of life, they in nothing declined from
the way.

And for this they had the Authority of our Savior, who said, after he was
risen from the dead, xvi. Mark 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved: and showed St. John, xxii. Rev. 1, 2. a pure river of WATER OF LIFE
clear as crystal, running through the midst of the street So Andraeas Caesar.
joins the beginning of ver. 2. to ver. 1.
of the new Jerusalem, from the throne of God and of the Lamb. Which is a plain
description of the place of Baptism, appointed by God and our Savior, in the
midst of Christian assemblies, (called Streets, because they are the place of
concourse,) for the purifying of the world, and restoring us to Paradise again.
And he calls his Baptism WATER OF LIFE, because it runs thither; and there we
begin to live S. Basil. (...). L. de Spiritu S. c. x.
, and are admitted to the friendship of God, and put in assured hope that the
Life which then begins shall be continued to Eternal life. It is usual with
the ancient Writers of Christianity, to speak of a (...) instauration, (...) a
transformation, (...) a transfiguration of men's Souls in Baptism: by which,
says St. Basil, the Soul so glisters, that (...) in Psalm. xxix.
, God forms it to himself to be as it were his Throne. And so St. Cyprian
testifies of himself, in his Epistle to Donatus, that though he was perplexed
in so many errors, as made him think he could never be rid of them, and so led
away by those vices which stuck close to him, that despairing to do better he
began to favor them, as things proper to him: yet when he had received
Baptism, a light from above came streaming into him, a celestial breath
repaired him into a new man; and after a wonderful manner he was confirmed in
those things which seemed dubious, and saw those things clearly which before
were obscure, and found a power to do that which he judged not only
difficult, but impossible.

Now this change which they felt in their thoughts, desires, and passions, as
soon as they were baptized, was a powerful argument to persuade them, that
they should as really rise from the dead and live eternally, as they were now
quickened, when they lay dead in trespasses and sins, to the life of God and
true piety. Which was the reason that they chose Easter, rather then any other
time, as the most proper season for the receiving the grace of Baptism. So the
same St. Basil tells us, that every day, every hour, every moment is a time for
Baptism; but there is none so fit, as the (...), Exhortat. ad Baptismum.
the more proper and peculiar season for it, which is Easter Day. For the day
is (...) a memorial of the Resurrection, and Baptism is (...) a power granted
us to rise again. So that on the day of the Resurrection, we should receive the
grace of the Resurrection. And therefore the Church calls on those whom she
has conceived and traveled withal a good while, that now she may bring them
forth. This belief they were desirous, by all means, to impress upon men's
minds; and would have them look upon Baptism as the seal of a second life Greg.
Naz. Carm. iamb. (...).
. In which they could not be deceived; finding such a beginning of it already,
as testified the mighty power of God working in them.

And therefore St. Paul with great reason alleges Baptism as a public witness
to the faith of the Church, about the Resurrection of the dead, and the Life of
the world to come. 1. Cor. xv. 29. Else what shall they do which are baptized
for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the
dead? The Resurrection of the dead was so much the hope of Christians, and
Baptism gave such strength to their hope, that when any person, newly
instructed in the Christian faith, died before he could receive Baptism, some
of his Friends, it is reported from Irenaeus, received it after his departure
in his Name. To what purpose do they this? says the Apostle, (if he have
respect to this custom,) why do they thus trouble themselves, if they look for
nothing after death? This shows, that even those who were mistaken in other
things (as in this about baptizing for their deceased Friends) thought the dead
were not lost, but that there was hope of their future happiness: else they
would not still have continued to assist them, and taken all the care they
could that they might not be prejudiced for want of Baptism, which in their
stead they received. They would not have been so senseless, as to concern
themselves to do any thing for those who were gone from this world; if they
had not believed another, and looked upon them as capable there of Eternal
Life. Into the belief and expectation of which all Christians whatsoever were
baptized: which perhaps is all that the Apostle means by this Question, Why are
they baptized for the dead? Which Rigaltius In Tertul. de Resurrect. carnis c.
48.
thus interprets, Why are they baptized ut mortui resurgant, that after death
they may rise again? why are they asked at the Font, whether they believe the
resurrection of the dead? So that for the dead, is for themselves, in hope of
what shall follow after death, viz. a blessed Resurrection.

Which is the interpretation of St. Chrysostom, (as I have observed elsewhere
Aqua Genitalis.
;) who also bids us take notice, how that which they expressed in words, when
they professed to believe this great Article of the Christian Faith, was also
represented, as in an Image, by the very act of Baptism. In which the going
into the water, and the coming out, was a sign of their descending to the state
of the dead, and of their ascending from thence to life again. There is no man
that is baptized, but by the very rite and manner of it professes to die, at
least, to sin, and to rise again to newness of life. This Death and
Resurrection (as the Apostle teaches vi. Romans 3, 4, 5.) is most lively
represented there. But this is not all that is intended by it: for even those
Arias Montanus.
who in that sense were already mortified and renewed by receiving the Holy
Ghost before their baptism, (as Cornelius and his family,) proceeded
notwithstanding to receive that holy washing; and by their submersion took upon
them the likeness of the dead, and by their emersion appeared as men risen
again from the dead. If there were no other death to be escaped but that in
sin, and no other resurrection to be expected but that to newness of life; why
were they, who had attained these, baptized as dead men? and being already dead
to sin, why again sustained they the image of death, out of which they believed
and professed they should come? This very action of theirs proves that they
looked for another resurrection after death; which is the resurrection of the
body. And this profession of theirs was so much the more weighty, as they were
the more learned and instructed, being already taught by the Holy Ghost. By
whose power they were already dead to sin, and made alive to God; and by whose
instruction they professed to believe, that as there is another death, viz.
that of the body, so they should overcome it by the mighty power of Christ,
raising their very bodies from the dead.

There are several other interpretations of this place; as that of Epiphanius
Haeresi 38.
, who expounds it of those who received Baptism at the point of death: but I
shall not trouble the Reader with them, because they all conclude the same
thing, that Baptism was a public profession of the hope of immortality; and a
Seal also of the promises of God, not only to that particular person who at
any time received it, but to the whole Church, both to the living and the dead.
Who, as often as Baptism was repeated, had an open assurance given them from God,
(by whose authority it was administered,) that they should rise again to
everlasting life.

And so I shall dismiss this First Witness on Earth: which is the more to be
regarded, because, though it be not so great in it self as those which speak
from heaven, yet to us it is very considerable; and cannot be denied by those
who cavil at some of the other. For all men acknowledge the Life and Doctrine
of our Savior to be incomparably excellent; and John the Baptist stands upon
record in Josephus for a person of severe and strict sanctity; and the whole
Christian Church (who were not so childish as to build their hope on a sandy
foundation, but stood immovable (as you shall hear) like a house upon a rock,
when all the world stormed and made the most furious assaults upon them,)
believed thus from the beginning: as appears by their holy profession which
they made when they entered into the gates of the Church by Baptism.

The mighty power of which WATER OF LIFE they have thus celebrated with their
praises. Greg. Naz. Orat. xl.
Baptism is the Splendor of the Soul, the Change of the life, the Answer of
the Conscience toward God. It is the help of our weakness, the putting off the
flesh, the attainment of the Spirit, the Communion of the Word, the Reformation
of God's workmanship, the drowning of Sin, the participation of light, and the
destruction of darkness. It is the Chariot which carries us to God, our
fellow-travelling with Christ, the establishment of our faith, the perfecting
of our minds, the key of the Kingdom of heaven, the foundation of a second life
(...). Orat. xi.
. At this the heavens rejoice: this the Angels magnify, as of kin to their
brightness: this is the Image of their blessedness. We would willingly praise
this, if we could say any thing worthy of it.

Let us never cease however to give him thanks who is the Author of such a
gift; Greg. Nyssen. L. de Baptismo Christi.
returning him the small tribute of a cheerful voice for such great things as
he has bestowed on us. For thou truly, O Lord, art the pure and perpetual
fountain of Goodness; who wast justly offended at us, but have in much love had
mercy on us: who hatedst us, but art reconciled to us: who pronouncedst a curse
upon us, but have given us thy blessing: who did expel us from Paradise, but
have called us back again unto it. Thou have taken away the fig-leaf covering
of our nakedness, and clothed us with a most precious garment. Thou have
opened the prison-doors, and dismissed those that stood condemned. Thou have
sprinkled us with pure water, and cleansed us from all our filthiness. Adam, if
thou call him, will be no longer ashamed: he will not hide himself, nor run
away from thee. The flaming sword does not now incircle Paradise, making it
inaccessible to those that approach it; but all things are turned into joy to
us who were heirs of sin and death. Paradise, and Heaven it self, is now open
to mankind. The Creation, both here and above, consents to be friends after a
long enmity. Men and Angels are piously agreed in the same Theology.

For all which Blessings let us unanimously sing that Hymn of joy which the
inspired mouth in ancient times loudly prophesied. I will greatly rejoice in
the Lord, my Soul shall be joyful in my God: For he has clothed me with the
garments of Salvation, he has covered me with the robe of righteousness; he
has decked me with ornaments as a bridegroom, and as a bride adorned me with
jewels. lxi. Isa. 10. This adorner of the Bride is Christ; who is, and who was
before, and who will be blessed both now and for ever. Amen.

CHAP. X. Concerning the Testimony of the BLOOD, the Second Witness on Earth.
THE next Witness which comes in order to be examined is the BLOOD: by which, I
told you, we are to understand the Crucifixion and Death of the Lord Jesus,
with all the attendants of it. This is a Witness which the greatest enemies of
Christianity cannot but confess was heard to speak in his behalf. The stubborn
Jews, who will be loath to grant that a voice from heaven declared him the Son
of God, cannot deny that their forefathers imbrued their hands in his blood.
For in the Babylonian Talmud Vid. Horae Hebr. in Matt. p. 3^9. and Tzemach
David ad an. 3761.
it is delivered as a tradition among them, that they hanged Jesus (...) in the
evening of the Passover: and that a Crier went before him forty days, saying,
He is to be carried forth to be stoned, for conjuring and drawing Israel to
Apostasy. If any one can speak any thing for him to prove him innocent, let him
appear. It is an hard matter to have any truth from these fabulous people,
without the mixture of a tale together with it. When they cannot gainsay what
we believe, that their Nation were the great Instruments of his death, they
endeavor to find false reasons for so villainous a Murder.

But they granting that his Blood was shed by them, we shall soon prove it was
for another cause; even that which is recorded in our Books. Which none ever
undertook to confute, though they were put forth in the face both of Jews and
Romans: who might long since have exposed our Religion to shame, if Pontius
Pilate could have averred out of the Records of the Court where our Savior was
judged, that things were not so as his Disciples have related. And that this
Blood of his so shed, and upon such an account as we have received, is of very
great force to induce us to believe another World, and an eternal Happiness
there for us with Jesus, I am now to demonstrate; and shall easily make good,
unless we will entertain such low and slight thoughts of him, as no man can
suffer to lodge in his mind, who attends to the Doctrine he preached, and all
the arguments which prove him to be the Son of God. That alone indeed is
sufficient to justify all that he preached; particularly, that God by him will
give Eternal Life to those that obey him. If he be so nearly related to God,
(as even his Bloody Death, I showed in the former Treatise, proved him to be,)
we may believe him when he says that, As the Father has life in himself, so
has he given to the Son to have life in himself. But I shall wave this
general way of reasoning, though undeniable; and offer some things more
particular to every one's serious consideration.

I. It is apparent by the whole story, which it would be too long to relate,
that to lay down his life was an act perfectly voluntary in our Savior, who,
if he had pleased, might have avoided it. He might have chosen whether he would
have died or no: for no man (as he said x. Joh. 18.) could take his life away,
but he laid it down of himself; openly professing, I have power to lay it down,
and I have power to take it again. He need not have fallen into their cruel
hands, it is plain, unless he had freely consented to it. And when they were
about to apprehend him, many legions of Angels were ready for his rescue, if he
had pleased to lay his commands upon them. xxvi. Matt. 53. Nay, when he made
the Soldiers feel his power, so that they went backward, and fell to the
ground, (xviii. Joh. 6.) he could withal have escaped and gone his ways, as he
had done at other times; when this reason alone is given why they did not
apprehend him, as they attempted, because his hour was not yet come: vii. Joh.
30. viii. 20. that is, He did not see it to be the fittest time for him to
resign up himself to their power.

Now it cannot enter into man's deliberate thoughts, that he would have so
freely, without any constraint or resistance, given up his life; especially
when by preserving it he might have lived in great repute, esteem and
admiration of the people, yea, have been honored for escaping out of the hands
of his enemies; if he had not been sure of ETERNAL LIFE and a greater glory in
the Heavens, which he should win by going so willingly out of this present
world. He that saved others, could surely have saved himself, and spoiled their
jeer; (xxvii. Matt. 42.) if his will had not been otherwise resolved. He that
raised Lazarus from the dead, could have more easily struck all his opposers
dead at his feet; if it had been his pleasure. What should make his will then
thus bent upon death? What hindered the putting forth of his power for himself,
which it is manifest he so often used for the benefit of others? What could
move him so tamely, like a Lamb, to give his throat to the bloody knife, and to
hang so meekly upon an infamous cross; if it were not the contemplation of an
incomparable felicity which he hoped to obtain, by his Obedience to God, and
bearing witness to the Truth?

All men of sense cannot choose but look upon this as an undoubted Argument,
that he himself steadfastly believed, and had good assurance of, the truth of
what he preached. For who is there that can find in his heart to die, and die
in such a manner, so painfully and with such ignominy, for that which he thinks
in his conscience is false, nay, does not know to be certain? It is next to an
impossibility, that any man in his wits should so far forget himself, as to be
forward to throw away all he has, against the strongest inclinations and
persuasions of nature, which abhors death, and most of all a cruel and
disgraceful death, merely to justify a lie; which humane Nature is ashamed
of, without the help of torments to make it odious. There have been sundry
examples of rashness and foolish boldness; but none can be produced, nor easily
imagined, of such an one as this. For what can a man propose to himself, who
lays his life at the stake, to make good that which he believes has no truth
in it? What can he hope to get by such a mad resolved obstinacy? No man
attempts any thing without an end; much less will he expose his life to the
least hazard, without a cause of some moment. What can you see then in this
case weighty enough to be cast into the balance against a man's life, which
should make him sacrifice it freely, as our Savior did? Riches, and all the
Pleasures they can provide for us, could be of no consideration; because they
will do a man no service when he is dead, and our Savior had no posterity to
whom to leave them. Honor and Fame also seem to be of as little value; for
what satisfaction is it to be talked of in the world, when we have left it, and
hear nothing of what is done in it? Yet this is all that can be imagined to
have any power in this business. One may possibly, you may fansy, for to get a
great Name in the world by being the Author of a new Opinion or Sect, throw
away his life; though he know that he does but broach a lie. A strange
supposition this is, which a man in his right senses, one would think, should
not be inclined to make. But since some have pretended it is possible, I shall
briefly show that it could have no hand in our Savior's Sufferings. As will
appear if we consider, either the Circumstances of his Death, or the quality of
his Doctrine, or the manner of his Life.

II. The Circumstances of his Death were such, that if they be but a little
examined, you will presently find there is no place for this conceit. For (1.)
it stands upon good record, that He himself knew of his death beforehand, and
foretold it, with the manner of it: and yet was so far from endeavoring to
avoid it, that he went of his own accord to the very place where he knew they
would come to apprehend him. This is a plain declaration that he was no
Impostour. For though you may fansy a man tickled with so much vainglory, that
he will not stick to embrace death, when he cannot evade it, rather then unsay
what he has published, though he know it to be false: yet this is all that can
with any color be supposed. No such person can be conceived willing to seek
death, to offer himself to it, to go to the very place where he knows it waits
for him, (when he may as well avoid it,) and designedly put himself into those
hands which it is apparent are resolved to kill him. No; though fame be his
design, yet the preservation of his life, without all doubt, is his greater
concernment: and if he can, he will enjoy both, his fame together with his life.

But if any body will be so extravagant as to fansy, that He might intend to
get fame, even by running himself into this danger; let him observe farther,
(2.) what our Savior met withal in his passage to his death, which would have
stopped such vain forwardness. For there was something so dreadful appeared to
him in the way to his Passion, that when it approached he fell into an Agony. A
great horror seized on him, which declared how much Nature was against his
proceeding. Whose strong and violent inclinations would have prevailed against
a fancy and vain humor; if he had not known that he was engaged in a good
Cause, and did not deceive the World. Such terrible apprehensions as then
presented themselves, would have made him take the opportunity of the night,
and consult for his safety; if he had been a Deceiver, and not very well
assured that this was the way to everlasting Life.

And then, if you consider again (3.) that he was not hastily hurried to the
gibbet, but had a long time to weigh what he was about to suffer; it will seem
incredible that he should not repent of his obstinacy, if he had been conscious
to himself of any falsehood. For though in a sudden heat of mad zeal a man may
be supposed so foolish, as to maintain an untruth with the hazard of his life:
yet the sight of long-continued torments set a great while before his eyes,
would make him in all likelihood confess the truth.

But (4.) that which quite overthrows this idle supposition is, that the kind
of his death was such as could procure him nothing less then glory and fame:
there being nothing more infamous and reproachful then to die like a vile slave
upon a Cross. This he could not but foresee would expose him to the scorn of
all the World; did not something else gain him more credit then this could do
disgrace. And so it proved afterward; notwithstanding all the Miracles he had
wrought, his Crucifixion was the laughter of the Gentiles, and a
stumbling block to the Jews. From whence we may conclude that, if we will but
allow him to be a man of common sense, he would not have taken this way of all
other to procure fame. No course he could have thought of to propagate his
Doctrine would have been more mad then this; if it were not taken, as in all
reason it ought to be, for a token of his sincerity and truth in what he
preached: which would be published, he knew, to his immortal honor and glory
in all the world.

But dying such a death as he did, there could be no hope, it must be farther
considered, (5.) that his Doctrine should be so much as published by his
followers, much less received by others; unless he were both sure himself that
it was the truth, and that he could make the truth of it appear to them. And
then what would have become of all the glory, for which it is supposed he might
be tempted to part with his life? All that he could do to secure his
Disciples, that he preached nothing but the truth, and to encourage them also
to preach Christ crucified, (which was a most odious and dangerous
undertaking,) was to tell them that He would rise again the third day, and
appear alive to them. Now it is as manifest as the Sun, that, if he knew
himself to be an Impostour, he could have no hope that God would raise him up
again: and it is as manifest on the other side, that, if he did not rise again,
there was no hope that his Apostles would preach him, because he had proved
himself a liar: and if he was not preached by them, there could be no hope of
glory and fame: and, consequently, he would never have died in expectation of
that, which, if he did but abuse the World, he knew could not possibly attend
upon his Name. For it is visible, it must either have been buried in silence,
or else remembered with reproach; He himself having blasted it, by failing in
the performance of his word.

But I have said enough of this, and therefore shall consider only one thing
more, (6.) what it was that comforted our Savior and supported his spirit upon
the Cross. Was it the hopes he had to be cried up by his followers, and
magnified everywhere, when he was dead and gone, for a man of an invincible
spirit? No; He comforted himself with the thoughts of his own integrity: He
humbly addressed himself in prayer to God: He relieved himself with the
thoughts that he was his Father; to whom therefore he commends his spirit, and
breathed out his Soul in a pious confidence that He would receive it, and
glorify him in the heavens. For a little before he suffered, he lift up his
eyes thither, as St. John testifies, and said, Father, the hour is come;
glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee, etc. I have glorified thee on
earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do: And now, O Father,
glorify thou me with thy own self, with the glory I had with thee before the
World was. xvii. Joh. 1, 4, 5. And when the moment of his departure was come,
and he was just expiring on the Cross, He cried out with a loud voice, that all
might hear him, Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit. And having thus
said, he gave up the ghost.

He that shall impute all this also to vainglory, we may rather conclude takes
a pride in cavilling and contradicting; and has lost all sense of the Nature
of man, which finds no inclinations in it to be thus audacious. For how can he
repose any hope in God, who at that very instant when he expresses it is
committing the greatest open affront unto him imaginable? Our Blessed Savior
was ever a devout worshipper of him, and in all his ways acknowledged him: and
therefore since he did thus seriously betake himself to him in his sorest
distress, it is apparent he was persuaded of his own sincerity and truth: which
God the searcher of all hearts knew; to whom therefore he appeals, and was
confident he should live with him for ever, and be able to give Eternal Life
to others.

III. But what need is there to insist any longer upon such considerations as
these, when his Doctrine (which is the Second thing I mentioned) is so holy and
pure, so heavenly and divine, that the constant preacher of such things could
not be guilty of so great an impiety, as to call the God of heaven at last to
bear witness to a known untruth? No; it condemns lesser lies to so severe a
punishment, that to say, he was sent of God with the words of Eternal life,
nay, was the Way, the Truth, and the Life, when he knew he was not, deserved,
according to his own sentence, the heaviest condemnation.

To which if you add the manner of his Life, which was the last thing, it will
complete the Demonstration. For it was so perfectly conformable to his
Doctrine, that we cannot but think he believed it; and so could not die with a
lie in his mouth. Particularly, it was so free from all covetous designs, and
from hunting after the applause and praise of men; that it is incredible he
should seek that by death, which he had despised through the whole course of
his life. If he was so thirsty of vainglory, as to lose his life for it; why
did he not make it his business to win all he could of it, while he lived? Why
did he not lay the foundation of his after-fame, by insinuating himself, in the
most diligent and men-pleasing manner, into the favor of all the Jewish
nation? and conform himself so perfectly to their humor, that they might have
presently made him their King? Nay, why did he not accept the offer, when the
people intended to advance him to the throne? This had been a more likely way
to honor and renown, if that was all his aim, then the lifting him up upon a
Cross. He might have hoped to build a lasting glory on the love of the Scribes
and Elders of the people: whereas this infamous death, he could not but see,
would make him so odious, that it would rob him of all men's good word, and
quite frustrate the design of winning a reputation among men. This is a truth
of which I presume, by this time, the most suspicious and unbelieving are
convinced: who cannot but confess that the voluntary death of such a person as
this, and a death so horrid and ignominious, is a plain testimony of his
sincerity; and proves, beyond any reasonable contradiction, that he did not
invent his Doctrine himself, but believed it to be of God; and did not seek to
gain any thing by it but immortal life and glory in the world to come.

VI. Now that we must needs be great gainers hereby as well as himself, will
appear, if you consider that he came into the world on purpose to do mankind
good, as the business of his whole life testifies. He went about doing good,
and sought all occasions of obliging even the most ungrateful. He had
compassion on every body he met withal, and never denied a cure to those that
begged it; though they were never so poor and contemptible. He employed his
Disciples also, who attended on him, in the same charitable works, of healing
all manner of diseases, and easting out unclean spirits. He bad them go, and
speak peace unto every house into which they entered. And as for themselves, he
professed the greatest love imaginable to them, as they themselves have
recorded. He called them his Friends, and did not use them as Servants; nay,
his Children, and at last his Brethren: which are all terms of much kindness
and tenderness, which he ever expressed toward them. From whence I conclude
that, unless he could have served them better by his death then by his longer
life, he would not have so soon and so willingly gone to the Cross, and there
left these dear Friends, for whose sake he had hitherto lived more then his
own. If he had not died for their sake too, and been certain he should thereby
show more love to them, and do them better service then any other way; he
would have been as much inclined to stay still with them, as they were to
desire it.

He saw how loath they were to part with him; and with what sad countenances and
troubled spirits they received the news. He was encompassed with sighs and
groans when he did but mention it; for sorrow (as he speaks xvi. Joh. 6.) had
filled their hearts. Would not this have moved a heart less tender then his, to
alter this resolution, when it was in his power to stay longer with them? How
could he endure to see their tears flow so fast, when he was able to dry them
up with the speaking but one word, that he would not leave them? If he had not
been sure that he was going, as he told them, to his Father, and that it was on
purpose to prepare a place for them, which ought to have made them rejoice
rather then weep, because he would come again, and receive them to himself,
that where he was, there they might be also; (xiv. Joh. 1, 2, 3, 28.) without
all doubt his great love would have yielded to their prayers, and commanded his
power to prolong their happiness in his company. He should be able, he verily
believed, to do greater wonders for them, and bestow greater blessings upon
them, if he did not hearken to their importunities; or else we cannot but think
(if we measure him by our selves) he would have still continued with these his
dear Companions: especially since none, as he professed, could snatch him from
their society, but it was his own free choice to leave them.

V. And he earnestly desired them to believe as much, and to look upon his
BLOOD as the Seal of a New Covenant, which contained better promises then the
former, between God and men. So he said, just before his death, when he spoke
of the Representation of it, This is my BLOOD of the New Testament (or
Covenant) which is shed for many for the remission of sins. xxvi. Matt. 28. And
so the Apostles believed and spoke of his BLOOD in the same terms; when by his
resurrection from the dead they saw that it was the BLOOD of the Covenant, x.
Heb. 29. and that he was most eminent for this above all other things, as the
expression is xiii. Heb. 20. where the Apostle calls him the Shepherd of the
sheep, (...), who was great in the blood of the everlasting Covenant. Now this
is one Article every body knows, (one of the promises contained in it,) that we
shall as certainly have Eternal Life, as Israel in due time was brought to the
possession of the good Land God promised to their Fathers.

Abraham, you read xv. Genesis 7. had the word of God for it, that he would give
his posterity the Land of Canaan, into which he had brought him out of
Chaldaea. And when he made so bold as to ask how he should know that this was
true, you find (ver. 9, 10, 11.) that God passed this promise into a Covenant,
which was made by the blood of sundry beasts: whose bodies being divided, and
the halves laid one against another, a smoking furnace appeared and a lamp of
fire, (representing a Divine Presence,) which passed between those pieces,
(ver. 17.) according to the custom in those days of making Covenants, by the
parties going between a beast so out asunder. In like manner our Blessed Lord
and Savior promised more then once or twice the Kingdom of Heaven to all his
followers, most earnestly entreating them to believe it. And lest they should
doubt of it, he proceeds at last of his own accord to engage himself to bestow
it, by entering into a solemn Covenant with them. Which was ratified, not by the
blood of beasts, and the cutting their bodies in pieces; but by his own most
precious blood, and by suffering nails to be thrust through his own flesh: that
he might confirm us in the belief of his promise of an eternal inheritance.
ix. Heb. 15.

VI. And great reason there is we should be confirmed by it in this belief. For
what could he do more to assure us he meant as he spoke, then to seal it with
his blood? The Apostles justly took this to be (...), an eminent testimony or
WITNESS to the truth of that which he preached. So you read 1 Timothy ii. 6. He
gave himself a ransom for all, (...), a testimony in due time. That is, He
became the price of our Redemption, and, like the Paschal Lamb, his blood saves
us from the destroyer, and assures us God will bring us to our Eternal Rest;
of which we cannot reasonably doubt, since his giving himself thus to die for
us is an evident testimony of God's great love to men, and of his will (which
he spoke of before ver. 4.) to save all men; by pardoning their offenses, and
bringing them to Eternal life for Jesus his sake. His bloody death was an
unquestionable Witness, as St. John here calls it, of the truth of his promise;
which he confirmed and sealed in this solemn manner, by dying on the Cross to
verify it. And this he did at that very time, or season, which was most fit and
proper for such a business: (just when the Prophets said he should do it:) for
in those days (as we read ii. Luke 38.) they looked for redemption in
Jerusalem.

And he could not satisfy their expectation by any better means then this:
which was illud Testimonium, as Erasmus renders it, that Testimony, that
remarkable Witness which none can justly question. For it is taken by all for
certain, that He does not intend to deceive, qui morte sua fidem facit, who
seals what he says with his blood. This (...) Testimony, I may add, or
WITNESS to the truth of what he preached, was most properly his own Testimony.
There were sundry others; but none, while he was on earth, so peculiarly his as
this: which was all he could do to justify himself and his Doctrine. The Voice
from heaven was a Witness, as you have heard; but that was the testimony of the
Father. His Doctrine was a Witness; but he says of that, it is not mine, but
his that sent me. vii. Joh. 16. His Works or Miracles were a Witness, as he
says v. Joh. 36. but in the same place he adds, that they were the works which
his Father gave him to finish; and xiv. 10. My Father does the Works. But as
for his most precious BLOOD, it was that, and that alone, whereby He himself
witnessed the truth to us. For this cause he came into the world, as he tells
Pilate, xviii. 37. and it was a free act of his own: for which reason he is
said to give himself for us, and to lay down his life; there being none, as I
said before, that had power, without his consent, to take it away from him. And
therefore it may well be called (...), That testimony, whereby He more
peculiarly witnessed, that this was the will of him that sent him, that every
one who saw the Son, and believed on him, should have everlasting life. This he
preached all his life, and he justified it to be true by his Death. When they
would have had him revoke what he had said, and deny that he was sent upon this
message by God, he maintained it to the last drop of his blood. Which was as
much as could be done for the verifying of his Doctrine, and assuring the World
that he sincerely published the will of Heaven. For who can do more then die
for the truth which he asserts?

But he having thus attested by dying, that which God the Father had witnessed
before in his lifetime by voices from heaven, by signs and wonders, and such
like things; it pleased the same Father Almighty to give a more illustrious
testimony to Him, and to the truth of his Doctrine, then ever had been given
either in his life or at his death: and that was by his Resurrection from the
dead. Which is commonly in the Holy Scriptures ascribed to him, and made his
work; (ii. Act. 24, 32. i. Ephesians. 17, 20. etc.) and evidently proved all that I
have said, and more too. For it showed, that as he was not a deceiver of
others, so he was not deceived himself. God hereby bad all the World believe
what he had preached; and no longer make any doubt of that which he had
testified, even by his own BLOOD, to be his heavenly Truth. But of this more in
its proper place.

VII. Let us now consider, that those persons whom our Savior bad all men
hear, because they were sent by him, as he was by the Father, have told us,
(and the event proved it true,) that this BLOOD was shed to make peace; as you
read ii. Ephesians. 14, 15. That is, to reconcile Jews and Gentiles together,
between whom there had been very long differences, so that of twain they might
become one new Man; and both serve him in the same Religion, and partake of the
same privileges. What force there is in this to prove the right we have to
Eternal Life you will soon see, when I have noted, that the intention of God
to bring all the World to share alike in his divine favor and love, which had
been so much enclosed in the Jewish Nation, was notably proclaimed by the
rending of the veil of the Temple in twain, just when the veil of our Savior's
flesh was torn, and he yielded up the ghost, xxvii. Matt. 50, 51. This was a
plain indication, as Photius Epist. cxxv.
, the famous Patriarch of Constantinople, has truly observed, a Symbol and
Presignification, to use his words, of the overthrow and desolation that was
coming upon that Temple, and the Worship therein celebrated. How could it be
otherwise construed, when that place wherein their most holy rites were
performed, and their most venerable mysteries kept from the eyes of the vulgar,
was now laid open and exposed (...), as his words are, to common view and
profanation?

This was a preface, as he calls it, to the utter subversion and extinction of
the rest of their Ordinances, and their legal Worship. The consequence of
which was, as he likewise notes, that the knowledge and service of God
according to the Law, which had been so long circumscribed and shut up in one
city and country, being to be abolished; that worship which by the Passion of
our Savior was revealed, was to be established, and spread to the uttermost
parts of the Earth. And therefore the rending of the veil did as good as
proclaim to all the world, and cry with a loud voice, saying, Come hither and
behold the invisible things. Come (...) to the sight of the divine Mysteries,
from whence you have been so long excluded. Here is free leave for you all to
enter, who have as much right as any to that which before was inaccessible.

And since this most holy place was a type of Heaven, (God commanding Moses to
make all things according to the pattern in the Mount,) the shutting up of this
from the people, and hiding the things contained in it, by a veil drawn before
their eyes, was an acknowledgment that by the legal worship there was no
entrance into the heavens; but the way was unpassable by those that stuck only
to its rites and ceremonies. And therefore the tearing of this veil by the
death of Christ signified as plainly, that the obstacle was removed; and
preached to the world, as with the sound of a trumpet, that every one of us, by
his BLOOD, may hope to come thither. For He that emptied himself for this very
cause, as the same Photius writes, and took upon him our flesh, and suffered
all things for our sake, Christ, I mean, our God, has opened a new passage
into the kingdom of heaven, by his life-giving death. Which both dissolved that
old Religion, (as the very same thing you see foresignified,) and introduced
such an one as will certainly bring us into the high and holy place, whether
Jesus our forerunner is entered for us.

And that this tearing of the veil in sunder was the effect of our Savior's
passion and precious BLOUD-shedding, is visible from the relation which the
Evangelicall story makes of this Prodigy. So I call it, because you read that
it was not rent from the bottom to the top, as it would have been if the
Earthquake (as some may be prone to suspect) had been the cause of it; but from
the top to the bottom. xxvii. Matt. 51. This evidently shows, it was an hand
from above that made this breach: which following immediately upon our
Savior's giving up the ghost, was as sensible a token that it depended upon no
other cause but that. The most impious are not able to devise any other reason
of so strange an accident. Which could have no natural cause, (as an
Earthquake may,) but proceeded from a (...) (as Photius his phrase is) Divine
vengeance, which gave the veil this stroke, and cut it quite in two; as an
indeleble proof that it was the BLOOD of an innocent person which they now had
shed. And indeed the Earthquake, there mentioned, was so far from being the
cause of this rent, that it followed after it: that Power from on high which
first slit the veil, next of all shaking the earth, and cleaving the rocks in
sunder.

To which I think it may be fit to add, that the Jews themselves tell us, the
gates of the Temple used, after this, to open of their own accord forty years
before its destruction Tzemach David ad an. 3785.
. Which made R. Jochanan ben Zaccai cry out, O Temple, Temple, why do thou
affright thy self? I know that thou shall be destroyed in the end; for
Zachariah prophesied of thee, Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may
devour thy Cedars: xi. 1. Which new prodigy, confessed by many of their
Writers, together with the extinction of the Lamp that used to burn there, was
a witness that God was going away from that place, and intended no longer to
dwell in it; but would show his Glory, which for many years had heretofore
filled that house, to all the Earth.

Now then, if the Partition Wall was thus broken down through the BLOOD of
Jesus, and all laid open and common, that we might enter upon the possession of
the Divine promises as well as others; it is certain, by the Witness of this
BLOOD, that there is an Heavenly Inheritance for us, for Earthly there is none.
Either we must obtain Eternal Life by him that died for us, or nothing at all.
For there is no land of Canaan, nor any thing like it, given to us Gentiles,
who are now called to inherit the promises. We have no assurance of any worldly
purchaces; no portion of money, vine-yards, olive-yards, or other goods of that
nature, assigned to us, as there was to the ancient Israelites. But quite
contrary, they that enjoyed the very first fruits of the Divine Love, were told
that every one who would live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution;
and take up their cross, and forsake all, if they would be his followers.
Accordingly we have examples of those who sold their lands, and when they had
done, gave away the price of them: so far were they from thinking of any
temporal rewards. Undoubtedly then, the Blessing which Jesus purchased for us
by his BLOOD, whereby he laid waste all former enclosures, can be nothing else
but great Possessions in another World; where we have the promise of an
eternal Inheritance. This we ought to expect with the most assured confidence:
for we cannot make any doubt of it, unless we will look upon the BLOOD of Jesus
as more ineffectuall then the blood of bulls and goats, whereby they held the
Earthly Canaan.

VIII. And now let us once more look upon the BLOOD of Jesus, as the blood of a
Sacrifice; whereby all Covenants were anciently sealed, and without which there
could be no entrance, no not for the High Priest himself, into the Holy place
where God dwelt. Those inspired persons, whom, as I said before, our Savior
bids all men hear and reverence, frequently call his Death by this name. And
common reason also leads us to have the same thoughts of it. For if it was not
the BLOOD of the most precious and acceptable Sacrifice which He offered upon
the Cross, how could it put an end, as it has done, to all the old Sacrifices,
which had stood so long by God's appointment; and make all the blood that was
afterward offered of no force at all for their preservation from ruin? That it
did so, is manifest by the experience of near sixteen hundred years. And the
Hebrew Writers themselves confess, that the scarlet tongue, (as they call it)
that is, the list of that color and figure, which was hung between the
Scape-goat's horns, or, as others will have it, at the door of the Temple, and
always used to turn white, according to that in Isaiah 1.18. would never alter
for forty years before the destruction of the Temple, but still continued red
on the great day of Expiation. Which if it be true, (as we have their own faith
for it,) was a shrewd token, that their most excellent Sacrifices were now able
to do them no service; and that their Sins were of so deep a dye, having
crucified the Prince of life, that nothing in the old Religion could purify
them. In vain did they expect to hear that tongue speaking peace to them, which
was wont to publish good tidings; for it still looked as red as blood, and told
them there was no hope for them but in Jesus, who alone could make their
crimson sins as white as wool.

By his bloody Death they might sue out a pardon of those very crimes which
they had committed against himself. For it being a Sacrifice, was for the
remission of Sins: or else the World had been in a worse case then it was
before, now that all other Blood to cleanse them was quite taken away. And
there was no reason to doubt but God was perfectly well pleased and satisfied
with this one Sacrifice of his; else he would not have raised him from the
dead, nor admitted him into the heavens, where, as He himself has since
declared, he appears in the presence of God, and by virtue of his Sacrifice
makes perpetual intercession for us. Now this plainly infers (as has been
said before) the hope of Eternal Life. For if there be remission of sins, then
we are restored to the state of innocence again. We are put into the state and
condition of the sons of God; and there is nothing to hinder our being
re-possessed of Paradise and the Tree of Life. To which we not being restored
in this World, it remains that we be admitted to it and re-instated in it in
another.

IX. Unto all which let the consideration of the time be added when our Savior
suffered: for that is not without its instruction in this business, but
contributes something to the confirmation of our faith. It was at the Feast of
unleavened Bread, (as they themselves cannot deny,) a solemn time appointed by
God to be observed at their departure out of Egypt; when they were ransomed by
a mighty hand, and purchased to be God's peculiar people, and began their
journey toward the Land of Canaan, which he had promised to their forefathers.
At this Feast, it is well known, a Lamb, immaculate and pure, was ordered to be
slain; whose blood was that which saved them from the strokes of the Angel of
Death, who destroyed the Egyptians. Now our Lord, the Lamb of God without spot
and blemish, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, (as St.
John Baptist testified,) being slain at this very time, and hanging on the
Cross after the same fashion wherein the Paschall Lamb was wont to be killed;
it was a Testimony clear enough, to those that observed and laid things
together, that his BLOOD was their ransom from a greater slavery, and was shed
to deliver them from eternal death and destruction; and, after they had
traveled a while through the wilderness, as I may call it, of this world, and
overcome there all difficulties and temptations, would procure their entrance
into a better and more glorious Rest then that wherein they were.

The Holy man who writes the Epistle to the Hebrews proves unanswerably, (chap.
iv.) that the Rest into which Joshua brought the Children of Israel, was not
all that good men expected, and which God intended to bestow upon them. For if
that great Captain had brought them to their final Rest, there would not have
been mention made by the inspired Psalmist, many years after their settlement
in Canaan, of another Rest, which, as the words there are, remains for the
people of God. Now who can pretend to be the Captain of their Salvation, to
conduct them thither, but only our Blessed Savior? whose Name is the same
with that of the ancient Joshua or Jesus; who was baptized at that very place
where they entered into their Rest in the promised Land; to whom the heavens
there opened, and God the Father spoke by an audible voice, and the Holy Ghost
fell down in a visible shape; who at last, after many promises and assurances
that he would bring them to the heavenly Country, was offered at that very time
when their forefathers began their travells to their resting place; and hereby
sealed what he had promised by his blood, as God the Father sealed to it by
diverse acts of his, that He was a Lamb without spot, an offering and a
sacrifice to him of a sweet smelling savor.

Well might St. Paul call him our Passover that is sacrificed for us. 1 Cor.
v. 7. For it is as visible that he was slain for the salvation of mankind, as
that the Paschall Lamb was slain for the preservation of Israel: and that as
the destroying Angel passed over those houses where he found the blood of that
Lamb upon the door-posts, and spared the lives of the inhabitants; so all those
Souls that are sprinkled with the blood of Jesus ( i. e. believe on him) shall
be delivered by him from perishing, and preserved to eternal Life. Which
Salvation he procured by offering himself freely as our Passover; that is, for
the like end (but as much excelling as Eternal life does temporary) for which
the Paschal Lamb was sacrificed. And he made his sacrifice the more remarkable,
by offering it at that very time when the other was offered, and when they
themselves expected it. For some of the Jews say expressly, which adds much
weight to this observation, that on the same day of the month Nisan Israel
shall be redeemed in the days of the Messiah, Vid P. Fagium in xii. Exodus 13.
on which they were redeemed when God wonderfully brought them out of the land
of Egypt.

Now our Savior made good his word, which he had often passed, that he would
give them his very flesh to eat; whereby they might feast with him, as they had
done that day on the Paschal Lamb. He gave them also his very blood to drink;
which was the price of their redemption, that which saved them from the
destroyer, and overcame those enemies which opposed their entrance into the
Eternal Rest. For his flesh, (as he speaks vi. Joh. 55.) being offered on the
Cross, was meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed. That is, the most perfect
food and excellent nutriment; which has a power to give (not a temporary, as
the Paschal Lamb did, but) an Eternal life, to those that partake of it by a
lively faith in him. Some of the Jews themselves thought there was some greater
Mystery in the Passover then the commemoration of their deliverance out of
Egypt; and say expressly, that then God communicated his Divinity to men. They
are the words of R. Judah apud Mas^um in v. Jesh. 1^.
, By the Sacrifice of the Passover God joins men so closely to himself, that
they are one with him, as light is with a candle. Which had little truth in it,
till Christ our PASSOVER was sacrificed for us; when the mystery was
explained, and he invited all men to come and eat of his flesh, and drink of
his blood, and thereby have such a fellowship with him in his death, that he
might communicate to them his life. For (...), as Clemens Alex. speaks L 11.
Paedag. cap. 2.
, This is to drink the blood of Jesus, to partake of the Lord's immortality.

And so our Lord explains himself, when he adds, in the next words, (ver. 57.)
As the living Father (who, being the author of life, can give it again to the
dead,) has sent me, and I live by the Father: (shall rise again, though I give
my flesh to be slain:) so he that eats me (believes on me though crucified)
shall live by me; that is, be raised again to life by me, as I by the Father.
For he gave his flesh, (as he says at the beginning of this discourse ver. 51.)
that is, delivered it to be made a bloody sacrifice, for the life of the world,
i. e. that all mankind might have remission of sins, and eternal life. Which
he will as certainly give to those who do not refuse to participate of this
Sacrifice by believing in him, as the Father of life raised him from the dead
to live for evermore. These words seemed hard to some of his Disciples, ver.
60. who could not understand that there should be such virtue in his flesh as
to give life unto the world. But our Lord tells them, there was no cause of
being offended at this discourse; for if they would but stay a while, they
should be convinced that he did not ascribe too much to it: ver. 62. What and
if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? That is, What
will you say, if you behold me raised up from the dead, and ascend into heaven,
where I was before I took this flesh? Will you not then confess that my Death
(which is meant by his giving his flesh to them) had an exceeding great virtue
in it, being so acceptable to God as to be thus highly rewarded? Will it then
seem incredible to you, that I should obtain thereby a power to raise the dead,
and to give eternal Life? This, sure, will be a convincing argument that I
have not said too much of my BLOOD, nor promised greater things then it can do
for you. You will then, if you consider it, join your selves heartily to me,
though now you are ready to fly off; and not think my Cross such a scandal,
that it should hinder you from being Christians.

X. And that will be one of our next works, in the following Chapter, to show
the power of Christ's Resurrection to persuade us, that by his Death He will
give life to the world. Let us first only briefly consider, that there are
some other Circumstances, besides this now mentioned, which declare there was
something exceeding remarkable in the Sufferings of Christ on the Cross, to
procure him great glory. For we find that Nicodemus, one of their Senators,
who durst not publicly own our Savior while he was in great savor with the
people, came, now that he was crucified and exposed to scorn, and brought a
mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound weight, (xix. Joh. 39.) to
honor his Corpse withal. Which would be a stronger argument of the thorough
conviction already wrought in his mind, if there be any truth in the conjecture
of a learned Man Jac. Al^ing Schi^^. l. w. p 26.
, that these spices were intended not to embalm him, but, as the manner was
upon great occasions, to burn at his funeral. Thus far he is certainly in the
right, that the honor of having sweet spices burnt at their funerals
appertained to no other persons but only their Kings, (2 Chronicles. xvi. ult.) and
the Head of all the Doctors, the Nasi, as they called him, of their Academies.
And he notes likewise truly out of Joseph ben Gorion, that when the funeral
pomp of Herod the Great was carried forth, fifty of his servants are said to
have scattered all the way they went those very things which Nicodemus brought,
viz. Myrrh and Aloes, and all other sweet spices. But whether we can hence
conclude that Nicodemus now honored him by these as the King of Israel, and
the Prince of all the prophets, I cannot tell; because the Evangelist (ver.
40.) seems to tell us, that the use they made of these spices was to imbalm his
body, which they wound in linen clothes, with the spices, as the manner of the
Jews was to bury. Yet this we may safely conclude, that he would never have put
himself to so great a charge, and laid out so much upon his dead body, if he
had not seen something which convinced him that this was that King of Israel,
who would give him a reward, for his love and open confession of him, in his
heavenly Kingdom. There was nothing to move him to such an expense, upon such
an hated person, but only a persuasion that Jesus was what he pretended; and
an assured hope that by this flesh, which now lay dead, the World should be
restored to life.

Yea, such power there was in his Death to affect men's hearts, that not only
the Centurion confessed him to be a righteous man, but all the people who were
come together to that sight, beholding the things that accompanied his
sufferings, were pricked in their consciences, and smote their breasts. xxiii.
Luke 47, 48. They could not, that is, but express their sorrow for this horrid
fact of shedding his BLOOD, and dread the dismal consequences of it. Insomuch
that, Gem. Sanh. c. vi.
though it was forbidden by the Constitutions of the Sanhedrin to make any
lamentations for a malefactor; yet they were not able on this occasion to
forbear it. Their own Writers tell us, that it was a part of the honor they
did to a deserving person, when his funeral was carried out, to accompany him
with sighs and groans and tears, and beating themselves, and such like tokens
of their inward grief for his loss. With which the Holy Scripture agrees, when
it names this as part of the Curse of God upon Jehojakim, that none should so
much as sigh at his burial, nor make the usual lamentation, saying, Ah my
Brother! Ah Lord! or Ah his glory! xxii. Jer. 18. From whence it is likely they
passed a Decree, that when any person suffered by a public sentence for a
crime, none should presume to grace him with any ceremony, nor use the least
outward sign of heaviness, though in their hearts they might mourn for him. But
this Decree and Custom settled by the Authority of their supreme Court, the
esteem which our Savior wone to himself, even when he hung upon his Cross,
forced the people to break. Their affection to him was stronger then all Laws;
and they could not contain themselves when they saw what testimonies heaven
gave of his innocence and virtue; but did him public honor even at the very
place of execution. Though he suffered as the highest and vilest offender in
the world, yet the honest-hearted spectatours were not only inwardly troubled
in their breasts at the sight, but beat or knocked them also; and showed
thereby, that they were not afraid to own him as a most Excellent person, whose
death they ought to accompany with the bitterest lamentations.

And so much may suffice concerning the Testimony of his BLOOD; which no man
can hear speak a word, but he must needs think, that which got him such honor
among the people in the midst of his shame and the reproach of the Cross,
obtained a far greater glory for him with God in the heavens, who best knew how
to value his obedience.

O wonderful Passion, Proclus Homil. xi.
the Expiation of the World! O Death, the cause of Immortality, and the origin
of Life! O descent into Hell, the bridge by which those who were dead passed
into Heaven! O Noon, which has revoked the Afternoon-sentence against us in
Paradise! O Cross, the cure of the fatal Tree! O Nails, which wounded Death,
and joined the world to the knowledge of God! Great was the victory which He
that was incarnate for us obtained on the day of his passion. He grappled with
death, when he was dead. Hell and the grave this day ignorantly swallowed a
deadly morsel. To day death received him dead, who always lives. To day the
chains were loosed which the Serpent made in Paradise. The Thief this day made
a breach on Paradise, which had been guarded by the flaming sword some
thousands of years. This day our Lord broke the gates of brass, and cut the
bars of iron in sunder.

Which of the great Men, that ancient times boast of, are comparable to him?
All the just fell under the power of death, and none could conquer it. Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, are all turned to dust and ashes. The memory of Joseph, in
whom the Jews glory, lay in his dry bones, which they carried out of Egypt with
them. Moses is extolled by them to the skies, but there is not so much as his
tomb to be found. Such as these, and so many, death devoured and swallowed them
all down. But at last it swallowed one, and against its will vomited up the
whole World. Who now triumph over it, and cry with a loud voice, O death, where
is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? Thanks be to God, which gives us
the victory through Jesus Christ our Lord.

His Passion is our impassibility: S. Athanasius (...). p. 598.
His Death is our immortality: His tears, our joy: His burial, our
resurrection: His Baptism, our purification: His stripes, our healing: His
chastisement, our peace: His reproach, our glory. How much are we indebted to
him, who from first to last consulted our happiness? For he descended, Id.
(...), etc. p. 1002.
that he might make way for our ascent. He was born, that he might make us
friends with the Unbegotten. He took on him our infirmities, that we might be
raised in power, and say with St. Paul, I can do all things, through Christ
which strengthens me. He took on him a corruptible body, that this corruption
might put on incorruption. He put on mortality, that it might be changed into
immortal. In fine, He was made Man and died, that we who die as men might be
deified, and death might no longer reign over us.

O blessed and life-giving Cross of our Savior, which triumphed over death,
and destroyed him that had the power of it, which is the Devil! O divine Word,
and true Wisdom of the Father! thou have overcome the Devil, when he thought
he had been a conqueror August. de Trinitate, L. 13. c. 15. Caet. ex Athanasio
p. 1022.
. O Lover of men, and gracious Lord! thou have both redeemed us that were
captives, and freed us, by thy own death, who were servants of sin. O Son of
God, the true Peacemaker! thou have both given us the adoption of Sons, and
reconciled us to thy Father; having destroyed the enmity by thy flesh. O rich
Savior, and true King! who becamest poor, that we by thy poverty might be made
rich; and have given to us the Kingdom of heaven. O Creator and former of all
things, the Word of the Father! for thou have created us again; we are thy
workmanship created unto good works. O Light indeed, the brightness of the
Father! for thou have enlightened us that were in darkness, and have brought us
that were blind to see the light. O Likeness and real Image of the Father! for
thou have formed us who were lost, and again restored the image of God in us. O
God, the Word and Life indeed! for thou have quickened us who were dead, and
renewed us that were corrupted, and clothed us with immortality. O thou Power
indeed, the arm, the right hand of the Father! for thou have both loosed the
bands of death, and broken the prison-doors in pieces.

God forbid that we should glory, Ib. page 1028.
save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. To this let us adhere; let us walk
worthy of this. And thus living and believing, we shall know also his
assumption into the heavens, and his session on the right hand of the Majesty
on high. We shall behold the subjection of Angels to him, and his coming again
with glory. Which Angels have foretold; which Saints sing of in their hymns;
and which when we all see, we shall rejoice and be exceeding glad in Christ
Jesus. By whom be glory and dominion to the Father, world without end, Amen.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the Testimony of the SPIRIT, the Third Witness on Earth.
THough the Children of Israel were so strangely delivered out of their
bondage, being saved by the Blood of the Paschal Lamb from the destroying
Angel, and then freed from Pharaoh, who thought, it is like, that his blood must
next of all pay for the keeping them in Egypt: yet still they questioned
whether they should come into the good Land or no, and were at a sad plunge
when they came to the Red Sea; imagining that they themselves should be there
destroyed, and become the next Sacrifice to Pharaoh's cruelty. To confirm them
therefore in their belief of God's kind intentions toward them, and persuade
them thoroughly that Moses had not brought them out of Egypt to kill them, but
to save them, He gave him power to do great wonders at that place, and in the
rest of their journey; which, added to the Miracles in Egypt, were a strong
conviction that God was among them, and was conducting them by the hands of his
Servant to their long-desired Rest This was the last Argument and the most
constant, whereby he demonstrated the truth and reality of his promises of
bringing them to the land of Canaan. They saw his signs and his wonders, his
mighty power and stretched-out arm, all the great acts of the Lord; (as they
are called xi. Deuteronomy. 7. which Chapter be pleased to read unto that verse;)
which were eminent tokens that GOD had taken the^ to be a peculiar, or
special, people to himself, as he frequently speaks, and was able to fulfill
his word to their Forefathers, of giving them the Land, wherein they were then
strangers, for their inheritance.

Just such as this is our case, whom He has called by his Son to an
inheritance incorruptible and that fades not away, reserved i^ heaven for us.
To obtain an eternal Redemption for us, and deliver us out of the hands of all
our enemies, his own most precious BLOOD was shed, as of a Lamb without spot or
blemish. Whereby also, as you have heard, he testified to the World that he was
no Deceiver, but came to them from God with the words of Eternal Life. Many
things concurred to make this BLOOD a witness of his Truth, and of his power to
fulfill his own promises. And yet, notwithstanding, this was the very thing
that offended many, and kept them from following him. They could not endure so
much as to hear him speak of giving them his flesh to eat, and his blood to
drink; though he told them thereby he would give life to the World. And
therefore to strengthen this Testimony of his BLOOD, and to convince them
evidently that he was the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the World,
and gives life to it, there was another Witness which attended it, both before
his BLOOD was shed, and likewise afterward; which was the SPIRIT. That is, as I
showed in the former Treatise on this subject, the power he had to work
wonders; and the miraculous power which raised him from the dead, and presented
him to God in the heavens. This was abundantly sufficient to prevent any
offense they might take at Christ crucified; and to settle in their hearts an
unmovable belief that he was their mighty Redeemer, who would bring them to the
eternal Rest which he had promised. For this is the last and greatest argument
which St. John here produces, ver. 6. He came no^ only by WATER, but by BLOOD
also; and it is the SPIRIT that bears witness, for the SPIRIT is the Truth.
Or, as Arias Montanus translates it, the SPIRIT is ((...)) that Witness, that
undoubted testimony on which we may certainly rely. For (...) that SPIRIT which
I speak of is truth; an^ infallible Witness, which cannot deceive you, that
Jesus is the Son of God. And so it is likewise, that Eternal Life is in him;
and that we shall enjoy it by his means: for this RECORD of God is given to
make us as sure of the one, as we are of the other.

Let us briefly therefore consider, first, what his Miracles say to this; and
then, secondly, what force there is in his Resurrection and Exaltation to prove
it.

I.
And at our entrance upon the first of these, let us, before we go any farther,
weigh those words of this Apostle St. John in his Gospel, xx. 30, 31. where he
tells us that he wrote the signs which Jesus did (suppose after his
Resurrection) in the presence of his disciples, for this very purpose, that
they might believe that he was the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing
they might have LIFE through his Name. They were wrought by Him, and recorded
by his Disciples, for these two ends: that the World might be convinced He was
the great Lord of all; and that they might, by faithful subjecttion to him,
look for Eternal Life from his omnipotent love. It was the design of all his
wonderful works throughout his whole life, (to which the Apostle may have
respect as well as to those after his Resurrection,) to persuade men to believe
that he would make his followers so happy. For by these he manifested forth his
glory, (as I observed before of the beginning of his Miracles in Cana of
Galilee, ii. Joh. 11.) and declared to the world, he could work as great a
change upon our mortal bodies as he did then upon the Water; making them as
much nobler then they are now, as the Water excelled it self when it was become
Wine. They were mighty instances of his Power; and of his Goodness too: they
made him appear to be the King of Israel, who was to deliver and bring
Salvation to them; though much greater then they expected.

That our Lord did work Miracles, is a truth which they that crucified him can
no more deny, then that he died. The wisest of them could never find any color
to affirm that the Gospel-story was but a fabulous Legend, which related
Wonders that were never done. For if they had been able to say this,
Maimonides, the very best of them, would not have been put to such distress, as
to let fall these words, which we read in his Treatise of Kings: Cap. xi.
Do not imagine that the King Messiah shall have any need to work wonders, or
alter the course of Nature, or restore the dead to life again, with such like
things, that fools talk of. Had he not known as well, that these things could
not be denied which are related of Jesus, as he did that, their force to prove
any thing being granted, they would be an unanswerable testimony to him, he
would never have thus slighted (as he does in many other Books) things of this
nature; which brought the greatest reputation to Moses among their ancestors,
and were the cause why they believed on him, though he attempted no such wonder
as the raising dead men to life again. Our Savior, he was not ignorant, very
often appealed to his works, as the testimony of God to him; and thought it
sufficient to tell John's disciples, when they came to inquire who he was, that
he opened blind men's eyes, cleansed lepers, and raised up the dead; by which
they might answer their own question. And therefore something was to be said by
this Jew to disparage these, upon which he saw the credit of our Savior in
great part relied. Now had it not been the readiest way to deny that there were
such Miracles wrought? Nothing but the notoriousness of the facts made him wave
that course; which drove him upon this wretched shift, of denying utterly that
Miracles are credible witnesses to him that works them. By this means he
thought to rob our Savior of the glory they brought him; and was so blind as
not to see that, at the same time, he took away from his own Master the
greatest support he had of his Authority. And therefore herein he is deserted
by his own Countrymen, particularly by Abarbinel; who, as I observed before,
makes the power of working Miracles one of the principal gifts of the Messiah.
In which our Lord, it is apparent to his very enemies, was so eminent, that one
cannot imagine why he did not believe on him; unless, with the spiteful
Pharisees, he imputed all his Works to the Devil. Which blasphemy, I have
shown in the former Book, is so manifestly confuted by his holy Doctrine and
Life, that they must be no less foolish then malicious who regard it. We ask no
more, but to allow such things were done as the Gospel reports: (which they
dare not deny us:) and then their great uncertainty what to say against them,
shows how forcible they are to convince all indifferent men that he came from
God; whose finger they were, pointing them to him as the Person whom they
should hear and obey.

And that they were a plain demonstration of his power to give Eternal Life to
all his followers, will appear from these following considerations.

I. If they confirmed all his Doctrine to be the Will of God, then we ought to
look upon this as firmly established by them; for it was a known part of his
Doctrine, that God sent him to proclaim his purpose of giving everlasting life
by him, to all those who should believe on him. vi. Joh. 38, 39, 40. iii. 16.
There is nothing in this assertion needs proof, but that they confirmed his
Doctrine, (this being, it is apparent to all, a constant part of it;) in which
the Blind man thought he could presently satisfy any reasonable person, when he
said, If this man were not of God, he could do nothing. ix. Joh. 33. That is,
no such Miracle as that was, of opening the eyes of one born blind; a thing the
world had never heard of, since it was first created, till that time. He
preached nothing but piety and holiness; He lived as he preached: both his
Sermons and his Conversation were above all that ever had been for Sanctity:
And his Works being so also, much beyond the most famed Prodigies the world had
ever boasted of; it was an unanswerable argument that God was in him; who was
never known to have let such things be done before, in the compass of so many
Ages; and therefore would not let them now do their first Service to the
countenancing of a lie. And therefore to these our Lord often refers them, as
there was reason, for a proof of his Divine Authority. For if a false prophet
could do such wonders, how should there be any possibility of ever knowing a
true? Read x. Joh. 37, 38. xiv. 10. xv. 24.

That which is most proper for me to note is, that in that xiv. of St. John,
when he bids them look upon his Works, as the best glass (that then was)
wherein to see his Divinity, he was discoursing on this very subject, that He
was the Life, ver. 6. and that He was going to the Father to live with him, and
to prepare a place for them, etc. ver. 2, 3. Of this he could not give them a
better evidence then the Wonders he had wrought, until his Resurrection. After
which indeed (he says ver. 12.) they should do greater works then these;
which would more plainly tell them that he was with the Father. It will not be
unprofitable if I open the whole discourse, from verse. 2. where he tells them,
with a solemn profession he would not abuse them, that in his Father's house
are many Mansions; and that he was going away indeed from them, but it was in
order to prepare a place for them. He departed, he would have them believe, not
merely to go to rest himself after all his labors; but to take up lodgings, as
one may say, for them in that blessed Rest prepared for the people of God. Now
the consequence of this he tells them in the next words, ver. 3. And if I go
and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self;
that where I am, there ye may be also. He assures them, that is, he would not
lose the pains he had taken to procure such a happiness for them; but see them
safe there, where they should have their share with him in that very bliss
which he was about to receive. And where I go, ye know, and the way ye know:
ver. 4. As if he should have said, You understand well enough what I mean: (for
I have often spoke of these things:) I go to Heaven, to live with God, and to
give life to those that believe on me; which that you may not miss of, I have
shown you both by my doctrine and my example the way that leads to it. Alas!
replies one of his Apostles, who seems to be the slowest of all other to
apprehend his meaning, or give credit to him, Lord, we know not whither thou
go; and how can we find the way? ver. 5. No? says our Savior to him again,
that is strange. I my self am the Way, from whom you might have learnt how to
arrive at this happiness. And that this is the true way, which I have
described, you need not doubt; for I am the Truth; that is, the teacher of
truth, who have demonstrated several ways, that what I declare is the very
mind and will of God. And the same arguments which prove me to be the Truth,
evidently show also that I am the Life; who will conduct you to that bliss unto
which I am now going. And no man comes to the Father, (and that Eternal life
which is with him,) but by me; that is, by believing my words, and following my
steps: ver. 6. And therefore if you had minded me and my words, (as it follows
ver. 7. If ye had known me, ye would have known my Father also,) you would have
known it is my Father's purpose to give you Eternal life: And from henceforth
sure you will not doubt of it, now that I have revealed it so plainly, that I
may say you know him, and have seen him. Upon this Answer of our Savior,
another of his Apostles wished they might but see the Father, and that would be
sufficient: ver. 8. He desired, that is, there might be some such Divine
appearance to them, as there was to Abraham and others of the Patriarchs in old
time, and they would trouble him with no farther questions about this matter.
How? says our Savior, have I been so long with you, and yet have thou not
known me, Philip? that is, understood what kind of person I am? Do thou not
see that I am the onely-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth? the
express image of his person, and the brightness of his glory? Was there ever
such an appearance of God in the world, as thou see in me? All the Fathers
enjoyed was but a little glimpse of the Divine glory, in comparison with that
which now shines upon you in my face. And therefore why do thou ask to see
the Father, as if there was nothing of him in me? I tell thee, He that has
seen me, has seen the Father. And so it follows ver. 10. Believe thou not
that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you
I speak not of my self; but the Father that dwells in me, he does the works.
The properties of God are known by the works that he does; and there are such
wonderful evidences of a Divine power as well as wisdom in me, that all the
Visions the Prophets had, together with all the Miracles they did, were not
such a testimony of a Divine Presence with them, as these are that the Father
dwells in me. Therefore believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in
me; ver. 11. (that is, take my word for it, that you See the Father, as you
desire, by seeing me;) or else believe me for the very works sake. Let these,
at least, convince you that I am as nearly related to him as I pretend; for
they are such as can come from none but from God alone. (...), as St. Greg.
Nazianzen speaks; Orat. xxxvi. p. 590.
The Son is a brief and easy demonstration of the Nature of the Father: who
appeared in him, and spoke by him, and declared both how good and how powerful
he is, not only by all that our Savior said, but by the Works that he did.
Which were most manifest tokens that God was in him; and that his words were
the words of God; and, consequently, that in him we have life; and that he went
to heaven, as he said, to prepare a place for us; and that he will come again,
and receive us unto himself, if we walk in that way which he has chalked out
to us by his most holy Life.

This our Savior asserts also in other places, where he alleges his Works as
an evidence of this very Doctrine. I shall mention only two more, and so
dismiss this Argument. In the v. Joh. 28, 29. he tells the obstinate Jews, it
was no such marvel that a dead man should be raised up by him; if they
considered, which was far more wonderful, that he was the Person who would one
day call all mankind out of their graves, and give unto the good Everlasting
Life. For proof of which he puts them in mind presently after of his miraculous
Works, (ver. 36.) which testified God had sent him, and would verify all that
he said. And thereupon he exhorts them to search the Scriptures, for in them
you think ye have eternal Life; and they are they which testify of me. But you
will not come to me, that you may have life: ver. 39, 40. Which was as much as
to say, You all look for ETERNAL LIFE, and you hope in the Holy Scriptures to
find it: I wish you would be more diligent in perusing them; for they show
plainly that I am He who must bring you to it. But this is the misery of your
condition, that neither my Works, (spoken of before) nor the Scriptures, nor
the testimony of John Baptist, (which he first alleged ver. 32, etc.) will
persuade you to believe on me; without which I cannot bestow Life upon you.

The same he tells them x. Joh. 25. Where he says, The works that I do in my
Father's name, they bear witness of me. They made it so apparent, that is, he
ought with all readiness to have been received, that he could not judge, as you
read in the next verse, their infidelity came from any thing but improbity.
Now what it was his works witnessed, he tells us ver. 27, 28, 29, 30. viz. that
to his sheep, who were obedient to him, he would give Eternal Life: of which
they should have such a sure possession, that they should never lose it;
because none should be able to wrest them from him, with whom God himself had
entrusted them; who would maintain and defend them, and their right to it,
without any possibility of plucking them out of his hands. His Father, he
means, had appointed him to bestow this Life on all his followers, who was able
to make good his own purpose and promises. And therefore as the Works he did
made it appear that He and the Father were one; so He would certainly make good
the Doctrine which he preached, (and thus by Miracles confirmed,) that they
should have Eternal Life, and never perish.

II. This we may reasonably think his Miracles declared, if we consider the
nature and quality of every one of them; which, in general, was the doing of
some good or other to mankind. What did this speak, but that He was come to be
the Author of the greatest happiness to them? They could not well pick less
sense out of his Works then this, when they saw him bestow such benefits, that
He was of GOD, who is Good, and does good, and would never cease his
lovingkindness to the World. For the multitude and the constancy of his
Miraculous acts of bounty, in so many places, to all sorts of men, throughout
his whole life, declared the largeness, the universality, and unchangeable
perpetuity of his Goodness; which would withhold no good thing from upright
persons. And therefore in his Answer to the Question which John's disciples
proposed, you find his opening the eyes of the blind, cleansing the lepers,
making the lame to walk, and such like miraculous works, in conjunction with
his preaching the Gospel to the poorest people; which was nothing else but
this glad tidings of Eternal Life. xi. Matthew. 5. This he published so plainly
as none before him had done; and that they might be disposed to believe him to
be the person in whom all nations should be blessed, He did such Miracles as
none before him had done: which were all blessings, the greatest favors and
kindnesses to mankind; but no hurt to any one man in the world. This was a
greater Argument to receive him as the Author of Eternal Life, which he
promised, then the wonders in Egypt were to persuade the Israelites that Moses
should redeem them, and bring them to temporal felicity: inasmuch as the
constant doing innumerable benefits to men renders one far more acceptable,
then the killing and destroying them.

III. But then, if you more particularly consider, that a great many of his
Miracles were the restoring men to their primitive state of integrity and
soundness of body, by removing the sicknesses and diseases which Sin had
brought upon them it was a notable sign^^^ (...) He was the Healer of Nature,
the Restorer of the World, the (...) Savior of mankind; who could bring them
back to that blessed immortality which they had lost. Whence it was that, when
he cured the man sick of the palsy, in stead of saying, Be well, he said, Son,
thy sins are forgiven thee: to show that He had power to remove the punishment
of sin, and so make them immortal.

VI. The like another sort of Miracles seems to suggest to us; which was his
feeding so many thousands at a time with a small quantity of provisions. Of
which you read (as in other places, so) in vi. Joh. 5, 6, etc. where you find,
that with five barley loaves and two small fishes he entertained about five
thousand people so plentifully, that every one of them had as much as he
desired: and when they had done, there were twelve baskets of fragments, which
remained over and above to them that had eaten. This Miracle made the multitude
conclude that certainly He was the Prophet who should come into the world: and
therefore they purposed, whether he would or no, to come and make him their
King: ver. 14, 15. And when he avoided it by crossing the sea privately, (ver.
16, 17, etc.) they also took shipping to follow after him, and never rested
till they had found him: ver. 24, 25. Whereupon our Lord takes occasion to tell
them, how sorry he was to see them so industriously pursue the food of their
bodies, and not mind the food of their Souls, to which his late Miracle led
them: and in plain terms tell them, that Spiritual food was himself; who was
the Bread of life they should hunger after, more then for the loaves wherewith
they had been filled: and that if they did eat of him, they should have
everlasting life, and he would raise them up at the last day, ver. 26, 27. and
35, etc. This they might easily have believed, if they had considered the
Miracle of the loaves; which was a token from God that he could support them
eternally. For why should not he be able to give life, who so strangely
preserved it? and out of a little dust make a body, as he had out of a few
crumbs made so many loaves? If their desires had been fixed upon this Eternal
Life which he preached, as much as upon the present, they would as naturally
have taken this Miracle for the Seal whereby God noted him to be the giver of
it, as they took it to be a mark that he could thus fill their bellies every
day, and save them the labor of seeking food; after the manner that Moses fed
their Fathers with Manna in the Wilderness.

V. And next to this, if you consider how he dispossessed Devils, which was a
Wonder as frequent as any, if told the world plainly that He was come to
destroy the works of the Devil, to overthrow his kingdom, and divest him of his
power, unless they would still uphold him in it. By Sin he held his Throne;
this gave him all the power he had over men, and made them his vassals and
slaves. Who being so often rescued out of his hands, and he so openly foiled;
it was a sign that Jesus was come to take away the sins of the world, and
thereby disarm him of the power of death, and restore men again to that
everlasting Life, out of which the Devil had before thrown mankind, as our
Savior now threw him out of them. All this the Jews themselves confess shall
be the work of the Messiah. According to what we read in the Author of the
Book concerning the Service of the Sanctuary, who says, that the King Messiah
shall restore all things to their first estate, so that the intention of God
shall be fulfilled which he had in the Creation of the World; for the World
shall return to that natural perfection which it had before rebellious Adam
sinned. The Prophets are faithful witnesses of this, as it is written lxv.
Isa. 19. I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people; and the voice of
weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. And so he
speaks also in another place of that Book, xxv. 8. He will swallow up death in
victory, and the Lord God will wipe away tears from all faces. The Author also
of Baal Hatturim, as I find him cited by Hackspan Cabala Judaica Sect. 72.
, confesses as much in his Notes upon xix. Number. where he says, In the times of
Salvation (or the days of Christ) there shall be no use of the Ashes of the red
heifer, according to that, He will swallow up death in victory. Which words are
cited by St. Paul 1 Cor. xv. 54. (as the other part of that verse is by the
voice St. John heard from heaven, xxi. Rev. 4.) when he is treating of the
Resurrection of the dead, as the great comfort of Christian people. Who may
well expect it, and all the blessings that attend upon it, from our Lord Jesus,
the true Messiah, if to all that has been said we add the consideration of
what follows;

VI. That he raised even dead men to life again: which was the greatest Miracle
of all, and at that time the greatest witness of the SPIRIT to him. This showed
that indeed he had Life in himself, and would bestow it upon us, as I have
already noted; for he raised them on purpose to declare what he was, and what
they might expect from him, viz. a perfect victory over death and the grave.
Which appeared most remarkably in the resurrection of Lazarus; who was the most
famous instance of this power residing in him. For the Miracle wrought on him
was not so little as the recovering one who drew his last breath, (which was
the case of the Centurion's Servant;) nor the restoring one to life who was
newly dead, (as in the case of the Ruler of the Synagogue's daughter;) nor the
raising a young man who was carried out toward his grave, (as the Widow's son
was:) but (...), as Greg. Nyssen speaks De Hominis opifici^ cap. xxv.
, his Wonder-working proceeds to something more sublime. A man of grown years,
not only dead, but musty, already putrid, and in a dissolution, (as he
describes his condition,) so far gone toward corruption, that his own friends
thought it not fit our Lord should go to uncover his tomb, because of the ill
smell which might be expected; this man, I say, with one word of our Lord's,
was restored again to life, firm and compacted: and though he was bound hand
and foot with grave-cloaths, it did not hinder his coming out of his grave;
which, as Theophanes thinks, was a Miracle little less then his Resurrection.
Who can choose but look on this (...), to use the same St. Gregory's words, as
the beginning (the little Mysteries, as I may call them,) of the Universal
Resurrection, into which Christ now initiated his Disciples? For it is apparent
by this, He is the Lord of Life, who can raise a putrid rotten carcass, as well
as those who are but newly departed the world.

And this was no private business transacted only between him and his
Disciples, but a thing so notorious, that the (...) the multitude who were
there present bare record of it. xii. Joh. 17. That is, they affirmed it to be
no vain report, but told those of Jerusalem (whither our Savior was then
going) who had not seen the Miracle done, that it was a certain Truth upon
their knowledge. Which they might affirm with the greater assurance, because,
as Theophanes Archiepis. Taurom. Hom. xxv.
observes, they were confirmed in this belief by the testimony of all their
senses. By their own voice, which showed him the Tomb, saying, Come and see:
and his loud voice, which they heard saying, Lazarus, come forth. xi. Joh. 34,
43. By their sight, when they beheld him, whom they knew very well to be dead,
obeying his word. By their smell, when they perceived the ill sent, as they
rolled away the stone. By their touch, when they loosed his hands and his feet,
as our Lord bad them, and let him go. By all these they were so well satisfied,
that there was no room left for their infidelity; nor much for the Pharisees:
who knew neither how to confute this Testimony, nor how to avoid the
consequence of it. They began now to despair of prevailing against him any
other way, then by taking away his life; which their malice made them design
against the clearest light. Though that also proved, as you shall see
presently, but a farther confirmation of the truth they sought to obscure, by
his rising again from the dead. And they could have found in their hearts to
have killed Lazarus too; because, as long as he lived, he would proclaim this
Miracle to the honor of Jesus: who hereby gave such an illustrious testimony
that he was the Author of Eternal Life, that just when he was going to raise
up Lazarus, he inculcates this Doctrine, as the fittest season to impress it
upon them. xi. Joh. 25, 26. I am the Resurrection and the Life: he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever lives,
and believes in me, shall never die. Martha, it seems, believed this before,
upon a persuasion that he was the Christ, the Son of God, that should come into
the world: ver. 27. But when she saw Lazarus come out of his grave, then sure
she believed it more strongly; both because it was a farther argument that he
was the Christ, and likewise included in it that very thing which he propounded
to her belief, viz. that He was the Life, and would give life unto those who
were dead, if they believed on him.

I shall conclude this part of the SPIRIT's Testimony with those words of our
Lord himself, viii. Joh. 50. where he protests that he sought not his own
glory; that is, assumed not to himself this great power, to be the Life of the
world: but God the Father sought it; i. e. persuaded the world of it, by the
illustrious Miracles which he wrought; whereby the Father honored him, (as he
says ver. 54.) and passed such a judgment on him, that we may all conclude, as
he does ver. 51. Verily, verily, if a man keep his words, he shall not see
death.

II.
Of which we shall be the more confident, if we add now the other Witness of
the SPIRIT to him, which was in raising him from the dead, and giving him Glory
at God's right hand. This was a greater Wonder then all that preceded;
sufficient to satisfy those who still remained doubtful. For if any body (as
St. Greg. Nyssen discourses in the Book before mentioned) should use those
words of our Lord in another case, and apply them to this business, saying,
Physician, cure thy self: it is but meet that he who did such wonders on other
men's bodies to prove a Resurrection, should give an example of it in his own.
We have seen one nigh to death, another newly dead, a young man ready to be
laid in his grave, and Lazarus already rotten; all these by his word recalled
to life: Let us see one live again who was wounded, and had his heart pierced,
and his blood shed, one who we are sure was dead. Come then, and look upon
Jesus himself; whose hands and feet were pierced, into whose side a spear was
thrust. Come, and look upon him who bled to death. And if this man was raised
from the dead, (nay more then that, ascended into heaven,) as abundance of
credible witnesses testify; what doubt is there left, that by him God will
give us a blessed Resurrection unto immortal Life, if we be obedient to him?
They that saw the one ( viz. his Resurrection and Ascension) could not but
steadfastly believe the other: and have told us that he was raised and glorified
on purpose that our faith and hope might be in God. 1 Pet. 1.21. This was the
great design and end of first opening his grave, and then opening the heavens
to him; that our confidence in God might revive again, and we might hope by his
favor to have the honor of being made the sons of God, by being the children
of the Resurrection.

That our Blessed Savior was really dead, as the History testifies, his
greatest Enemies always confessed, and still acknowledge. He hung a long time
upon the Cross; there he bled; and at last his side was wounded with a spear in
the vital parts. All the spectatours were satisfied that he had given up the
ghost: and the Soldiers, when they came to break his legs, as the manner was,
found the work already so effectually done, that there was no need of it. He
was wrapped in Cerecloaths, laid in a grave, and given up by all his Friends for
a lost man. But that after all this he was as really alive again as he had been
before, is testified by diverse sufficient Witnesses; and among the rest by one
of his principal Enemies, who was thoroughly convinced of it. The Apostles saw
him very often; they spoke with him; they felt and handled him; one of them put
his finger into the very print of the nails, and thrust his hand into his
wounded side. They eat and drank with him; they received Commissions from him:
and after he had shown himself alive to them by many infallible proofs, being
seen of them forty days, he ascended up to heaven in their sight; and from
thence, according to his promise, they received the Holy Ghost; i. e. in his
Name did all sorts of Miracles, raising even dead men to life again. And after
all he appeared from heaven to St. Paul, (a man that set himself vehemently
against him, and breathed nothing but threatenings and slaughters against his
Disciples,) whom he turned quite to be on his side; persuading him so fully
that he was indeed risen from the dead, that he became, as you have heard, a
most zealous preacher of it with the continual hazard of his life. This is a
more credible History then any other: (as it were easy to show, if it were my
present business:) and we may better doubt of all Records, then of those
wherein the memory of these things is preserved. They were holy, devout and
self-denying persons, who report these things upon their own knowledge. And
they are reported not by one or two, but by many of them; who met with nothing
in the world to tempt them to tell a lie, but with a great many things to
deterr them from publishing so odious a Truth. And therefore if we will not
doubt of every thing we do not see, we cannot refuse to believe that Jesus did
indeed rise again after he was dead and buried, and ascended into heaven. Which
being supposed, (for I shall say no more of it here,) there is no man can have
the face to deny the Resurrection of the body, and Life everlasting, which
Christ our Lord has promised us. There can be no truer reasoning then that of
St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 14. If we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even
so them also that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

I. For thus much is evident at first sight, and is included in the thing it
self, that this work of the SPIRIT proves a possibility of the Resurrection of
the dead, and shows that we mortal creatures, who live on the earth, may live
in the heavens. So the same Apostle argues elsewhere against those who denied
this Truth. 1 Cor. xv. 12. If Christ be preached (upon such credible
testimonies as he mentions in the foregoing verses) that he rose from the dead,
how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead? It is the
grossest absurdity, that is, to say there can be no such thing as the restoring
of a dead body to life; when it is so evidently verified in Christ's
resurrection. Which shows it is so far from being impossible or incredible,
that it is a thing which has been done already; as is very well attested by
Witnesses that cannot with any equity be rejected. And by the same reason he
proves we ought not to despair of seeing our bodies made glorious and
incorruptible. For if He be not in his grave, (as none could show him there
after the third day,) but is made glorious; why may not we partake of the same
favor, by that power which raised Christ from the dead, and set him at God's
right hand? There is no reason to doubt of it; but the greatest reason to hope
and be confident, that He who raised up the Lord Jesus (as St. Paul speaks in
the next Epistle, 2 Cor. iv. 14.) will raise up us also by Jesus, and set us in
his presence in the heavens.

II. For by his Resurrection the SPIRIT proved the truth of all that the other
Witnesses, the Water, the Blood, and his Miraculous Works too, testified.
Particularly it demonstrated the truth of his Doctrine, by which, as you have
seen, life and immortality was brought to light. If this had not been true,
that we shall live for ever by him, Jesus would have perished, and never have
come to life again, to deceive the World the second time. But seeing God did
not leave his Soul in hell, nor suffer his Holy (i. e. his anointed) one to see
corruption; it is an uncontrollable argument that those who believe on him
shall not perish neither, but be made alive as he is. Because He that said he
would rise again the third day, said likewise with the same assurance, that at
the last day he will raise up us also, and bestow upon us everlasting Life.
When God (who alone could do it) verified the one, and according to his word
raised up Jesus the third day; He bid us be assured of the other, that this
Jesus has Life in himself, and will by his power raise up us, according to his
promise, unto a never-dying life.

This is the Character He had given of himself, I am the Resurrection and the
Life; that is, the Author, the Cause of both: He that believes on me shall
have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day; nothing of him
shall perish, neither his Soul nor his body; for even they that are in their
graves shall hear his voice, and shall rise again to lise. This he often
preached, and proved many ways: but after all he sealed it with his blood, and
bad them expect a little, and they should see it sealed by his resurrection
from the dead. Which ensuing at the time appointed, was a perfect demonstration
that he said true, when he affirmed that He is the Resurrection and the Life;
by whom we shall receive this inestimable benefit of rising again after death,
to live for ever with him. Of this as well as the former Consideration I may
possibly say so much elsewhere, that I shall spare any farther pains about them
now.

III. Let us rather remember how several persons rose from the dead at that
very time when he left his grave: (xxvii. Matt. 52, 53.) which were notable
instances of his power to give life; and put us in hope that we shall all rise
again as they did. There is no cause but his Resurrection to be assigned of
this Miracle, which fell out the same time that he was missing in his grave; as
the opening of their tombs, at that very moment when he died. Never was any
such thing heard of before or since; and therefore it was intended to
demonstrate the mighty power of his Resurrection: when many bodies of Saints
which slept arose, and came out of their graves, and went into Jerusalem, and
appeared unto many. Whose testimony none have had the confidence to contradict
by endeavoring to disprove it; but the Jews rather by some concessions of
theirs confirm us in the belief of it. For it is a common opinion now among
their Doctors, that the Kingdom of the Messiah shall begin with the
Resurrection of the dead. Bury me, said R. Jeremiah, with shoes on my feet, and
my staff in my hand, and lay me on one side; that when Christ comes, I may be
ready. But of this conceit we can find no footsteps in the Old Scriptures;
which makes it probable that they have borrowed this, as they have done many
other things, from the Holy Gospel, in which it is recorded, that he began his
entrance upon his Kingdom with the Resurrection of some pious persons, as an
earnest of the restoring all the rest to Eternal Life. And thus it is likely
they have learnt to discourse of the bodies of the just after they are raised;
concerning which some of them speak so sublimely, above the dull and gross
conceptions of the rest of their Nation, that one can scarce look upon it
otherwise then as Christian language. When the Soul is in the state of glory,
Vid. Jo. de Voysin in Pug. fid. part. iii. did. 2. c. 8.
(says the Book Zohar,) it sustains it self with the light above, wherewith it
is also clothed: and when it shall return to the body, it shall come with the
same light, and with the body shall shine as with the brightness of heaven.
More there is in other Authors to the same purpose, which say, God can give us
bodies strong and vigorous like the Angels; and that the bodies of the just
after the resurrection shall be subtle like the globe of the Moon, Vid. eum de
Lege Div. in xxii. Matt. 3^.
and so give no impediment to the Soul, in its enjoyment of the Splendor of
the Divine Majesty.

But supposing this to be their own language, without any tincture they had
received from the Christian Doctrine, it will be still more remarkable, that
our Lord Jesus (according to their expectations from the Messiah) should begin
to raise the dead, when he went to take possession of his throne. A plain sign
that he is the Resurrection and the Life; from whom we may confidently look for
bodies, not only bright as the Moon, but that shall shine, according to his
faithful promise, like the Sun, in the Kingdom of the Father. Concerning which
things if the Apostles had written false, and there had not been many able to
bear record of the rising of these holy persons, and coming into Jerusalem, as
well as of the rising of Lazarus; there would have been pens enough in those
days employed to confute them, and proclaim the forgery. And these Jews would
have been as careful preservers of such confutations, as of any their most
beloved Traditions; which can never do them so much service, as those volumes
would have done.

VI. Nor is there the least shadow of reason to question the Testimony of those
who saw him ascend into heaven, and, as a token of his being inthroned there,
received from him, ten days after, the gift of the Holy Ghost. Which completed
the demonstration of his power and purpose to give Eternal Life to all his
followers. For,

1. His very Ascension into heaven (as it breeds in us a belief of a glorious
state in the other World, so it) evidently shows that it is possible such as we
may be translated thither: And though our Bodies now be but lumps of living
clay, yet they may one day be snatched, as he was, from this dull globe, to
shine among the Stars. And the Angels also appearing both at his resurrection
and ascension, and waiting upon him unto heaven, show that its gates are no
longer barred against us, but set open again to give us a free admission into
it. For they who were set to watch the way to Paradise, and guard it so that
none should enter, voluntarily lent their assistence to transport Him thither,
after they had brought the joyful news of his being risen from the dead.

2. But this is the least comfort we receive from thence; for his glorification
at God's right hand, when he came thither, advances our hope to a greater
height; and shows that it is not only possible, but certain, we shall be taken
up above to be with him. His Kingdom, it is apparent now, (by his sending the
Holy Ghost,) is supereminent over all; and nothing can be out of the reach of
his power. For it is a power over all Creatures in heaven and earth and under
the earth, who do obeisance to him, and cannot resist him. ii. Phil. 10. 1
Pet. iii. ult. And a power to do all things: for God has put all things under
his feet. 1 Cor. xv. 27. A power of conferring all dignities and honors; iii.
Phil. 21. and of removing all impediments to our preferment, He having the keys
of hell and death. i. Rev. 18. In short, a perfect power to do all things to
make us glorious. For in that he put all in subjection under him, he left
nothing that is not put under him, as the Apostle argues ii. Heb. 8. And though
he has not yet exercised his whole unlimited power, as it there follows, yet
we are sure he has it; because we see (by manifest arguments) Jesus crowned
with glory and honor for the suffering of death. By which the allwise God
thought fit to consecrate this Captain of Salvation; who he designed should
bring many Sons unto glory together with himself.

3. Which He will not fail to do, we may be sure, being thus perfected and
completely furnished for the very purpose: because this Royal power wherewith
he is invested is a kind of Trust; and he has received it (as St. Paul plainly
supposes 1 Cor. xv. 24, 25, etc. where he speaks of his Kingdom) not only for
himself, but for the good of all those whom he rules and governs. For the
Apostle concludes that he, having a Kingdom which must at last be resigned into
the hands of God the Father, will first put down all rule, all authority and
power, and leave no enemy unconquered; no not Death, which will only be the
last that shall be subdued, but subdued and destroyed it must be: ver. 26, 27.
Nay, our Lord himself acknowledges his Kingdom to be a trust, when he says,
xvii. Joh. 2. Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him. Whence it is that he often
protests, it is his Father's will, that of all he has given him he should lose
nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day, etc. vi. Joh. 39, 40.
For as the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father; so he that
eats me, even he shall live by me: ver. 57. And in express terms he says, as
I have shown before, that he went away to prepare a place for us. And therefore
is bound by his office, we may conclude, to promote us to that glory and honor
in the heavens, which it is his Father's will, he knows, should be bestowed on
us.

4. And who can doubt at all of his fidelity in this, who was so faithful in
all other things; most punctually, for instance, making good his promise of
sending the Holy Ghost, as an earnest, I have often said, of this immortal
inheritance? None can imagine he will now prove negligent in that, which by his
place he stands engaged to perform; when upon Earth he did the will of him that
sent him with such exactness, that he rewarded him for it with that high
dignity which he now enjoys in the heavens. Therefore his greatest care was to
assert and prove his power to give Eternal Life. Of his will he thought there
need not much be said; for none could doubt of it, after they saw him die for
them, and then express such love, after his resurrection, as to send the Holy
Ghost upon them.

5. This is abundantly sufficient to secure all considering persons of so
desirable a Good. Which the Apostles began confidently to expect, as soon as
ever they were satisfied of the resurrection of our Lord from the dead. Before
he ascended to heaven their thoughts ran thither, and they began to see that he
was the Lord of life and glory. For as soon as St. Thomas was convinced by a
palpable demonstration that he was risen, he cried out, My Lord, and my God.
xx. Joh. 28. This is the first time that any of his Apostles gave him the title
of their GOD; when they were fully satisfied, as Grotius observes, by his
Resurrection, that he would give Eternal Life to them. And then it was also,
you may note, that he first gave them the title of his Brethren, who should
share with him in the glory to which he was going. xx. Joh. 17. xxviii. Matthew.
10. Go tell my Brethren that they go into Galilee, etc. In which words he
alludes, as Eusebius observes, to those xxii. Psalm. 22. I will declare thy name
unto my brethren. He never called them so before, till he was after a new
manner declared the Son of God with power by the resurrection from the dead:
And now to own them for his Brethren, was as much as to say, that they should
be made the Sons of God by their resurrection, and be coheirs with him. To
prove which new Brotherhood the Apostle to the Hebrews brings that place of the
Psalmist now mentioned, ii. Heb. 11, 12. He is not ashamed to call them
Brethren, saying, I will declare thy name unto my brethren. Whence he is called
the firstborn among many brethren, viii. Romans 29. Whom he bids them that first
saw him alive again inform, that he ascended to his God and to their God, and
to his Father and their Father: to show them, that they might safely repose
such a confidence in God as he had done; and hope to be raised by him from the
dead, as he was, and receive a portion with him in the heavenly inheritance.

6. This Relation which he owns to us gives us the greatest confidence to look
upon him as our HOPE, (as St. Paul speaks 1 Timothy i. 1.) the HOPE of Glory, 1
Col. 27. For it is certain that when any person is advanced to a throne, his
blood is thereby enriched: all his family, I mean, are raised and dignified;
his children especially put into the quality of royal persons, though never so
mean before; nay, made capable of succeeding him in his state and greatness.
Now our Lord has a family as well as other persons; all those who believe on
him being acknowledged by him, not only to be his brethren, but his children:
who, living by his faith, are really descended from him; and therefore by his
resurrection are also begotten again unto a lively hope of an incorruptible
inheritance. 1 Pet. i. 3, 4. Whence the same Divine Writer, who observes how he
calls them Brethren, immediately shows how he owns a nearer relation to them,
saying, Behold, I, and the children which God has given me: ii. Heb. 13. who
in him are all advanced to the highest honor. His glory makes them
illustrious: for if children, says St. Paul, then heirs; heirs of God, and
joyntheirs with Christ. viii. Romans 17.

Who is not to be considered merely as a single person, but as the Lord and
Head of a Body or Corporation of men; who are so one with him, that the raising
him to so great a glory as he inherits, is the raising and ennobling them. A
sure pledge, that is, that the same shall be done for the Members, which was
for the Head; who will not be without them, but make them partakers of the same
benefit which is bestowed on him. He is like the first fruits, as St. Paul
discourses, (in his Chapter of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. xv. 20, etc.) a second
Adam, the head and beginning of a new Creation; by whom all shall as surely be
made alive, as in the first Adam all died.

7. Why should we doubt of it, since he was carried to heaven, as they that
received the Holy Ghost testified, to appear before God with his blood for us?
ix. Heb. 23, 24. This is a very great argument that we have Eternal Life, and
that it is in him; for this Sacrifice of himself being accepted by God, (the
Eternal SPIRIT, which offered him to God, presenting him before him without
spot or blemish,) must needs take away sin, and remove all hindrances to our
admission into the very same place where he is, as that Epistle proves at
large. By this offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified;
and we have (...), liberty and freedom (without any let or impediment) to
enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus. x. Heb. 14, 19. Who is such an
Highpriest over the family of God as is set on the right hand of the throne of
the majesty in the heavens; (viii. 1.) and being consecrated for evermore, is
become the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him. v. 9.
vii. 28.

8. To whom therefore we ought to draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of faith, that he will not fail to employ his power to make us happy
with himself. Which, you may consider once more, he most earnestly prayed for
when he was on earth: it being one of his last requests to his Father, that
those whom he had given him, might be with him where he is; that they might
behold the glory which he has given him. xvii. Joh. 24. And therefore having
obtained such a power over all as has been described, by his precious blood
which he was then going to offer; we may rest assured he will not let us be
without that of which he was so desirous before he left the World, now that he
is in heaven with full power to fulfill his own desires. For it is unreasonable
to suppose that a Friend, who carnestly beseeches another to grant us a favor,
will not most readily do it himself, when he becomes as able to bestow it as
he of whom before he asked it.

But the fear of swelling this Treatise into overgreat a bulk makes me pass
over these things with the bare mention of them, and omit many other. I shall
put an end therefore to this last Testimony of the SPIRIT with those remarkable
words of St. Peter, in his second Epistle, ver. 3, 4. of the first Chapter:
Where he says, as we translate him, that the Divine power has given unto us
all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him
that has called us to glory and virtue: whereby are given unto us exceeding
great and precious promises, etc. The meaning of which in a larger form of
words is plainly this. Account that grace and peace which I have wished you in
abundance (ver. 2.) from God and our Savior, no small blessing: For God has
in a most excellent, omnipotent manner bestowed on us all things that are
necessary for our future happiness and felicity, and for our present conduct in
piety, which is the only way to that Eternal life. And if you ask me how he
has given us these things in so resplendent, godlike a manner; I Will tell you:
it is through the knowledge of him that has called us; that is, through Jesus
Christ, the true Word of God, who has called us to piety and happiness. And if
you enquire again, how you shall know that what he says is true, and that he
calls us not merely from himself, but from God, who directs us by him in the
right way of godliness, which will bring us to everlasting Life; I Will resolve
you in that also: for he has called us (...), by (so it is in the margin)
glory and virtue. How we come to render it to glory and virtue, I know not, for
it makes the sense obscure; whereas otherwise it is perspicuous and clear: and
as if the Apostle had said, The Glory and Virtue which accompanied his
preaching, or presently followed it, is a very strong argument to induce you to
believe that he taught the way of God in truth; having revealed all things
pertaining to life and godliness, as God himself attests. For by the Glory
wherewith he called us, i. e. preached the Gospel and persuaded us to believe,
we are to understand his Transfiguration on the holy Mount; where they saw his
glory: ix. Luke 32. and to which the Apostle afterward appeals ver. 16, 17. of
this Chapter, as a justification of the truth of their Ministry. The coming
down also of the Holy Ghost at his Baptism, the voices from heaven, (in one of
which God said he would glorify him again as he had done already,) and the
descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, are here also to be understood by
Glory: for by these we are called and moved to receive the knowledge of him.
And then by Virtue is undoubtedly meant that very thing which I last treated
of, his mighty power in miraculous works, and the mighty power of the SPIRIT in
raising him from the dead. For it is well observed by Drusius and others, that
(...) Virtue in these holy Writings never signifies, as it does in heathen
Authors, Piety and moral goodness in opposition to Vice; but power and might
in opposition to weakness. And therefore by this word the Greek Interpreters of
the Old Testament render the Hebrew word (...), which denotes the Greatness,
Majesty and height of God's excellency; and sometimes the word (...), which
signifies strength and stoutness. According to which in the New Testament it
denotes either the mighty power of God, (as here in this place;) or else our
courage and valor, as in the fifth verse of this Chapter. But it is nowhere
found in the sacred style used for piety: and therefore we must not render the
particle (...) to, but by, virtue; that is, the power and mightiness of God's
arm or strength, (as the Scripture speaks) by which our Savior convinced the
World that God the Father had sent him to give Life unto it.

Thus the Apostle St. Paul says, (which will very much explain this,) that He
was raised up from the dead (...), by the glory of the Father. vi. Romans 4. That
is, by his glorious power, as Camero well renders it: for his power appeared
most gloriously in that wonderful Work, whereby, as St. Peter here speaks, he
called us to believe on him. So we are to understand him, it appears by another
Argument. For if we should say we are called to glory, (understanding thereby
heaven,) we could not be said to have precious promises (as it follows) hereby
given to us: For this would be to say, that by calling us to heaven he has
called us to heaven. But if we take these words the other way, then the sense
runs currently, and delivers to us this excellent Truth; That by such means as
I have treated of, (the Descent of the Holy Ghost, the Transfiguration of our
Savior, the Voices from heaven, the Miracles he wrought, the might of his
power which wrought in him when God raised him from the dead,) he persuaded men
to receive him as the onely-begotten of the Father; who was come, by his
authority, to show them the true way to everlasting life. By these we know that
we are not cheated, but that he who has called us is the Son of God; by whom
we are sure to attain everlasting life, if we follow those directions he has
given us, which will infallibly bring us to it.

And then the next words (ver. 4.) are still more pertinent to my purpose,
(...), or by which, (GLORY and VIRTUE) are given unto us exceeding great and
precious promises. We are so sure to attain eternal life, that we have many
promises of it; which are so strongly confirmed, that we cannot doubt of them,
being delivered in such a divine manner. For when he gave them it was (...), by
glory and virtue, with such demonstrations of his Authority to promise them,
and of his power to make them good, that we cannot but depend upon his word.
None, I suppose, question but by these great, these precious, yea exceeding
great and precious promises, he means those of raising us from the dead, and
carrying us to heaven, to live with God, and that eternally. These are the
chiefest things of which our Lord has given us such assurance, when he called
us to believe on his Name. Things which as much exceed all that was promised
Israel, as the heavens are wider then the smallest spot of this earth. More
precious are they then all lands, if they flowed with milk and honey: more to
be desired then gold, yea then much fine gold, then all the gold of Ophir: more
to be valued then the Crowns of Kings, which are not so much as an Emmet's Egg
in comparison with this Happiness. Now as there is nothing that can be compared
with these promises; so we have no testimony on Earth comparable to this of the
SPIRIT, that exceeding greatness of his power, whereby these promises were
brought to us, and assured to be infallible. For by this we know that He has
all power in heaven and earth, and is able to do whatsoever the Father
Almighty does; that is, give life to the dead, which is the property of the
Almighty alone. So the Enemies of our Religion are forced to confess, who say
there are three keys which God keeps to himself, and commits to none of his
Ambassadors, the keys of the womb, the keys of heaven, and the keys of the
grave. Thy power, says Joseph Albo speaking of God, is not the power of flesh
and blood; for the power of flesh and blood is to put those to death who are
alive, but thy power is to raise those to life who are dead. The very same we
may justly say of our Lord Jesus Christ, who challenges this power to himself,
as I have noted before out of the first of the Revelation, where he tells St.
John, I have the keys of hell and of death, ver. 18. He was no ordinary
Ambassador, but can do more then any whom God sent into the world ever did or
could. He can raise even the dead bodies of his subjects to life again. And
when he has lifted them out of the dust, (if I may apply the Psalmist's words
to this purpose,) can set them with Princes; even with the Princes of his
heavenly Court, to praise and bless his love among those great Ministers, the
Angelical powers, for ever and ever. Which is a power he does not assume to
himself vainly, but was conferred on him by God the Father; who raised him from
the dead, and gave him glory: wherein St. John beheld him when he said, I am he
that lives, and was dead; and behold, I live for evermore, Amen; and have the
keys of hell and of death.

Great is thy Majesty, O thou most mighty Jesus! whose power is not the power
of flesh and blood, but the power of God, who raises those to life who are
dead. Great was the joy which filled thy Disciples hearts when they first saw
thee alive from the dead, and called thee their God. Georg. N^comed. Sermon. ix.
None can understand the beauty of that sight. O the brightness of that
appearing! What a light diffused it self then through the whole Creation? What
a fragrant smell did the very earthquake breath forth, when like a public
crier it proclaimed the Resurrection? What was the savor of the ointment which
was then poured out? How was the whole world then transformed and made new? The
Angels themselves leaped for joy to see it. How sweet was the sound then of
their doxologies? With what divine splendours were they then adorned? How
beautiful did those preachers of thy resurrection appear? and how great was
the glory and the happiness which they came then to proclaim? O those Words of
theirs, which brought us the news of victory over the Enemy! which proclaimed
the destruction of Death; and published thee to the World, the Resurrection and
the Life!

O that sweet and above all things desirable voice of thine, which, by the
women that were carrying spices to thy grave, sounded joy to the World! The
Heavens then opened their gates, and received the glad tidings which were
brought to us, as if they had been their own. The Intellectual powers
rejoiced, and took a pleasure in our happiness. The Spiritual as well as
Sensible World was enlightened. The clouds of sadness were dispelled, from one
end of the world to the other; and the rays of joy possessed all. Guilty Nature
put off the robes of heaviness, and was clothed with garments of light. The
handwriting of the Curse was torn in pieces, and promises of Blessing were
sealed in the room thereof. By that new Salutation, when thou said ALL HAIL,
the world was filled with the sweetest and everlasting joy.

For thou art the Preacher, and the Cause, and the very Exultation of all joy;
the Author of good things; the giver of pleasure; the joy which can never be
taken away; the sweet light; the spectacle above all others desirable; the
intellectual tranquillity and peace; Wisdom it self, and Power; Incorruption
and Eternity; Security and Delight; the only unchangeable and inconceivable
Beauty; Sanctity it self, and Honor and Righteousness, and Glory above measure
glorious. O how many Names would my Mind bring forth to express thine
unutterable excellency! It is only my weakness that hinders, and want of
words. But thou who art the infinite, not to be named Good, far above all the
titles that Mind can invent; who regardest not words, but rather an inflamed
heart; who thy self broughtest the joyful news of thy Resurrection; shine now
into our Minds by the bright beams of thy appearing. Let us see intellectually
the superexcellent beauty of the intellectual Sun. Let us inwardly enjoy the
incomparable sight of our Lord and Master. Let us hear his divine voice
speaking some sweet and joyful word to us. O thou gracious Lord, come; and
draw us from these present thi^^^, (...) deeps: and (...) never-decay(...) the
quires of those that keep perpetual festivals above. For thou art both light
and life, and resurrection, and the joy of those that triumph in the heavens.
To thee it becomes us to give, together with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
glory, honor and adoration, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

CHAP. XII. Concerning the Testimony of the Holy APOSTLES of our Lord.
THere is nothing now wanting to complete this Discourse, unless it be to show
that, if the Testimony of the APOSTLES of our Lord be at all intended, when St.
John says, He CAME by Water and Blood and the Spirit, (as in the former
Treatise I proved we have reason to think it is,) they also bear Witness to
this Truth; and by them God has given us this Record, that we have Eternal
Life, and that this Life is in his Son.

That Jesus had Disciples the Talmudists themselves confess: who tell us in the
same place where they speak of his being hanged on the evening of the
Passover, that they were five; MATTHAI, Talmud Bab. Tit. Sanhed. c. vi.
NETZER, NEKAI, BUNI, and THODA. They do not love to speak the truth, but to
the Four Evangelists (to which perhaps they have respect) they have added one
more: and report not one of their names aright, except the first; and in the
last have a little varied from the Name of Judas the Brother of St. James. But
thus much we gain from their own Records, that known Disciples our Savior had;
who professed to believe on him, and owned him for their Lord and Master. These
persons, we can make no question, would be careful to communicate to the World
what they had received from him; because they looked upon him as the Son of God,
and esteemed his words as so many Oracles, which his Crucifixion could not
disparage. Accordingly there are Books that pass under their Names, besides the
four Gospels; which no man ever laid any claim to, or pretended to be the
Author of, but only themselves: and therefore we have no cause to think they
were not of their inditing.

Now if you examine them, you will find that, after his Ascension to heaven,
and the coming of the Holy Ghost, their business was to go about and preach
this Truth, and the certainty of it, to all the World, as their Lord and Master
had delivered it to them. They were so fully persuaded of it, that they could
not forbear to publish such glad tidings of great joy to the whole Earth. It
was the very end of their Apostleship, and that which moved them to undertake
so great a task; as St. Paul tells us, when he calls himself an Apostle of
Jesus Christ by the will of God, according to the promise of Life, which is in
Christ Jesus: 2 Timothy i. 1. appointed by God, that is, to publish the promise of
Eternal Life which he had received from Christ Jesus; who would certainly give
it to all that believed on him. And it is the very Character which the other
great Apostle gives of himself, 1 Pet. v. 1. that he was a Partaker of the
glory that shall be revealed. This encouraged him to be a Witness of the
sufferings of Christ, as he says just before, and not to be daunted, as he had
been, though he followed him to a cross; because now he clearly saw he had a
right as a Friend of his (so the word (...) signifies Philem. 17 Vid. Scipion.
Gentil. ibid.
.) to a share in that unseen glory where He was, which should one day be
revealed.

In this they desired that all mankind might have a portion with them, (1 John
i. 3.) by becoming Members of their Society. And therefore it was the constant
strain of all their Sermons, to invite them to it, by showing that Jesus will
reward well-doers with the Crown of Life; and be so far from letting their
labor be in vain, that he will do for them as his Father has done for him,
viz. bring them into his own joy. So St. John writes in the very beginning of
his Gospel, i. 4. that in him was life, and the life was the light of men. He
brought the promise of Eternal Life, that is, to mankind, and can himself
bestow it; which is the best news, the greatest cordial, that can be thought
of, to revive our spirits: like the honey on the top of Jonathan's rod,
inlightning our eyes, and making us live most cheerfully and happily, if we
believe it, and prepare our selves for it. This they laid as the very ground
and foundation of all Christian piety; unto which St. Paul says it was his
office to call men, in hope of eternal life, (i. Tit. 1, 2, etc.) which God,
that cannot lie, promised of old, but did not manifest till the preaching of
the Gospel, which was committed to him by the commandment of God our Savior:
who authorized him to open this Doctrine more fully, then it had been even by
our Lord himself while he was on Earth. For St. Paul shows that, at the last
day, so often mentioned by our Lord, he himself will appear again in person,
after a visible and glorious manner, to consummate all the faithful; whose
happiness begins as soon as they depart this life. These two weighty Truths are
notably asserted by this Apostle.

I. Who declares by the Word of the Lord (that is, a special revelation from
our Savior) the manner of his coming again from heaven, with the attendance of
his Angels, to raise the dead, and to lift them up to himself, and give them
the Crown of righteousness; which till that time shall not be bestowed. Read 1 Thessalonians. iv. 15, 16, etc. 2 Timothy iv. 8. where the splendor of that great day,
when he will openly appear as the Lord of all, is described no less lovely then
magnificently; as I hope to show in another place. It is the day of rejoicing,
ii. Phil. 16. because he will then most eminently appear as our life; iii. Col.
4. as our Salvation; 1 Cor. v. 5. ix. Heb. 28. to the praise and honor and
glory of our fidelity. 1 Pet. i. 7. And therefore for this time Christians are
said to wait and look, 1 Cor. i. 7. ii. Tit. 13. as the time that will complete
their felicity; which till then, the Apostles plainly suppose, wants its Crown
and perfection. And so the Church has from the beginning understood them. Who
describe Souls departed as in a state of Expectants, waiting for the appearing
of our Lord Jesus Christ: who will come out of his most holy Temple to perfect
those who now stand, as they speak, (...), in the porch or entry of it; in
atriis, as the Latin phrase is, in the outward Court of the Temple or holy
place of God. For as the Children of Israel stood in the outward Court, (which
yet was a part of the (...) or Temple, as we render it,) expecting the Priest
every day to come out of the Sanctuary, and the High Priest on the day of
expiation to come out of the Holy of holies, to give them the blessing: In such
manner do the Ancients describe the now blessed waiting and looking without
(though in Heaven, of which the Sanctuary was a figure,) for that blessed hope
of our Lord's coming out of his Most holy place, where he now is, without sin
unto their Salvation. And thus the best of the Jews express their happiness,
saying that pious Souls are in the bundle of life, (as the most learned Dr.
Pocock shows out of Judah Zabara, Not. miscell. cap vi. p. 176.
) in the high place, in the treasury; where they enjoy the splendor of the
Divine Majesty, being hidden under the throne of glory. Which phrases signify a
state of imperfection, in comparison with that which our Lord Christ (with
whom, says the Apostle, our life is hid, and kept in safe custody,) will bring
us unto at the day of his appearing.

II. But all this time they do not imagine that their Souls lie asleep, without
any sense of joy and pleasure; no more then the Israelites did, who were at
their Prayers all the time that the Priest was in the Sanctuary, desiring God
to accept his intercession for them. For what good does it do them to be in
the Garden of Eden or pleasure, (as the Jews also call the place where they
live,) if they have no taste of its fruits and happy enjoyments? They would be
as well any-where else as in the Bosom of Abraham, (by which the same Jews
Vid. Vcy: (...) de (...) bil. L. i. c. 16.
, as well as our Savior, describe this state,) if they do not feast there, as
that expression properly signifies; and as the Parable of Lazarus supposes he
did, when it says, that now he was comforted, or enjoyed his good things,
which made a recompense for all the evil he had here suffered.

The sense of the Christian Church in this matter is admirably expressed by St.
Orat. x. p. 173.
Greg. Nazianzen. Who comforting himself and others for the loss of his
Brother Caesarius, concludes with these words: I am persuaded by the words of
the Wise, that every Soul that is good, and beloved of God, when it is loosed
from this body to which it is tied, straightway (...), conceives a certain
wonderful pleasure and rejoices exceedingly, in the sense and contemplation of
the good it expects. Which makes it go most cheerfully to its Master; because,
being got out of its prison, and having shaken off its fetters, which pinioned
the wing of the mind, (...), it already injoys, as it were, an image of the
Blessedness laid up for it. And not long after receiving, out of the earth from
whence it came, and where it is deposited, its nearly-allied body, (in such a
way as God, who tied them together and dissolved them, knows,) it shall
together with it inherit the glory there.

And thus St. Paul also plainly teaches us;

1. When he relates how he was transported into the third heaven and into
Paradise; and for any thing he knew, out of his Body. 2 Cor. xii. 2, 3. Which
evidently shows he believed, that Souls could act without their bodies, and
that they shall enjoy God, and have a sense of heavenly things, as soon as they
depart this life. And so much the Jews themselves well conclude from the Spirit
of Prophecy; whereby holy men of God were separated for a time from their
bodies, so as to perceive nothing either by their senses or their minds, but
only what God presented to them. The phantasms, indeed, which they had
received from this sensible world, were commonly used to represent those things
which were then offered to them by Divine Revelation: but without any
assistence of the motions of the body, which lay then as if it was dead; while
the Soul enjoyed converse and familiar discourse with God. In which condition,
it is manifest, St. Paul's mind was so intent to what was communicated unto
him, that he did not at all observe whether he had a body about him or no. But
there is more then this, if you mark it, in St. Paul's transport into Paradise;
where God spoke to him (...), mysteries which he could not declare by any
words, because no phantasms or images of things he had seen or heard here in
this world could express them. Which is a sign he conceived them without any
motion of his brain, merely by his Spirit.

Of such transports the Hebrews themselves talk, who say four men entered into
Paradise Sepher C^sri part. 3. lxv. Tzemach David ad An. 498^.
: (that is, by the spirit of prophecy:) one of them was too curious, and died
presently; another proved distracted after it; a third plucked up the roots, or
denied the foundation of Religion, saying, (...) I have already touched the
mark, I am come to perfection, and therefore need not mind the work of the Law
any longer; a fourth entered in peace, and came out again in peace. Which I
recite not as a truth; (for all these stories are told of men who lived since
the spirit of prophecy left them;) but to show that they think it not
impossible for men to be transported as St. Paul was, (to whom, I imagine; they
were ambitious to equal some of their Doctors,) but by the power of the
Spirit they might enter, while they were inhabitants of this world, into
Paradise. Of the sweet enjoyments of which place therefore they cannot sure be
incapable, when they have quite left this body: since the Apostle supposes his
spirit might go out of it in this rapture; when it perceived and understood
things without the use of phantasms, after the manner of Intelligences.

2. Wherewith he was so ravished, and so fully assured of future bliss as soon
as he died, that he desired above all things to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, which he looked upon as far better then to stay here any longer. i.
Phil. 23. This eager longing clearly shows what he expected, as soon as he was
got loose from this body: and that he did not think death would stupefie his
Soul, and bereave it of all sensation; but rather open to it a freer passage
into that delightful place, whither he had some time been caught up. For it
would not have been better for him to depart, and to be with Christ, if he
should not have had the favor to enjoy that sweet conversation with him there,
which was not denied him whilst he was here. He tells us indeed, that when our
Lord shall appear, then is the time when we shall appear with him in glory; but
before this he expected upon his departure to be with Christ, though not in so
full an enjoyment of him as hereafter. This made him so confident and well
assured in his perpetual conflicts with so great troubles and calamities,
because he looked upon himself in this present bodily state but as a stranger,
who was absent from his own country and friends; to whom he desired to return
even in this way, through the midst of many afflictions. 2 Cor. v. 6. Which he
repeats ver. 8. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from
the body, and to be at home with the Lord. So we render this phrase (...) ver.
6. when he speaks of his being in the body. From which I conclude, that he
thought his Soul, which while it did (...), inhabit the body, had such a sense
of future happiness, as made him resolutely endure all manner of troubles to
come at it, would much more enjoy a blissfull sense of it when it did (...),
dwell in its own country with the Lord.

3. Hence you read that those who were dissolved, or rather whose souls were
torn out of their bodies by the hand of cruel persecutours, cried unto God for
vengeance on their murderers. vi. Rev. 9. Which argues Souls departed do not
sleep, and think of nothing that passed here; but are so awake, as to remember
the gracious promises of God, which they live in expectation to see fulfilled.
It may be said indeed, that by (...) Souls we are to understand only their
Blood, as the word is sometimes used in the Holy Scriptures; and as I thought,
when I writ the former Treatise Vid. Chap. viii. p. 501.
, it might be taken here. But upon farther consideration I find reason to
correct that mistake: For St. John, I observe, speaks of them as persons (ver.
11.) who had fellow servants and brethren here upon earth; who were to finish
their testimony to Christ by laying down their lives for him, as they had done.
Till which time those Martyrs were to rest and acquiesce in what they enjoyed
already; having obtained very great honor: For there was given (...) to every
one of them white robes. Mark the place, and you will be satisfied fully that
he speaks not of their blood. For St. John saw these Souls (...), under or
beneath the Altar; of incense, that is, (as a Great man has proved Mr.
Thorndike Rights of the Church p. 95. 310.
:) whereas the blood of the Sacrifices was poured out at the bottom of the
Altar in the outward court. They were not without, but in the Sanctuary; though
in the lower part of it, beneath the Altar of incense; not yet advanced to the
higher part of it, much less to the Holiest of all. They were admitted, that
is, unto a greater nearness to God then others, (as the Church always believed
the Martyrs were,) though not yet consummated; as the Apostle St. Paul supposes
himself should not be till the day of Christ's appearing. But St. John adds,
(2.) that they had white Robes given them in that place where they were: which
signifies they were a kind of heavenly Ministers attending on the Divine
Majesty; or that they had exceeding great honor conferred on them: (xli. Genesis
42.) which would have done them no good at all, if they had not been sensible
of the favor of God therein, and lived in great joy and festival pleasures;
which white raiment also in the holy languages uses to denote. ix. Eccles. 8.

And thus the Jews themselves, I observe, are apt to speak of this matter;
making the description of the City and Temple in the latter end of Ezekiel to
be a representation of the other World. For when it is affirmed by one Doctor
in the Talmud Vid. Coch. exc. Gem. Sanhedrin c. xi. n. 30.
, that there were not above six and thirty just men in every Age that behold
the face of God; and another objects, that the Court about the City (called The
LORD is there) was exceeding great, no less then eighteen thousand measures
round; xlviii. Ezekiel. 35. this Answer is returned, that the difficulty is small:
For some behold the very light of God; others only see it obliquely, and have
no more but a certain obscure duskish image of it. There are but few of the
former, says the Gloss there, who have the Light in its power; but of the
other, who have a weaker ray, obliquely and at a distance, there are very great
numbers. Which agrees with those words of our Savior, In my Father's house are
many Mansions, as they are expounded by the two St. Gregory's, Nazianzen and
Nyssen, and others: who by a Mansion understand (...) Nazianz. Orat. 33.
, etc. the rest and the glory which is laid up there for the blessed; but
suppose some to be in a higher, others in a lower condition, proportionable to
the virtuous dispositions they carried out of the world with them. Which being
very different, they believed some to see less; and others to be like Gorgonia,
the Sister of St. Greg. Nazianzen, whom, in the conclusion of his Eleventh
Oration, he supposes to be in the clear light of the glorious Trinity.

4. But it would take up too much room in this Treatise, if I should enter into
that discourse: and therefore I proceed to consider, that though they made this
difference, according as we see in a City (to follow the former comparison)
some are accounted the chief, others the more inferior streets and houses, and
some are nearer unto, others more remote from the royal palace: yet they did
not imagine those mansions to be dark, nor those that were in them to have
their eyes shut up with sleep; but all to enjoy the light of life. They lead,
as another Jewish Writer Vid. Jo. de Voysin de Jubilaeo L. i. cap. 16.
speaks, a most sweet life in that light, which is the figure and resemblance
of the supreme light, to which they shall be admitted at the last. Thus Moses
and Elias appeared in great splendor at our Savior's transfiguration on the
Holy Mount; where they talked and discoursed with him about his departure, that
he was to accomplish at Jerusalem. Which shows, they not only continued in
being, but had sense, and motion, and lived in much happiness and bliss. Which
we are not to take for a singular privilege indulged to them; for the Apostles,
you may observe again, looked upon our Savior as the (...) exemplar or pattern
to which God had determined they should all be conformed. viii. Romans 29. And
their conformity to him here in this world being so exact, that they passed the
very same way to bliss that he did, through most cruel sufferings; they could
not doubt but upon their departure the conformity would still hold as exactly.
That as He, when he died, immediately went to Paradise; (where he promised the
good Thief should be, before his Resurrection;) so they should enter into the
same blessed place immediately upon their death, and live there in a joyful
expectation of him, to come and change even this vile body, that it may be
(...) conformed to his glorious body. iii. Phil. 21.

And this is the sense also, you may observe once more, of the Voice from
heaven, which commanded St. John to write, Blessed are the dead which die in
the Lord. (xiv. Rev. 13.) With which the Spirit immediately joined its
testimony, saying, (...), Yea ( i. e. it is certainly true, believe what the
voice says,) from henceforth, or now at this present, I promise them a blessed
rest from their labors; and their works shall follow with them: that is, they
shall be refreshed with a sweet remembrance of what they have done and suffered
for Christ Jesus. It is uncertain indeed whether the word (...) be to be
referred to the former words, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; or to
those that follow, Yea, says the Spirit: But either way our Church understands
it in the same sense, as appears by the Funeral office. Where, referring it to
the former sentence, the words are thus recited; I heard a voice from heaven
saying, Write, From henceforth (or Now, at this present time) blessed are the
dead, etc. They are not only in expectance of future blessedness, but in
possession of an happy state already; and find inconceivable satisfaction in
venturing their very lives for Christ's sake: who for this very end, as St.
Paul observes, laid down his life for us, that whether we wake, or whether we
sleep, we should live together with him. 1 Thessalonians. v. 10.

There are those who from this word Sleep (by which the state of the dead is
frequently called in these books, there being nothing liker Death then Sleep,)
would infer the perpetual motion and operation of the Soul before the
Resurrection. For it is very busy and active, even when all the Senses are
locked up by sleep; and has at that time received very high illuminations from
God: which is a sign that, if the body were quite dead, it would not be without
them. Aristotle, I find in Sextus Empiricus L. viii. adv. Mathemat. p. 312.
, observes thus much, that in Sleep, when the Soul is by her self, (...),
resuming her own nature, she prophesies and foretells things to come: and
declares, says he, hereby what she shall be (...), when by death she shall be
separated from all bodily things. By which consideration, St. Austin tells us
that Gennadius, a famous Physician in his time, and very religious and
charitable, was wonderfully enlightened, when he was in doubt whether there was
any life after death. God, says he Epist. 100. ad Euodium.
, would by no means desert a mind so well disposed; but there appeared one
night to him in his sleep a very handsome young man, who bid him follow whether
he should lead him. Which he thought he did, till he came to a City, where on
the right side he was saluted with the sweetest voices that ever he heard;
which the young man, upon his inquiry what this meant, told him were the hymns
of the Blessed and of the Saints. What he saw on the left side, he did not well
remember: but awaking he looked upon this as a dream, and thought no farther of
it. Till some time after the same young man appeared again to him, another
night; and asked if he knew him. To which he answering, Yes very well; he asked
him where he had seen him. And Gennadius presently related, how by his conduct
he was once led to hear the hymns and see the sight before mentioned. Here the
young man asked him, whether he saw and heard what he related in his sleep, or
waking. In my sleep, said Gennadius. True, said the other; and now thou see
me in thy sleep, do thou not? To which he consenting; his instructor
proceeded to ask him, Where is thy body now? In my bedchamber, said Gennadius.
Do thou know then, replied the young man, that thy eyes are now bound up, and
shut, and lie idle in that body, so that with them thou see nothing? I know
it, said Gennadius. What eyes then are these, said his instructor again,
wherewith thou see me? Here Gennadius being silent, not knowing what to say;
the young man laid hold of this occasion to open to him the meaning of all
these questions, saying, Those eyes of thy flesh, which is asleep and lies in
thy bed, have no employment and do nothing at all; and yet thou have eyes
wherewith thou see me. Just so when thou art dead, and the eyes of thy flesh
are put out and can do nothing, vita tibi inerit, qua vivas, sensusque, quo
sentias, there will be life in thee, whereby to live, and sense, whereby to
perceive. Beware now hereafter how thou doubtest that life remains after death.
And thus that faithful man told St. Austin, the Providence and mercy of God
quite removed his doubt.

But I shall not insist on such reasons as these, my intention being only to
show what we learn from the Apostles, the faithful Witnesses of Jesus Christ,
to confute that drowzy conceit of the Sleep of the Soul; which like a thistle
sprung up first Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. L. vi. c. 37.
in the wild deserts of Arabia, but ought not to be suffered to grow in the
Garden of God. In which this Doctrine of the Apostles, I might show, has been
so deeply rooted, that to testify the Church's belief of it, was one great end
of the Commemorations and Prayers which were made for the faithful departed
this life. So we learn from Epiphanius his confutation of Aerius, who did not
approve of this practice. The very first account he gives of it is, that those
who were present might believe (...), Haeres. lxxv. n. 7.
etc. that they who were departed live, and are not gone out of being; but
exist and live with the Lord. And they did not suppose, I may add, that those
whom they remembered in their sacred offices, were frying in the flames of hell,
as the present Roman Church does; but in a state of happiness, though
imperfect, and some more imperfect then other. This we learn from the Service
of the Church in those days, especially at the funerals of the departed.
Whenever they celebrated the dreadful mysteries, together with the holy
Martyrs and Confessors and Priests, whom they commemorated, they prayed for
the whole World, for which Christ's blood was an expiation: not forgetting
those who slept in him, whom the Priest desired those who were present to
remember. For we are all one body (says St. Chrysostom Hem. xli. in 1 Corinthians. p. 524.20.
, who reports this,) though one member be brighter then another: and therefore
they desired all might have (...) pardon and consolation. Which they hoped they
had, it is plain from the Funeral Office, which, in great part, was
Eucharisticall, consisting of Psalms and Hallelujahs. So the same great person
informs us in his Commentaries on the Epistle to the Hebrews, where he takes
occasion from those words, ii. 15. [ deliver them who through fear of death,
etc.] to reprehend the bitter lamentations and wailings of those who mourned
for their dead friends, as altogether inconsistent with what the Church did at
their funerals. Where the bright lamps Him. i^. p. 453 35. 454. 10.
they saw burning proclaimed that they attended them as valiant champions: and
the hymns that were sung glorified God, and gave him thanks for crowning him
that was departed, and for freeing him from his labors, and for delivering him
from a state of fear, that he might have him with himself. Are not the hymns,
says he, for this end? is not this the meaning of the singing Psalms? (...):
and all these things are proper to those that rejoice: according to that of St.
James, Is any well-pleased? let him sing Psalms. And a little after he bids
them mind what they sung at those solemnities. Return unto thy rest, O my Soul,
for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee: and, I will fear no evils, for
thou art with me: and again, Thou art my refuge from the affliction that
compasses me about. This was part of the Funerallservice, to which he tells
them they did not attend, but were drunk with sorrow; or else they would not
have made such lamentations. For to say, Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for
the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee, and yet to weep and lament, is a
mockery and a stage play; not a serious piece of devotion. This and much more
that great Man there says, to show how preposterous it was to mix their
lamentations with those hymns: which supposed the Souls of the deceased to be
in rest and peace, and to partake liberally of the bounteous goodness of God;
and therefore ought to have composed and comforted the minds of the living, who
confessed their Friends had made a blessed change of a troublesome life, for
one full of quiet and happy repose. To which the Order of burial in our
Church, which professes to tread in the steps of the first Ages of
Christianity, is very conformable. Where we Sing, Blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord, etc. and acknowledge that we ought not to be sorry, as men
without hope; for them that sleep in him: because the Spirits of them that
depart hence in the Lord do live with God; and, being delivered from the
burden of the flesh, are in joy and felicity. Not complete indeed, but we pray
him (after we have given thanks for delivering our Brother out of the miseries
of this sinful world) to hasten his kingdom, that we, with all those that are
departed in the true faith of his holy name, may have our PERFECT CONSVMMATION
and BLISS both in BODY and SOUL in his eternal and everlasting glory.

But it is not my business, as I said, to seek for testimonies to this Truth
any lower then from the APOSTLES themselves, who as they preached the glad
tidings of Eternal Life everywhere, so they protest most solemnly, (and they
were men, you shall hear, who taught and practiced the strictest truth and
honesty,) that they had a most certain knowledge of it: and therefore we may
safely rely upon their testimony. Those words wherewith St. John begins his
first Epistle may serve in stead of all that might be alleged to assert this;
ver. 1, 2, 3. where he gives an account of the reason they had to publish to
the world that WORD OF LIFE, ( Jesus and his Gospel,) as they had done a long
time. For they said nothing concerning that Eternal Life, which it was in the
purpose of God the Father from the beginning to bestow, and now was manifested
to them, but what they had HEARD; that is, received from his own mouth, and
been constant Auditors of. Which made them the more confident to declare these
things to others, because they had them not at the second hand, but immediately
from himself.

And because it is the least of testimonies to say we have heard a thing,
therefore he adds, in the second place, that they had SEEN it; beheld, that is,
all the mavelous works he did to confirm this Doctrine which he delivered; as
the word Seen seems to be understood xv. Joh. 24. If I had not done among them
the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now they have
SEEN, and yet hated both me and my Father. They saw the vast numbers that he
fed with a little food, the sick that he cured with speaking a word, the dead
that he raised when all their friends gave them for lost, and despaired of
seeing them again in this world: In short, so many instances of his Divine
power and authority, that if they should have been written every one, this
Apostle supposes the World would not have been able to contain the Books that
should have been written. xxi. ult. But these are recorded which we find in the
Gospel, as he concludes the foregoing Chapter, that we might believe that
Jesus is the Son of God, and that believing we might have Life through his Name.

And lest any should imagine it was but a transient sight they had of these
things, and their eyes might be deluded, (as we sometimes are when a thing
suddenly flies away from us,) or that they were but seldom spectatours of these
things, and so could not gather much from thence; he adds, in the third place,
that they had LOOKED on it: that is, had this evidence continually before their
eyes. They scarce saw any thing else but miracles. They had not leisure
ofttimes so much as to eat their meat, by reason of the great multitude of
people that came to be healed by him. They conversed a long time with Lazarus
after he was risen; and our Lord himself was seen of them forty days after his
resurrection, speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God. And when
the Holy Ghost came, they themselves, to whom the Apostle here writes, could
testify the wonderful variety of spiritual gifts that were poured on
believers.

But because we imagine that to feel a thing is far more considerable for our
satisfaction then to see it or look upon it; (as St. Thomas would not believe
those who had seen our Lord and heard him speak, but he would put his hands
into his wounds, before he would be satisfied;) therefore the Apostle tells us
farther, that they declared nothing but what they had HANDLED of the word of
life. That is, there was most palpable evidence and demonstration given of the
truth of their report. They were so near as to touch and feel that their eyes
were not deceived, when they thought they saw such miracles wrought. For their
own hands distributed the bread and the fish to the hungry multitude. And some
of them untied the gravecloaths of Lazarus when he was raised from the dead.
And (to give one instance for all) when he himself rose again from his grave,
they not only discoursed with him, and saw him eat and drink, and beheld him
several times and in several places; but he called them to him, and said,
Behold my hands and my feet; handle me and see: for a spirit has not flesh and
bones, as you see me have. xxiv. Luke 39. This very handling of him was a great
argument of the Eternal Life which was with the Father, but was hereby made
manifest unto us; for it proves his resurrection, and that is a proof of ours.

Now they having thus heard, and seen, and beheld, and handled these things,
how could they choose but publish that Jesus is the Author of Eternal Life?
And we receiving such testimony from them, how can we refuse to believe their
word, that we may have fellowship with them in God and his Son; i. e. be
partakers, as they were, in that most blessed Life of God and our Savior Jesus
Christ? If we do but believe there were such men as St. John and St. Paul and
all the rest, and if they had eyes and ears and hands like other men; if they
were men of sound brains and understandings; (as it appears by their writings
they were;) if any credit may be given to sober persons, who protest they heard
those voices from heaven, saw those miracles which they have recorded,
conversed with our Savior after he rose from the dead; (as there are no
Writers in the world deserve credit, if they do not;) nay, if they deserve more
credit then any, considering what they did and suffered, as you shall hear, for
the testimony of that which they saw and heard, and wrote to the world; there
is no doubt this Life was manifested most apparently to them, and they had
reason to bear witness of it, and show it to us: And we cannot but rest
satisfied that it is the will of God to give Eternal Life by his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord. No question to be made of it, unless we will question all
Histories in the world, and believe nothing that is reported and delivered to
us by others. Which if it were once resolved, there would be an end of most of
the trade, commerce and business that is managed in the world. And deeds and
evidences which men have from their ancestors would become void; and present
possession would be the only title they could have to their estates.

But for our farther satisfaction, let me briefly show, that the APOSTLES gave
a continued Testimony to this truth, all the three ways whereby St. John says
He came, by WATER, by BLOOD, and by the SPIRIT.

I.
As for the purity of their Doctrine, which is one part of the Testimony of
Water, I have given an account of it in the first part of this Discourse. Which
demonstrates it was of that nature, that it had been an idle attempt to preach
it, and endeavor to plant it in the World, had they not believed, and been
able to prove, that their Master, who employed them, would give them, and all
those who obeyed their word, the reward of Eternal Life. To which if you add
the holiness of their Life, which is another part of this Testimony, you cannot
think that men of such sincerity in all other things would have affirmed so
confidently as they did that which they did not take to be true; nor have
protested they saw and heard and felt such things as they never had any notice
of. But if you will needs suppose they might be so vile, (which is very
unreasonable;) yet who can think they would have denied themselves so much as
they did for their Master's sake, in which a great part of their piety
consisted, if they had not been sure that he would lead them by such means to
everlasting life? This extraordinary contempt of all present things, even of
life it self, as you shall hear, plainly showed they were not merely big words
which they spoke, of being with God and our Savior, to see the Glory which the
Father had given him; but things which they heartily expected. For does any man
find such inclinations in himself, as should make him imagine they would have
left their trades, their houses, their possessions, their wives, kindred,
friends, all that is desirable in this world, and persuade those who were the
dearest to them to do so too; if they had not had an assurance, upon such
grounds as were apt to convince others as well as them, of the recompense they
should meet withal hereafter in a better life? Who can believe that St. Paul
would have quitted all his Dignities, his hopes of greater preferment, his
esteem and reputation with the wisest and chiefest persons in the Nation, his
ease and quiet, and every thing else, and betaken himself to the troublesome
service of a despicable Master; if he had not known and seen it as clearly as
the Sun in the firmament, that Jesus, whom he served, was raised from the dead,
and made the King of Glory, and would prefer all those that proved faithful to
him unto the greatest honor in the heavens? For what reason should those good
men live as having nothing, and all the time be as cheerful as if they
possessed all things? Did they not look upon themselves, think you, as heirs of
a Kingdom which could not be taken away from them? Read St. Paul's description
of himself to Timothy, (2. iii. 10, 11.) who he says had fully known his
doctrine and manner of life, (not only what he had been wont to teach, but how
he had followed his own instructions,) what his purpose and aim had ever been,
his fidelity, his lenity toward offenders, his charity to all Christians, his
patience under troubles of all sorts: for he was persecuted and endured great
afflictions by that means at Antioch, (where they thrust him out of the city,)
at Iconium, (where an assault was made upon him to stone him,) at Lystra,
(where they actually stoned him.) And in how many other places he had been
vilely used, Timothy, he says, could not be ignorant, having been a companion
with him in his travels. xvi. Act. 3. Now what think you of such a person as
this? Do you take him for a dolt and an ignorant sot? Was this great Apostle a
mere lump of clay, who was sensible of nothing; and imagined others so
senseless, as that he might without any reason propound this example to Timothy
for his imitation? How came they to be so stupefied, as to choose rods, and
whips, and stones, and all other miseries, when they might have lived in ease
and peace? Nay, to glory in these things alone, as if there had been nothing
that could have done them such honor, 2 Cor. xii. 5? They did both hunger and
thirst, (as I noted from the same Apostle in my former Book, 2 Cor. iv. 11.)
they were naked and buffetted, they had no certain dewlling place, they
labored working with their own hands, being reviled they blessed, being
persecuted they suffered it, they were made as the filth of the world, and the
offscouring of all things. Which things no body in his wits can think men of
their understanding would have endured, if they had not been provided of meat
which the world knew not of, and been nourished and sustained with the hope of
glory, and assured of eternal mansions in the heavens, and known that they
should inherit a blessing, and be made more honorable and glorious with Jesus
for ever, then the World for the present could make them vile and contemptible.

These things are so clear, that the bare recital of them is sufficient to
satisfy us they were no deceivers, nor men of light belief, who took things
upon trust without good evidence; but had the greatest reason to endeavor to
baptize all Nations into this belief, as they did by an indefatigable
diligence: which was no small testimony of the power and glory of the Lord
Jesus.

II.
And their BLOOD speaks as much. For as none of them, says St. Paul, xiv. Romans
7. lived to himself, so none of them died to himself; but consecrated even his
blood to the Service of Christ, if he pleased to command it. Whereby they
sealed to this Truth; and showed they were so far from doubting of immortal
Life by the Lord Jesus, that they unfeignedly desired to be dissolved and to be
with him. Witness St. Stephen, who was stoned because he said he saw the Lord
Jesus in the highest glory; which he was never more assured of then when he
died, for then he recommended his Spirit to him, as our Savior had done his to
God the Father. Witness Antipas, a faithful Martyr. Witness all those Souls
whom St. John saw beneath the Altar: who had all learnt from our Savior what
they must expect in his Service, when he said, The Brother shall deliver up the
Brother to death, and the Father the Child; and the Children shall rise up
against their Parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated
of all men for my Name's sake. Under which afflictions they had nothing to
support them, but that which he immediately adds, He that endures to the end
shall be saved. x. Matthew. 21, 22. These few words were a sufficient
encouragement to them, and made them not regard their lives for the sake of
Christ Jesus; who has abolished death, and brought life and immortality to
light through the Gospel. For the which cause, says St. Paul, I suffer these
things, and am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded
that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day. 2 Timothy i. 10, 12. And for this cause he would not have Timothy to be ashamed of
the testimony of our Lord, nor of him his prisoner; (ver. 8.) but to imitate
him by being partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel; which he endured, as
he adds in the next Chapter ver. 10. for the elects sake, that they also might
obtain the Salvation that is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. The Apostles
nothing doubted that they themselves should obtain Salvation and immortal
glory this way: and they hoped likewise, by their constant sufferings even to
the death, to draw others also to the faith, or confirm them in it; that they
might have a share with them in this happiness, and be willing to suffer for
it. For it is a faithful saying, he adds, that if we be dead with him, we
shall also live with him: if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him:
ver. 11, 12.

I shall conclude this with that Discourse of St. Paul 1 Cor. xv. 30, 31, 32.
where he alleges this among other reasons, to confirm that Church in the
belief of the Resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come, that
He and the rest of the preachers of Christian Religion would not have been such
fools, as to have suffered in that manner they did, had they not seen plain
demonstrations of this truth. For they were so miserably treated, that they
carried their lives in their hand; and were every hour, for any thing they
knew, at the brink of the grave. He for his part had been compelled to
encounter with wild beasts on the Theater at Ephesus: (so some ancient Writers
understand him, who knew there was nothing more common with the Pagans then to
cry, Christiani ad Leones, Away with the Christians to the Lions: and it was a
punishment to which the vilest Malefactors were subject, particularly
Magicians; as we learn from another Paul L. v de receptis sentemiis.
the Lawyer:) or at least he ran as great hazzards as those men did who were
exposed unarmed to the fiercest creatures, such as Lions, Bears, Tigers,
Leopards, wild Boars, and Bulls, and Dogs. (To every one of which we have
examples of Christians, in the Ecclesiastical Story, that were condemned.) And
it was for no other cause but this, that he preached Jesus and the
Resurrection. How could they think him so senseless, as to put his life in such
danger upon this account, if he was not fully persuaded of that for which he
suffered so much; nay, had not good ground to be of this belief? He knew the
value of life as well as other men. He was no stone nor block, as I have said,
that had no feeling of pain. He naturally loved ease and quiet and pleasure, as
well as the rest of the world. And his education had not been such as to
incline him to believe things carelessly; especially such a thing as this, quite
contrary to all his former principles, and as contrary to his present
preferments and future hopes. And therefore, without imputing to him the
highest degree of folly and stupidity, the Corinthians could not disbelieve
what he preached of the Life to come. Concerning which he had received such
full satisfaction, and was convinced of it by such undeniable arguments; that
he chose rather to lose his life, then to deny it, or not to preach it.

III.
And that He and the rest of the Apostles were not deceived nor judged amiss in
this matter, the mighty power of the SPIRIT, which wrought continually in them
and with them, abundantly testified. This was sufficient not only to satisfy
them, but to satisfy the rest of the world, that Jesus, as they said, was
alive, and made the Lord of all: who was ready at hand on all occasions to bear
witness to this Truth when they preached it, that he would give Eternal Life
unto his followers. This power of the SPIRIT going along with them was a thing
so notorious, that the Pagans in some places cried out, the GODS are come down
to us in the likeness of men; and could scarce be restrained from doing divine
honors to them. xiv. Act. 11, 18. And whereas there had been some wonderful
things heretofore done among the Jews, if we may believe themselves, they now
all ceased; as if God had transferred all power on earth into the Apostles
hands. For they tell us, there were Ten Signs in the House of the Sanctuary
Pirke Avoth cap. v.
, which never failed: as, that no woman ever miscarried by the smell of the
flesh that was burnt upon the Altar; no fly was ever seen in the House; nor did
the flesh of the Sanctuary ever stink; nor the rain ever extinguish the fire;
nor the greatest winds hinder the smoke from ascending in a straight pillar
toward heaven; etc. But forty years before the Sanctuary was destroyed, all
these Miracles ceased; according to that of the Psalmist, (which they apply to
this business Talmud Bab. in Joma apud Raimund. p. 297.
,) We see not our signs, nor is there any prophet to tell us how long. lxxiv.
9. When the veil of the Temple was rent in sunder, God, who dwelt in the Holy
place, left his habitation, and went out at that breach to return no more
thither. All the wonders were now without those doors, in the open streets, in
every house, in the whole world. Which was a notable sign that Jesus was
Christ, and alive from the dead, by whose power the Apostles professed to do
all their wonderful works.

By these they proved that he was exalted at God's right hand, and sat, as he
said he would, on the throne of his Glory. And their proof was the stronger,
because there was no great thing done (as formerly there had) but only what
was wrought by their hands; who reigned now with him as so many Princes, and
sat on twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. xix. Matthew. 28.
xxii. Luke 30. They were supreme Governors (whose office it is to judge) in
the Church under our Lord Christ, it plainly appeared by the mighty power
wherewith their Gospel was accompanied. Which came, as St. Paul tells the
Thessalonians, not in word only, but in power and in the Holy Ghost. That is,
in Miraculous works, and in extraordinary gifts, which brought along with them
a full assurance: insomuch that he left it to them to tell the world what
manner of men they were among them. And if any enquire what was the effect of
it, he tells us, that they were persuaded by this miraculous power, to turn
from idols, to serve the living and true God; and to wait for his Son from
heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus, which delivered us from the
wrath to come. 1 Thessalonians. i. 9, 10. This was the fruit of their labors and
travels, to convince a number of people, by wonderful operations upon the
sick, nay upon the dead, and by gifts of the Holy Ghost, that Jesus was raised
from the dead, and possessed of Eternal life in the heavens; from whence he
will come to bestow it upon the faithful; whom he will never susser to perish,
but rescuing them from destruction, make them ever happy with himself.

And whosoever afterward revolted from this Faith, I may add, and set
themselves to oppose it, the Apostles showed their power (which was a great
witness to Christianity) as much in their plagues and punishments, as in the
cures they wrought upon others. It may well be thought, that those in the
Corinthian Church who did not believe the Resurrection, were reclaimed from
their error by that Letter which St. Paul wrote to them; for we hear nothing
of it more in the next Epistle. But some there were in other places that
obstinately persisted in their folly; and not contented to disbelieve what the
Apostles taught in this matter, contradicted and blasphemed it. Two of them are
named in the 2 Timothy ii. 17, 18. Hymeneus and Philetus, who taught that the
Resurrection was past, and consequently denied the rewards of the Life to come.
The occasion of their erring thus from the faith seems to have been this, that
the Apostles often speaking of a spiritual resurrection from a state of sin to
the life of godliness, ( Romans vi. Col. iii.) which they supposed all Christians
had already felt; these men fansied there was no other, affirming the
resurrection was past, and none to come. If they had only doubted of it, the
Apostle, it is like, would not have so sharply punished them, no more then he
did the Corinthians: But they blasphemed, as he expressly tells us of Hymeneus,
1 Timothy i. 20. that is, reproached this Doctrine as a foolish opinion; and
reviled, it is like, the Apostles who were the preachers of it. And therefore
he inflicted on them the most grievous punishment, by delivering them up to
Satan: which was not so little as merely banishing them the Christian Society,
but turning them over to the power of the Devil, (...), as unto a public
Executioner, to torture and scourge them. They are the words of St. Basil
Homil. in princip. Proverb. p. 439.
, with whom agree diverse others of the ancient Doctors; who think the Apostle
speaks of surrendering such persons into his hands, that he might inflict bodily
diseases or pains upon them, to humble and bring them down to submit to the
Apostolical doctrine, when they felt the miraculous effects of their
Authority. For that is the reason this punishment is called delivering up to
Satan; because it visibly appeared by some plagues on the body, that they were
fallen under his power, by being thrown out of the Church. He was as a common
Galoer and Executioner in a City or Kingdom; the Apostles as the Magistrates
and Governors, (as was said before,) sitting upon thrones to judge and pass
sentence on men: either by giving the Holy Ghost to those who sincerely
believed; or by delivering those to be tormented and set on the rack by this
Evil spirit, who blasphemed the Christian Religion. There was then no other
power in the Church to correct and punish them for so high a crime; and this
being done by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, (as you read 1 Cor. v. 4.)
was a notable testimony of the SPIRIT to the truth of Christianity, and bad all
men beware how they spoke evil of this holy Doctrine: especially of this
fundamental part of it, that the Lord Jesus will give us everlasting life, and
raise us up at the last day. The terrible execution which they saw done upon
those who subverted this foundation of all piety, was a great means to confirm
all Christian people in the faith: and to make them reverence those who had
this mighty power, either to give men ease, or to torment them; to restore men
to life, or to strike them dead; to give them, as was said before, the gifts of
the Holy Ghost, or to put them into the possession of the Devil.

There is a great deal of difference, it is observed by Tertullian L. de
Pudicitia, c. xiii.
, between an Angel of Satan sent to buffet a man; and being delivered up, or
put into the possession of Satan himself. To the former St. Paul himself was,
by the Divine permission, obnoxious for his exercise. 2 Cor. xii. 7. The latter
was the punishment of blasphemers, and other horrid offenders, for their cure.
But both served to give a testimony to our Savior, and to settle the hope of
immortal Life. For by the Angel of Satan which buffeted, that is, disgraced
and vexed St. Paul, a great many ancient Writers S. Chrysostom. Theodorer.
Photius apud Oecumen. Ambros. Theophylact.
understand those troubles and sore afflictions, all sorts of injuries and
reproaches which infidels and wicked men, by the instinct of some of the
Devil's agents, tormented the Apostle withal. Alexander the Coppersmith,
(says St. Chrysostom,) who did St. Paul so much mischief, Hymeneus and
Philetus, all those that set themselves against the Gospel, cast him into
prison, beat him, drove him out of their cities, were Ministers of Satan,
(...), because they did Satan's business: who by such instruments labored all
he could to dishearten the Apostles, and hinder the free course of the Gospel.
Here now appeared the mighty power of Christ, which rested, as the Apostle
speaks, or took up its dwelling in them. 2 Cor. xii. 9. They were never so
strong as when they were thus afflicted. Then they mightily prevailed, and
advanced the Kingdom of Christ, by whose powerful grace they endured all
hardships and distresses courageously: and demonstrated they had a strong and
immovable hope of being with him in that blessed place, unto which St. Paul was
rapt just before this Messenger of Satan, as we render it, raised such a
terrible storm of persecution against him. By that glorious sight he was
fortified against it; and, standing as firm as a rock himself, confirmed others
in that faith, which made him so invincible, that he gloried and took pleasure
in all those infirmities, and reproaches, and necessities, and persecutions,
and distresses, which that Angel of Satan stirred up against him: ver. 9, 10.
That was all the Devil got by his ill usage of him, which only gave the
Apostle matter of glory. For when our Savior pleased not to grant his desire
of having this Angel removed, but only told him his grace should be sufficient
for him; immediately he adds, that he would gladly glory more then ever in his
afflictions. Which plainly shows, both what he meant by that Angel of Satan;
and how much hereby the Christian Religion was promoted, and the Souls of
believers strengthened in the faith. They might easily believe he had been in
the third heavens, when they saw him so much superior to all the power on
earth, and the powers of the air too; who conspired to beat him down and
oppress him. All the art in the world could not so declare the (...) the
unutterable words St. Paul heard, (which the impious Cainites and Gnostics
Epiphan. Haeres. xxxviii.
, in a Book of theirs called (...), concerning St. Paul's ascent, pretended to
relate,) as this inexpressible power of Christ residing in him, and supporting
him under the greatest miseries; which declared those words remained still
imprinted in his Mind.

And that other power of Christ, whereby the Apostle delivered up high
offenders to Satan, (that he might inflict plagues and diseases or aches and
pains on their bodies,) as evidently showed what a great Minister he was in
Christ's Kingdom; and how credible the Doctrine was which he preached to them.
For he was ready to revenge all disobedience with remarkable punishments; and
alleges this power as a proof of his authority, in the next Chapter, 2 Cor.
xiii. 2, 3, 4. If I come again, I will not spare, since you seek a proof of
Christ speaking in me. He is not weak indeed toward you, but is mighty in you:
(having given by me exceeding great demonstrations of his power and my
Apostleship, xii. 12.) Yet since you are not convinced, it seems, by what you
have seen already, and desire a farther proof that Christ speaks in me, you
shall have it; I will not spare you; that is, I will punish you, and make you
know it to your cost. For though Christ was crucified through weakness, ( i. e.
according to his mortal condition which he assumed for our sake,) yet he lives
by the power of God, which raised him from the dead, and gave him all power in
heaven and earth. You ought not therefore to contemn one because he is weak, i.
e. afflicted, as you are apt to do me; for Christ went this way to glory: and
though we also are weak in, or with, him, i. e. suffer for his sake, which is
no more then he did; we shall live with him by the power of God toward you;
that is, make you feel, that as he is alive, ( i. e. mighty and strong now that
he is raised from the dead,) so are we also by the power of God, which we shall
make use of for chastising your insolence. Which plainly shows, that these
Apostolical censures had most mighty effects; which demonstrated Christ was
alive, and wrought most powerfully in these his Ministers. By whom as he gave
miraculous gifts, so he miraculously punished offenders; and never more
terribly then when they were in such a weak (that is, afflicted) condition,
that it tempted some people to contemn them. Then they showed their power, and
made it appear that, as he, who was crucified, lived; so did they, who were
persecuted and despised: being armed with divine weapons or engines, which were
mighty through God to batter down the strongest holds; subverting the pitiful
reasonings of such as Hymeneus and Philetus, and making every proud conceit
stoop, which advanced it self against the Christian Doctrine. 2 Cor. x. 4, 5.
This they did by the power I am speaking of, which baffled all opposers, and
made them crouch as so many captives to these Ministers of Jesus Christ. Who in
their external conditino were mean, and exposed to the scorn and contempt of
all the world; but so mighty and great by this authority, that the Apostle
says, (ver. 8.) it had not been vanity, if he had boasted of it more then he
did. For this Apostolical Rod, as he calls it 1 Cor. iv. 21 Vid. S.
Chrysostom. in loc.
. was like the rod of God in the hand of Moses. It did miraculous things by
inflicting terrible punishments, for which no cause but his heavy censure
appeared, on those who contradicted and blasphemed: and was as sensible a sign
of the presence of God in the Church, as the things which the rod of Moses did
were of his presence with the ancient Israelites. Great fear came upon the
whole Church, and upon as many as heard these things, says St. Luke, ( Act. v.
11.) when he relates how the other great Apostle by this rod struck Ananias and
Sapphira dead.

For hereby they learnt two things, Encom. (...).
says Asterius: both that our Savior was God; and that the teacher of his
laws had Angels attending on him, who were ready to execute his pleasure. He
would have the lame man walk, and presently that grace came. He thought good to
punish these sacrilegious persons, and the punishment in an instant was
inflicted. These things were sufficient to astonish the most stony hearts; and
to persuade them firmly (...), that they were not words of deceit which the
Apostle spoke, but that God was certainly with him, and that the mystery which
he preached was true and holy.

O the wonderful power of our Lord Christ, to whom all things in heaven and in
earth and under the earth do bow and obey! whose Ministers had so large an
Authority, that Angels were ready to wait upon their word! Great is his power,
which by such weak instruments brought such mighty things to pass. His
Apostles, say the Gentiles, S. Chrysostom. Hom. iii. in 1 Corinthians.
were men of no account, mean fishermen and such like rustic people. True; and
we add moreover, that they were unlearned, illiterate, poor, vile, ignorant
and despicable. But this is no disparagement to them; it is their glory and
peculiar praise, that such men as these appeared more illustrious then the
whole World. For these idiots, these rusticks, these illiterate men, were too
hard for the wise, and overcame the mighty, and persuaded the rich and great to
submit to their authority. Great therefore was the power of the Cross; for
these things were not done by any humane strength. Consider a little. A
fisherman, a tent-maker, a publican, an obscure illiterate man coming from
Palestine, a far distant country, encounter with the Philosophers at their own
doors, with the Rhetoricians, with the ablest speakers, and in a short time put
them all down: though infinite dangers opposed them, and nature fought against
them, and length of time and old customs mightily resisted them, and Demons
also armed themselves, and the Devil mustered up his forces, and moved all
things; Kings, Rulers, People, Nations, Cities, Barbarians, Grecians,
Philosophers, Rhetoricians, Sophisters, Orators, Laws, Judgment-seats, all
manner of Punishments, a thousand sorts of deaths. But all these were no more
able to stand before the breath of these poor Fishermen, then the small Dust
before the blast of powerful Winds.

How came it about that the weak thus overcame the strong? that twelve naked
men not only encountered, but vanquished those that were so well armed? If you
should see twelve men unskilled in warlike affairs, and not only unarmed, but
weak in body, attack an infinite host of well-disciplin'd and well-appointed
soldiers, and, receiving a thousand darts, should not be wounded, nor have any
harm, but should take some of their opposers prisoners, and kill others, and
disperse all; would any one think this was done by humane means? And yet the
trophee's of the Apostles are far more admirable. For it is not so strange for
a naked man not to be wounded, as for an obscure; an illiterate person, a
fisherman, to baffle so much wit and eloquence: and not to be hindered in their
preaching, neither by their own small number and poverty, nor by the dangers
they met withal, nor by the prepossession of custom, nor by the austerity of
the things they commanded, nor by daily deaths, nor by the multitude of those
that were in error, nor by the dignity of those that miss-led them.

Who would not admire that mouth of St. Id. Homil. ult. in Ep. ad Roman.
Paul by which Christ was preached; and a light broke forth more amazing then
lightning, and a voice more terrible, even to Devils, then any clap of thunder?
This voice brought them bound like slaves, this purged the world, this cured
diseases, and threw out wickedness, and introduced the truth. What good was
there which was not done by that mouth of his? It drove away devils, it
unloosed sins, it stopped the mouth of tyrants, it silenced the tongues of
Philosophers, it brought the world near to God, it persuaded Barbarians to
Christian wisdom, it set all things in order on earth, and had a power also
in heaven; binding whom it would, and loosing there, according to the power
given him. As a lion let loose among a company of foxes, so did he fall upon
the societies of Demons and Philosophers: and like a thunderbolt struck
through all the armies of the Devil; who was so afraid of him, that he
trembled at his shadow, and ran away if he did but hear his voice. He delivered
the incestuous Corinthian to him, being far distant from the place; and again
he snatched him out of his hands, being perfectly acquainted with his devices.
And in like manner he taught others by the same severity, not to blaspheme.

But let us not content our selves merely to admire him; let us not only be
astonished at him: let us imitate and follow him. What though we cannot do such
miracles as the Apostles did? and there is no hunger and other miseries to be
endured? (the times being peaceable and quiet, God be blessed:) yet there is
their piety and the holiness of their life to be transcribed, which was no less
admirable. And this is the noblest conflict; this is the syllogism which cannot
be contradicted; this by our Works. Should we discourse never so excellently,
but live no better then others; we gain nothing. For unbelievers do not mind
what we say, but what we do; saying, Do thou first of all follow thine own
words, and then persuade others. For if thou tellest us of millions of good
things in the other world, but art so intent upon the things of this, as if
there were no other; we believe thy works rather then thy words. For when we
see thee greedy to snatch other men's goods, bitterly bewailing thy friends
deceased, and in many other things offending, how shall we believe thee that
there is a Resurrection? Thus unbelievers are hindered from being Christians.

And therefore having seen how glorious our Savior is, Id. Homil. xii. in
Johan.
being instructed in his Religion, and made partakers of so great a gift, let
us lead a life agreeable to our principles; that so we may enjoy those good
things which Christ has promised. For He therefore appeared, not only that
his Disciples might behold his glory in this world, as they say they did, (i.
Joh. 14.) but also in the world to come: For, I will, says he, that where I
am, they may be, and see my glory. And if he appeared so illustriously here,
what shall we say of his glory there? O happy, thrice happy they, more happy
then can be expressed, who shall be thought worthy of that glory! Which if we
should be so unhappy as not to see, better had it been for us, if we never had
been born. To what purpose do we live and breath; what are we, if we miss of
that Light? if we may not be permitted then to see our Lord and Master? If
those who enjoy not the light of the Sun, lead a life more bitter then death;
how miserable will their condition be who are deprived of that light? This loss
will be punishment sufficient: though this is not all they must expect. For
being banished from this Light, they shall not only be cast into outer
darkness; but there burn perpetually, and miserably consume, and gnash their
teeth, and suffer a thousand other miseries.

Let us awake therefore, let us look about us, let us use our utmost
endeavors, that we may enjoy the happiness Christ designs for us; and be far
remote from the river of fire, which runs with great noise before the dreadful
tribunal. Into that if we fall, there is no redemption. And therefore let us
purify our life, let us make it bright and shining; so that we may have
boldness of access to the blessed sight of our Lord, and obtain the promised
good things, through the grace and loving kindness of Christ Jesus; by whom and
with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory world without end. Amen.

CHAP. XIII. The Use we are to make of this RECORD.
I.
AND in the very entrance of so pious a design, to improve the great grace
which Heaven has bestowed on us, it becomes us to stand amazed at the
transcendent love of God our Savior: who not contenting himself to have
thoughts and intentions of good toward such wretched Sinners, has been
pleased to make us a gracious promise that he will bless us; and to acquaint
us, by no less Messenger then his own Eternal Son appearing from heaven in our
flesh, with the secret purposes of his heart to give us the greatest
Blessedness. There is nothing so astonishing as this; whether we consider the
incomparable excellency of the Good he designs us, or the favor he has done
us in revealing it to us, or the glory of that person by whom he reveals it, or
the certainty we have that this is a true report, that God has given to us
Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son.

O most joyful news! shall we poor mortals live for ever? and live there
where Jesus is? May such as we presume to expect such glory, honor and
immortality, as he has brought to light by his Gospel? O wonderful love!
which might have concealed its kindness, and yet eternally obliged us. It had
been enough, if we had got to heaven, without knowing beforehand we should be
so happy. Why should such offenders enjoy the comfort of hoping for so great a
Happiness, while we are here in these earthly prisons? Might we not have been
well contented, to creep upon our hands and knees to so high a glory? Had we
not been fairly used, if with our heads hanging down, and not daring so much as
to lift up our eyes to that holy place, we had traveled through this world,
and at last found our selves, beyond all expectation, at rest with Jesus? But,
O the love of God, which has bid us hold up our heads, and look above, and
behold our Lord in his glory, and hope well, yea be confident, that he has
seated us together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus! We are indebted to him
beyond all thoughts, for promising us so freely, out of his exceeding great
love, and giving us so evident a right to such glory and honor, as our own
unworthiness and guilt forbad us to promise our selves, or to have the least
expectance of.

And what is it that he has so freely promised? To look into that high and
holy place where he is? at some distance to behold his glory? to have an Angel
come sometimes to visit us, and bring us some message from him in some of the
suburbs of heaven? And a great favor too, I assure you. A very singular
kindness it ought to be esteemed, if we vile wretches may be permitted to be so
happy, as but to come near the gates of the celestial palace. Well would it be
for us, to come but within the sound of those melodious hymns which the
heavenly host continually sing: or to live but in some of the most remote
corners of that heavenly country; and there enjoy, for many Ages, the sweet
society of some good Friends, in pure love and innocent conversation. But hark;
He tells us we shall live with him, and see his Glory, and be with his Son
Jesus, and reign together with him in his heavenly Kingdom, and be equal to
the Angels, and enter into the joy of our Lord, and continue with him for ever.
What manner of love is this, that we should be called the Sons of God; and
being like him, behold him as he is! Where is our love? whither is it run?
after what is it wandered, if it be not here ready to acknowledge this kindness,
in making us such great, such exceeding great and precious promises? Ah me!
that we should have lost our selves so much, as not to find our affections
forward to meet such a love as this, with the highest transport of joy! When
our hearts so abound with love, that we have enough for every thing in the
world; when there is not a pretty bird or a dog but we have some to spare for
it; have we none at all for our Lord God, for LOVE it self, for that Love which
has so loved us?

Ah blessed Jesus! that thou should be pleased to do so much for those,
whose hearts thou knew to be so cold, that they would scarce be warmed with
the brightest beams of thine inconceivable love! How shall we excuse our selves
to thee, that our Souls are still so frozen, after thou, the Sun of
righteousness, have shone so long so powerfully upon us?

Let us consider, are we fed with a mere fancy? do we live only in a pleasing
dream? or are we left in doubt of the truth of these things, and hang in such
suspense, that we know not what to think of them? No such matter neither. He
has completed his kindness, by giving us a Certainty and full assurance of
those things which are revealed to us in his Gospel. Here are WITNESSES of the
highest quality to attest the truth of his Love: by whom we know that the Son
of God is come, and has given us an understanding that we may know him that is
true, etc. This is the true God, and Eternal Life. And as if one or two were
not sufficient, here are six Witnesses come to tell us how he loves us. Heaven
and Earth conspire to draw our hearts to be love of him; who has not only
given us exceeding great Promises, but exceeding great Certainty that they are
all true and faithful. He knew very well they would seem incredible; being as
much beyond all our thoughts, as they are beyond our deserts. And therefore he
took care to give us such evidences of their truth, as should not merely work
in us belief, but a full assurance of faith. By Himself, by his Word, by the
Holy Ghost, by the Water, the Blood, and the Spirit, we are so many ways rooted
and grounded in this persuasion, that we cannot but see we are doubly beholden
to his infinite bounty: first, for such exceeding great and precious promises;
and then, for as wonderfully great confirmation of them, to our unspeakable and
endless comfort.

And are we not yet apprehensive of his love? Does it not yet feelingly touch
our hearts; but leave us indifferent whether we will love him or not? Ah fools
that we are! who must be sent to school to those brute creatures mentioned
before, to teach us better nature and better manners. How do our very dogs (as
I have said elsewhere) follow us and fawn upon us for a crust of bread? how
close do they keep to us? how ready are they to defend us and our houses, and
all belonging to us? Even when we are dead, some of them have been known not to
forsake their Masters for any other. And what is all this service for, but such
things as we have no use of, or make no account of our selves? O blessed God!
who can endure to stay so long as to hear this applied to himself, before he
learn to love thee? I see whither this lesson tends: I behold already how
shameful it is to dispose of my heart away from thee. Thou have given us thine
own dear Son: What a gift! how great a boon! Thou have promised us eternal
life: How invaluable a possession! Thou have given us good hopes and strong
consolation: What an excessive kindness! Shall we not devote our selves to
thee? shall we not forsake all, and follow thee, whithersoever thou will lead
us? We cannot refuse: we must resolve to surrender our hearts entirely to thee.
We should be worse then Dogs, should we not with all our minds and soul and
strength love that transcendent goodness, which by the most miraculous
demonstrations has persuaded us, that we shall live eternally with himself,
and enjoy the everlasting fruits of his infinite love. This is the most
comfortable news that could possibly arrive from heaven. Should we have had our
own wishes, nothing greater, nothing so great could have entered into our hearts
desire. This sweetens the bitterness of all afflictions, and this heightens all
our joys; when we hope the one shall shortly, but the other shall never end.

Plutarch deservedly blamed Epicurus of great incogitancy, who, making all
happiness consist in Pleasure, denied the state of the future life: which it is
the greatest pleasure to hope for and expect. Nothing casts such a damp upon
all a man's enjoyments here, as the cold thoughts of an endless death seizing
on his heart. He cannot but sigh to think that shortly there must be a final
period put to all his delights. As on the contrary, this gives life and spirit
to them, if he can think they shall be improved and perpetuated for ever. And
therefore how much do we owe to the love of God, who has given us assurance
even of the Resurrection of our body to an immortal life; and told us, it
shall be so far from being lost by going to the grave, that, like Seed, it
shall rise again quite another thing then it was when cast into the ground? no
longer weak, contemptible, corruptible and mortal; but powerful, spiritual,
glorious, incorruptible and immortal: and consequently capable of purer, more
spritely, and more lasting pleasures then now it injoys.

O how much more comfortable is this opinion, then that of the Epicurean, (as
Tertullian excellently speaks De Testimonio animae c. iv.
,) which vindicates thee from destruction! How much more seemly then the
Pythagorean, which does not send thee into beasts! How much more full then the
Platonicall, which restores even thy body as a new dowry to thee! O taste and
see how gracious the Lord is. Bonum Deum novimus; solum optimum a Christo ejus
addiscimus Id. De Resurrectione carnis cap. ix.
: We knew God was good before; but so most excellently good, we learn only
from his Christ; who bidding us, next him, to love our Neighbor, does that
himself which he expects from us. He loves even our body, which is so many ways
of kin to him.

II.
But that we may understand how much we are indebted to him, and thereby become
more sensible of his wonderful Love, give me leave to show, as briefly as I
can, how little the world knew, before our Savior came, of this Happiness
which he has revealed to us: and how much his loving kindness has abounded
toward us more then to his more peculiar people in former days; whose love
notwithstanding he expected should be entirely devoted to him and his service.

It would be very easy to show, were there not danger of making this Treatise
too big, how weak all the reasonings of the Philosophers were about this
matter; and in what uncertainty they left men after they had written whole
Books on this Subject. Among all those who endeavored by humane argumentations
to find it, there were but few (as St. Augustine truly observes L. xiii. De
Trinitate c. 8. and 9.
) that could, and they but scarcely, arrive at the knowledge of the immortality
of the Soul; though men of great wit, and abounding with leisure, and
instructed in the most subtle pieces of learning. And when they had resolved,
says he, that it was immortal, they could not find a settled blessed life for
it. But many of them thought it returned again to the miseries of this life.
And they who blushed at this, and placed the Soul in immortal blessedness
without the body, destroyed their own opinion by the revolution which they
fansied of all things back again, after a certain period of time, to that
condition wherein they were before: As he shows more fully in his Book of the
City of God Lib. xii. cap. 20.
. There is nothing truer then that of St. Paul, ii. Ephesians. 12. that they had no
hope, viz. of the Resurrection and eternal Life. For, to say nothing of the
Resurrection, (to which they were perfect strangers,) some of the greatest
Philosophers denied the immortality of the Soul. Socrates himself, the very
best of them, was not confident of it; but left it in doubt as a thing
uncertain. Nor was Aristotle more assured; no nor Tully and Seneca: who could
not by all their reasonings attain a sure and well-grounded hope of it; but
were forced to confess, after all their disquisitions about the Soul, that,
(...) Aristoteles L. i. de A^ma c. 1.
, it is one of the most difficult things in the world to receive any belief or
certain knowledge about it. All that they said was conjecture, and very weak,
very uncertain, and sometimes very extravagant. Which shows in what a mist they
were, without the light of Divine revelation, which we by God's great grace
enjoy.

They themselves seem to be sensible sometimes of the want of an heavenly
Guide, to conduct them with more certainty to the knowledge of that happiness
which they desired; as any one may see in Plato's Dialogue in Phaedone.
on this Subject. Where Socrates his arguments for immortality, just before he
was going to die, have so little force to conclude any thing certainly; that
Simias had reason to say, it is either (...), impossible, or a thing extreme
difficult, to know any thing clearly of it in this life. But a man must choose
the best reasons he can find, which are least liable to exception; and he must
venture to embark himself in these, and sail by them through this life: unless
he can be so happy as to be carried safer and with less hazard (...), p. 85.
, in a surer steadfast chariot, of some divine word, that is, or revelation.
Which is a plain acknowledgement that this only can give us perfect security,
and satisfy us so as to take away all doubt. And this God has granted to us
Christians, to whom he has spoken in these last days by his Son, and given
this Record of him, that Eternal Life is in him. And therefore Lactantius
might truly say L. vii. Divin Instit. c. 7.
Immortales esse animas Pherecydes and Plato disputaverunt; haec vero propria
est in nostra Religione doctrina. Pherecydes and Plato disputed that Souls were
immortal; but it is our Religion only that teaches this as its proper lesson.
For to know what is true is in no man's power, but his that is taught of God.
And their arguments, he shows in the next Chapter, were so weak, and so much
there was to be said with equal probability on the other side, that Tully,
after all things weighed on both parts, concluded he knew not what to say but
this, Harum igitur sententiarum, quae vera sit, Deus aliquis viderit; Which of
these opinions therefore are true, God only knows. And in another place, Both
these opinions have learned Authors; but which is certain, cannot be divined.
In the next Chapter also but one he brings another such uncertain resolution of
the same great man; who says, We should go confidently to death, in which we
know there is either the greatest good, or no evil.

But what this Summum bonum greatest good was, they were still to seek. When
they had supposed their Souls to survive their bodies, they had no certain
knowledge what the happiness of their future state should be; but miserably
wandered in the darkness of their imaginations, as their several fancies led
them. We need only take the fairest descriptions they have left us of the
(...), country of the pious, to satisfy us how little men could know, when they
had only their own thoughts to direct them, of the state of the other World.
Gobryas, in a Dialogue ascribed to Plato in Axiocho, p. 371. edit. Serran.
, says, that it is a region where the seasons of the year abound with all
manner of fruit, the fountains gush out with the purest water, the fields are
clothed with all kind of flowers, and where there are Schools of Philosophers,
Theaters of Poets, Music and Dancing-schools in perfection; together with the
neatest Banquets, all sorts of Dainties springing up of themselves, a sweet
easy life without any mixture of sorrow or grief: for neither the winter nor
summer are there in excess, but a welltempered air illustrated by the softest
beams of the Sun: and there they that are initiated in the Mysteries have the
preeminence, and rightly perform the holy offices. Which is not much different
from the Paradise which the disciples of Mahomet expect; who cannot raise their
minds higher then the things they best fansy in this World. Which makes them,
being forbidden by their Law the drinking of wine here, to reckon this among
the pleasures of the other world, that they shall have liberty there to drink
as much as ever they will, and be in no danger of intoxication. For the wine of
Paradise, the Alcoran Miscell. D. Po^ock. c. vii. p. 300.
says, does not make men drunk, as ours does; but passes away all by sweat,
which smells as sweet as any Musk.

Which I mention for no other end, but to show how stupidly blind men are, when
they are left to walk in the ways of their own hearts: and how deeply we are
indebted to the exceeding great love of God; who, when he saw the minds of men
too weak to comprehend such things, and that they stood in need of a Divine
Teacher, (as Clemens Alexandrinus L. v. Stromat. p. 548.
speaks,) was pleased, in his infinite condescension, to send one from the very
place, his own dear Son from heaven, (...), both the Teacher and the Giver of
that possession of Good; the secret holy token of that great Providence, which
took care, when men had lost themselves in vain imaginations, to lead them
right by Him, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Who has made that
certain, which was dubious; and that plain to every body, which was the hardest
thing in the world to know before: and bids us lift up our Minds to God
himself, with whom he dwells, and to whom he will bring us; that we may rejoice
in his Love for ever, in the happy company of Angels and good men, and in that
place of which the Divine Majesty is the glory.

And it was but needful, we shall see, he should send us such a Conductour;
when we consider how little even they who were instructed by God himself
understood of this Eternal Life, before our Savior appeared.

It cannot be denied that the greatest part of the Jews, before our Savior's
coming, did expect the Resurrection of the dead, and Eternal Life. v. Joh. 39.
xxvi. Act. 6, 7. And their pious Ancestors before the giving of the Law, (xi.
Heb. 9, 10, 16, 26.) as well as after, (ver. 35.) sought an heavenly country,
and had respect to the recompense of reward, and refused deliverance from their
tortures, that they might obtain a better resurrection. And their Writers in
all Ages have spoken much of the World to come; whereby they understand
sometimes the days of the Messiah, and sometimes the future State which we
expect after death. All this is true; but it is as certain,

I. That they had no such express promises of these things, either in the Law
or in the Prophets, as we have in the holy Gospel. Where do you read one such
saying as this (which we frequently meet withal) in the whole Law of Moses;
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes on me has everlasting life.
I am the living bread, which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world? vi. Joh. 47, 51. Promises indeed
of the good things of this world are very rife, to those that diligently keep
God's commandments; to whom he says, I will give you the rain of your land in
due season, that thou may gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil.
And I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou may eat and be
full. xi. Deuteronomy. 14, 15. Which is repeated again more largely, xxviii. Deuteronomy. 2,
3, etc. And all these blessings shall come upon thee and overtake thee, if thou
shall hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God. Blessed shall thou be in the
city, and blessed shall thou be in the field. Blessed shall thou be in the
fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, etc. Blessed shall be thy
basket and thy store. Blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed
shall thou be when thou go out. But in what place do you find any such
promises as these: BLESSED are the poor in Spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven: Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted: Blessed are
the pure in heart; for they shall SEE GOD: Blessed are they that do his
commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life: with such like? of
which the New Testament is so full, that a little time will not serve to number
them all. v. Matt. 3, 4, 8. xxii. Rev. 14.

Alas! when their Writers undertake to prove the life of the World to come out
of their Law, it is out of places so far from the purpose, that this endeavor
is a plain confession they have no express promises of it, but are fain to
squeez the words to speak that which is not in them. Shall I give a few
instances of this truth? Joseph Albo, a famous man of that Nation, and of good
reason, from that place, xiv. Deuteronomy. 1, 2. Ye are the children of the Lord your
God; ye shall not cut your selves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for
the dead: For thou art an holy people, etc. thus fetches about his discourse.
Behold, one would think the quite contrary should be concluded. They should the
rather mourn and grieve, because they are the children of God: as the Son of a
King is more to be lamented when he is dead, then the child of an ordinary man.
But the true interpretation is, as if he had said, Seeing the most Blessed God
is holy, and his Ministers are holy; thou also art an holy people. All things
are joined to that which is like themselves: and therefore without doubt your
Soul is joined to the Angels, because it is holy as they are holy: for which
cause you must not cut your selves for the dead, nor mourn more then is fit.
And this teaches us, that there is a blessed immortality for the Soul after
death. Such is his conclusion from those words: which rather teach us, how hard
it is to find anything in the Law to that purpose; and how much we are bound to
magnify the love of God for the revelation of his blessed will in the Gospel.
He argues something better when he gathers it from those words, xxxii. Deuteronomy.
47. where he says there is a twofold happiness or reward spoken of; one
spiritual, [ it is your life,] the other corporal, because it is said,
through this ye shall prolong your days. And yet, so weak and infirm are their
reasonings that, at another turn they shall prove Eternal Life from this
promise of prolonging their days; though it be expressly added, in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee. For there being the letter Jod wanting in
the word (...) in the Fifth Commandment, where God promises to prolong their
days, they conclude that there is no prolongation of days in this world, but it
belongs to the next. Nor can he find any clearer place to prove the
Resurrection of the body, then that in the same book, xxxii. Deuteronomy. 39. I kill,
and I make alive. Nay, our Lord himself alleges a place for it, which was but
dark till he illustrated it, and proved, by consequence, not an express
promise, that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob should be rewarded by him who called
himself their God.

But we cannot, I think, learn this truth better from any then from Philo, a
man much excelling all the modern Jews; who could find no places to this
purpose plainer then those cited by Albo; some of which he alleges, and adds
others in his Book (...).
no less weak and obscure. Such as that iv. Deuteronomy. 4. But ye that did cleave
unto the Lord, are alive every one of you this day. They that were good, says
he, Moses only acknowledges for the living; and he witnesses to them
immortality, by adding, ye are alive (...) this day. For this to day is the
(...), world without end. If he could have met with any plain promises, who can
think that a man of his parts would have used such sancifull proofs as this?
And yet this place I find R. Gamaliel most relied on, when after a long dispute
with the Sadducees, who would not be satisfied that the Resurrection could be
proved out of the Law, he at last referred them hither Manasseh ben Israel L.
i. de Resur. c. 1.
. But he explained the words thus, As ye are all alive to day, so you shall
live also in the world to come. For he supposes some of those whom Moses speaks
of were dead, and yet the text says they were alive; because their union with
God, by cleaving to him, made them immortal. Which is not much better then the
next proof which follows in Philo, who fancies that in x. Lev. 2. where it is
said, Nadab and Abihu died before the Lord, (...), the tokens of their
immortality is proclaimed. And that to say, they died before the Lord, is as
good as to say, they lived; for it was not lawful to bring a dead thing into
the presence of God. And this, says he, is that which the Lord presently adds,
I will be sanctified of those who draw nigh to me: for the dead, as it is in
the Psalms, praise not God; (...), it is the work of the living. Just thus he
proves in another Book (...), etc. p. 164.
, with the like force, that Abel lives (...) an happy life in God, because the
Scripture says the voice of his blood cried out against his wicked Brother.
Now (...); how could he be able to speak, if he was not in being? An argument
which rather proves, Moses spoke nothing clearly of these things; for if he
had, this Writer would not have contented himself with such slender inferences.
Which are as weak as that of R. Johanan, who proves the Resurrection from that
in xviii. Number. 28. where they are commanded to give the Lord's Terumah to Aaron
the Priest. Who did not live, says he, to enter into the land of Canaan; and
therefore must be raised again to receive the portion of the Lord in that good
Land. And yet this is as strong an argument as that of R. Solomon, who
concludes it merely from the two Jods in the word (...) ii. Genesis 7. where it is
said, the LORD God formed man, etc. This signifies, says he, that man must be
formed twice; once in this world, and once in the next at the resurrection of
the dead. There are more of this nature in the Gemara of the Sanhedrin Vid.
Coch. c. xi. n. 2, 3, 9.
, which I shall not trouble the Reader withal: but only note, that the
weakness and uncertainty of these proofs make the Samaritans brag of the
advantage they have of the Jews; because they say, in their Pentateuch (which
therefore they would have to be the true copy of Moses his Law) there is an
express text to prove the Resurrection and the Life to come, which the Jews
cannot show. So desirous were all that had the possession of these Books, to
find these Truths plainly recorded there; which even those words, which the
Samaritans pretend to be a part of their Law, do not contain. All is dark and
doubtful, after their best glosses and inferences; and we can conclude nothing
certainly, but that God did not reveal these things to Moses, who was sent to
make a covenant of another nature with the Israelites. Whence it was that they
were so much disputed by a great party among the Jews, as every body knows; the
Pharisees affirming, and the Sadducees denying. Which left the minds of the
multitude in much doubt, while they saw these two Schools so resolutely
opposing one the other.

And if we pass from the Law to the Prophets, especially to the Prophet Isaiah,
who (as Abarbinel says in his Preface to him) speaks more clearly of the
Resurrection of the dead then all the rest, we shall not receive much greater
satisfaction. For the places from whence it is deduced do so evidently belong
to another sense in the first intention of the Prophet, that it forces us to
confess this Doctrine was but obscurely delivered in those days; and that we
could not have been certain of any other sense, without the benefit of a
Revelation. The proofs which Abarbinel brings are, xviii. Isa. 4. xxiv. 18, 21,
22, 23. xxv. 8. xxvi. 19. lxvi. 8, 14, 24. and such like: which when we have
seriously examined, it will excite us with the greater admiration to
acknowledge the infinite grace of God toward us; who do not see these things
through shadows, nor have need of long discourses to extract this heavenly
Doctrine out of our Books, but in express terms read, So God loved the world,
that he gave his onely-begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. iii. Joh. 16. And this is the promise that
he has promised us, even ETERNAL LIFE. 1 Epist. ii. 25. What is there in all
the Prophets like to this, I am the resurrection and the life: he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: And whosoever lives,
and believes in me, shall never die? xi. Joh. 25, 26. The clearest place is
that in Daniel, xii. 2. And yet, if we read the words going before, (not to
say Mr. Brightman Ib. and in xx. Rev. 11.
, Grotius, and other learned Writers upon the place,) we shall not be able to
deny that he is speaking of a particular Resurrection, from exceeding great
oppression, to a long state of prosperity. Which typified indeed in a very
admirable manner (as Ezekiel's dry bones and many other things did) the state
of the General Resurrection and eternal Blessedness; but did not plainly
reveal it. This was reserved for our Lord Jesus Christ, who brought life and
immortality to light by his Gospel; and openly proclaimed, that ALL (not MANY,
as it is in Daniel,) that are in their graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth: they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they
that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. v. Joh. 28, 29.

II. But we shall see more reason to bless the infinite goodness of God toward
us Christians, if we observe, as we may easily from what has been said, that
as they wanted the express promises which we have; so what they understood of
the nature of this Felicity, by the light they enjoyed, was but very dull in
comparison with what is revealed to us. Who can see more even in their Books
then they could do themselves; and find out that by the light of the Cospell,
which was wrapped up in dark figures and clouds under the Law and the Prophets.
As they saw Christ in Isaar and in a Lunb; so they beheld Heaven under the
figure of Paradise, and in a Land flowing with milk and honey, and in the ^^oly
city, and the Temple of stone; the greatest glory whereof was, when it was
filled with the cloud. 1 King. viii. 10, etc. But now in the Church of the New
Testament there is no Temple, but the Lord God Almighty and the L^mb are the
Temple of it. xxi. Rev. 22. And he says not now, I will dwell in thick
darkness; but, as it follows there, ver. 23. the glory of God inlightens the
Church, and the Lamb is the Light thereof: who has made us with open fa^e to
behold his glory in the heavens; and given us full assurance that we shall be
changed into the same image, from glory to glory: 2 Cor. iii. 18. This he
published so clearly, that the dullest and most illiterate fouls saw there was
no Master comparable to him, who had the Words of ^^ernall life; and by his
Death, Resurrection and Ascension, opened to all believers the Kingdom of
heaven. That Is a word St. Austin confesses Tom. vi. L. xix. contra Faust. Man.
cap. ult.
he could not find in all the Old Scriptures; and St. Hierom says the same.
There are Testimonies there, says he, of Eternal life, whether plain or
obscure it matters not: (though the places he alleges would have been obscure,
if we had not been enlightened, before we read them, by the Gospel:) but this
Name of the KING DOM OF HEAVEN I can meet withal in no place: Hoc enim proprie
pertinet ad revelationem Novi Testamenti; For it properly belongs to the
Revelation of the New Testament. And it is a word, as the Author of the
Answers ad Orthodoxos teaches us, which does not simply siguifie the
Resurrection, (...) but the state of things after the Resurrection, when we
shall be so marvel ously changed, as to be fit companions for the Angels, and
reign with our Savior in his glory.

Of which things the Jews have now so little knowledge, that they expect only
to rise again to feast here upon earth with the M^ssiah whom they look for; and
after they have spent some years in the enjoyment of the good things of an
earthly Paradise, then they think their bodies shall die, and their Souls only
live for ever Vid. Jacch^ades in viii. Dan. 14. and L'Empereur ib.
Let any one that is able but read what Manasseh ben Israel has writ of the
Resurrection; and he will find it such poor stuff, that the best use that can
be made of it will be, to put our selves in mind how much we stand engaged to
the Divine love, for acquainting us so plainly with the Happiness he will give
us at the Resurrection of our bodies to an immortal life. Our Savior, indeed,
says they might have learnt better out of the Scriptures, then to imagine
there will be eating and drinking and marrying after the resurrection: but
there was none of their books could teach them that we should be companions of
Angels, and shine like the Sun, and see God, and be coheirs with Christ, and
such like things; which by the Gospel are now so clearly discovered to us,
that the most ignorant know more then the wisest that want this Revelation.

R. Tanchum (who would fain prove the life of the World to come from the words
of Abigail, who speaks of the binding David's Soul in the bundle of life, 1 Samuel xxv. 29 D. Pocock. Not. miscell. c. vi. p. 91.
.) observes, that this Mystery, which was a stranger to men's understandings in
other nations, and far remote from their thoughts, to the knowledge of which
none but very wise men came, by much labor and exercise, and after long
disquisitions and difficult reasonings, was known then among the Jews, and
manisest even to the Women. An argument, says he, that wisdom was much spread
in our Nation, and that, as Moses speaks, iv. Dent. 6. we are a wise and
understanding people. Which is far truer of the Disciples of the Lord Jesus;
among whom even the most simple are taught such things, as (whatsoever such a
wise woman as Abigail may be supposed to understand in ancient days) their
greatest Doctors have been so ignorant of since, that we see the words of
Isaiah xxix. 14. sulfilled in them, The Wisdom of their wise men shall perish,
and the und^rshanding of their ^^ndent men shall be hid. Where is the wise? (as
St. Paul triumphs over them, 1 Cor. i. 20, 27.) where is the S^^^^? where is
the disputer of this world? God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to
confound the wise. Made use (...), of such men as the World, for wa^^ of humane
learning, accounted no better (...) fools, to publish so clearly and with such
evidence the doctrine of Lternall Life; that it may justly make men of the
greatest repute for learning blush, who could not speak one wise word about it.

But suppose them all to have been endued with a clearer sight then indeed they
had of the Life to come; yet of the Blessedness which God intends for us there,
that of St. Paul (1 Cor. ii. 9.) will still be true; Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has
prepared for them that love him. There is a passage in the Prophet Isaiah very
like this, lxiv. 4. which the Jewish Doctors themselves expound, in the
mysticali sense, of the future life; and from thence St. Paul is supposed to
have borrowed these expressions. Though the very words ^^^mselves of St. Paul
being found in the Apocryphal Book of Elias, it is probable, as Grotius
thinks, that this was grown a common saying among the Rabbis; who had been
taught, by ancient tradition, to expect such things in the days of the Messiah,
as never any eye had seen, nor ear heard, nor had entered into any man's heart
to conceive. Which is verified in the whole Revelation of God's will in the
Gospel; especially in this part of it. No man had so much as a thought or a
desire of such things as God has done for us, and intends to do by our Lord
Jesus. That he should send from heaven his own Son, his onely-begotten Son,
begotten of him before all worlds, to be incarnate of a pure Virgin, to die for
our sins, that he might rise again to sit at God's right hand, where our Nature
shines far brighter then all the glorious host of heaven, are such things as
they had no imagination of who expected the coming of Christ. Much less did
they think of being so promoted by him in his heavenly Kingdom, that they
should at last arrive at the same glory; and this clod of earth should be
lifted up to the dwellings of Angels, and there be fashioned like unto the
glorious body of Christ himself. These are things, as St. Austin you heard said
before, which are proper to the revelation of the Gospel; wherein we read
this unheard of love so plainly, that every child may understand it. But
without this revelation, even they that have got the words sink into the
dullest and most gross apprehensions of the future State. The Mahometans use
these very words to express the felicity they expect in their Paradise; saying,
God has prepared for his servants such things as eye has not seen, nor the
ear heard, nor have come up into the heart of man D. Pocock. not. ad Gregor.
Abul. Pharaj. p. 292.
. But they mean only (as they themselves explain it) virgins with fairer and
larger eyes then ever they beheld in this world, and such like things which I
am ashamed to name: beyond which these blockish vicious Arabians were not able
to lift their minds. They are the words of Maimonides, upon this occasion, who
talks more rationally, I showed in the beginning of this Treatise, then many of
his Brethren: in whom we find conceptions of the state of the other life little
less sensual then these of Mahomet.

Blessed be God therefore, should we say, who has revealed these unseen,
unheard of, inconceivable things to his Apostles by his Spirit; and made us
understand what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of
his inheritance in the Saints. We can never thank him enough, who has
delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of
the Son of his leve. By whom we understand that flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God; but we shall be changed, and made spiritual and heavenly,
after the image of him who is the Lord from heaven.

III. And we are bound to the love of God above all other men in another regard
also; because he has given us such Records, such Witnesses of this Eternal
life; far greater then ever the World had seen or heard of before.

When men saw Abel, that first-fruit of righteousness, (as Theodoret calls
him,) hastily plucked by the hand of violence before it was ripe; and his
murtherous Brother Cain survive, and take root, and build cities; there was
great danger that men should be tempted to think it was in vain to serve God
faithfully, there being as yet no hope of the Resurrection to (...) mars Souls.
And therefore God was (...) for this reason, as (...).
Theodoret thin^^, to manslate Enoc^, a man whose play ^^^dingly pleased him,
to the othere world, de (...), that he might comfort the hearts of th^se who
resolutely opposed vice, and co^^^nded for virtue, in a wicked Age. And this
was apt to revive in all m^^s minds a belief of his Providence, and persuade
them that piety never went unrewarded; but that he who thus honored Enoch, had
taken care to recompense righteous Abel. Such was the grace of God to men
before the law. And afterward, when the Israelites were greatly degenerate, and
fallen into Idolatry, Elias their Prophet was carried in a chariot of fire by a
whirlwind into heaven. These things were mighty encouragements to good men, and
were apt to confirm all in the belief of a future life. But who is there whose
name stands upon record to testify that he saw Enoch snatched from this mortal
life, and taken up to God? And of Elias his transportation, what witness is
there more then one, till our Savior's time; when three of his Apostles beheld
him and Moses too (which was more then they knew of) appear in glory? Whereas
we have no ^^ss then Six Witnesses, three in Heaven and three on Earth, who
many ways testify to us that Jesus is gone into heaven, and (which is more) is
on the right hand of God, Angels and authorities and powers being made subject
unto him. 1 Pet. iii. 22. All his Apostles likewise saw him ascend thither, and
he has appeared to more then one of them since his supereminent exaltation.
What a vast difference has his goodness made between us and former times? They
beheld something of the life to come in Enoch; justorum translationem
praemonstrans, (as Irenaeus Lib. v. cap. 5.
speaks,) who foreshewed the translation of the just: but we see it clearly in
the Son of God, who has promised to take us up to himself. They saw a few
beams of this glory in the face of Moses, which shone on them when he came down
from the Mount: but we in the face of Jesus Christ; who, all the time he was
among men, shone in such illustrious works, that they beheld his glory, the
glory as of the onely-begotten of the Father; and after he ascended to heaven,
appeared several times from thence in a light above the brightness of the Sun
at midday. What a vast difference is there between our times and theirs?
(...). For faith then was in Shadows, (as St. Greg. Naz Orat. xx. p. 366.
. speaks of Enoch's translation,) and they had not the things themselves
clearly revealed to them; as we have by the grace of the Gospel: which, when
it appeared, was so bright and full of glory, that it scattered, nay consumed,
as the other Gregory Gregor. Nyssen. Hom. v. in Cantic. p. 642.
speaks, (...), all that duskish umbratick representation in types and figures;
and enlightened all places with the beams of that true light, of life and
immortality.

And more then this; there is not the least evidence, no syllable of any record
which testifies that any of these persons had life in themselves, to give to
their friends, or so much as help them forward to Eternal Life. No; nor do
they say that others who fear God shall have the same felicity to which they
were carried; though their very going thither put pious men in hope of being
happy with them in heaven. Whereas we have abundant testimony in so many
words, that Jesus has life in himself, and is the Resurrection and the Life;
that we shall live by him, and with him; that none shall perish who believe on
him, nor any be able to pluck them out of his hands; that He himself will raise
them up at the last day, and give unto them eternal life. v. Joh. 26. vi. 57.
x. 28. xi. 25. vi. 40, 44, 54.

Then indeed, in those old times, was the Infancy of the World; and being
little Children, (though they were heirs, yet) they differed not much from
Servants. They knew not what their Father intended for them, nor understood the
inheritance to which they were born: no more then a child does what the
enjoyments of a man are, till he come to that estate. Unto that growth we are
now arrived, who have the knowledge of God's grace in Christ Jesus. We are now
the Sons of God: and though it do not appear (as I said before) how we shall be
his Sons hereafter; yet this we know, that we shall be like him when he
appears; for we shall see him as he is. And therefore we cannot refrain from
crying out again, Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us.
Let us admire it, let us adore it; for never was there such love.

III.
But it is not sufficient only to admire this incomparably transcendent love;
which naturally excites in the hearts of those that consider it such an ardent
reciprocal affection, as leads them to an universal cheerful obedience to
God's will. That Is the proof our Savior justly expects of our unfeigned love
to him. He would have us, if we be truly sensible of the kindness he has done
us, not labor so much for the meat that perishes, as for the meat that
endures unto everlasting life, which he will give unto us. Take any pains,
that is, to be so happy as he designs to make us: which no man can refuse who
has once set his affections, not on things beneath, but on those which are
above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God. And this he may well
expect we will do, now that he has so clearly demonstrated where our
Happiness lies, and given us such assurance that he lives for ever to bring us
to it. This will move us, if any thing in the world can do it, to come when he
invites us, to take his yoke upon us, and stoop to his burden; so shall we
find rest to our Souls. This Eternal life, as the Divine Record tells us, is
only in the Son of God: part of the meaning of which words is, that only by
the Religion which our Lord Jesus has taught us is this great Good to be
obtained. This is testified to us by God as much as any thing else, that there
is no way to be happy but by his Son Jesus; who has shown us the only means
to obtain glory, honor and immortality, is by patient continuance in well
doing. True Virtue is the preparation for it, without which nothing is good for
us; neither health, nor riches, nor beauty, nor strength, nor power, no nor
immortality, (as Plato L. ii. de Legibus p. 661.
excellently discourses,) should we suppose it added to all these: but it is
best that an evil man (...), should live as little a while as may be.

Which demonstrates again the incomparable love of God, in revealing those
things to us which are so necessary for the securing and promoting our present
happiness in this World. Where, as we could not be safe without the belief of a
Life to come; so this alone is sufficient to make the whole World most happy,
if it were deeply planted in it. We are infinitely therefore indebted to the
Almighty goodness for making this so certain. For this World would be a place
full of nothing but confusion, disorder and mischief, were not the evil
inclinations of men overruled by a belief of something to follow in another
life. This restrains them from those outrages, which their power many times
inables them to commit with impunity while they are here. Their bold and
violent spirits are checked and curbed, whenever they think there is a
greater Lord then they, who will call them to an account. Blessed be God
therefore, we have all reason to say, who has so evidently demonstrated there
is a Life to come, after we go from hence; and, by the resurrection of Christ
Jesus from the dead, assured us he has appointed a day wherein he will judge
the world in righteousness. This belief not only restrains men from doing
evil, but, which is much more, will even force them to do well. It alone is
sufficient, as I said, to make the World happy, did we thoroughly entertain it.
Let a man but believe steadfastly there is a Life to come in another world, and
you need not instruct him how to behave himself here. That one Principle will
teach him to make an exact difference between good and evil; and awaken his
Soul to attend to those directions which he finds there, for the regulating his
actions toward God and man. And this it does with such a force, that as a man
cannot be ignorant, if he think of this, what he ought to do on all occasions;
so neither his natural propension to sin, nor his evil customs, nor corrupt
doctrines, nor the common received fashions among men, nor meanness of parts,
nor multitude of business, nor the conceived difficulty of Religion, will be
able to hinder that man from doing as he ought, whose breast is possessed with
the thoughts of immortal life. Neither nobility nor meanness of birth, riches
nor poverty of estate, freedom nor servitude of condition, thirst of glory nor
fear of contempt, the praise of some nor the scorn of others, the company of
our equals nor the commands of superiors, no gain, no loss, nothing that we
desire, nothing that we dread, can stand before the force of this single
argument, if it be settled in the heart. For the love of life it self, which is
the first of all goods that we receive, and the last of all that we lose, is
overcome by this, and submits to the disposal of this Eternity of life. So
that this is an Universal Medicine to purge us of all vicious humors, to
strengthen and fortify our Nature, and to revive and comfort the most
languishing and fainting spirits. It is an Engine strong enough to remove the
most ponderous impediments that lie in our way; an unanswerable reason for any
duty; and such a demonstration, as not only perfectly satisfies our mind, but,
being once seated there, will never go out again.

The truth of this will be apparent to those that consider,

1. That this Motive alone contains all other whatsoever in it: there being
more in these two words, ETERNAL LIFE, then kingdoms, and thrones, and
treasures, and glory, and joy, and a thousand such like words can express. By
which we may judge what force there is in that to make us do well, in which
the strength of all other arguments, from greatness, honor, riches, pleasure,
to engage our affections, are concentred and united. There is as vast a
difference therefore between this and all other perswasives to the will, as
between the beams of the Sun when they are gathered in a glass, which set all
combustibles that approach them on fire; and the same beams scattered and
dispersed in the air, when they work only by their single virtue. By reason of
which excellency it is, that it meets with every man's desires, and has
something in it agreeable to his hopes. And to every one of those men of
different desires, it presents also every thing: So that the ambitious, for
example, has the greatest glory and honor set before his eyes to invite him
to it; with the addition of pleasure, joy, peace, and all other desirable
goods. Whereby it breaks the force of all temptations which would divert us
from piety; or rather heightens and lifts up our minds above them, as things
inconsiderable. For, a man's Spirit being naturally formed into a likeness of
the objects with which he is conversant, his Mind who has his thoughts in
heaven necessarily becomes great and heavenly; and is inspired with such a
generous and divine sense, that he is not moved with the solicitations of these
little things here, but overlooks them all, as much below him. He is made
sublime and truly noble by frequent conversation with so great a Good; and
scorns to stoop to the lure of those temptations, which have such power upon
earthly souls.

2. For such is the force of this motive, it is manifest from hence, that (as I
discoursed in the beginning) it speaks to the whole man, and leaves no part of
him untouched and unsatisfied. The Understanding cannot say it is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the Will that it is not satisfied with loving, nor the
Affections that they are not filled with joy, nor any part of man complain that
it wants a share in this Eternal life. For even the Body, we saw, shall
partake of the glory that shall be revealed, and be much improved in strength,
and beauty, and agility, and durableness; being made incorruptible. So that
while other, petty goods, do only still the craving of one desire, (and that
but for a little time,) leaving the rest discontented; this entirely and at
once quiets all, and brings in an universal fullness; being the very life of
God himself. It is desirable therefore upon its own account and for it self
alone; there being nothing beyond it (as there is in other goods) for which we
should desire it. We intend by the gaining of any thing here, to come to the
possession of some other good. But it is not so in our desires of Eternal
Life; which being the last and chiefest Good, our thoughts naturally rest and
repose themselves, when they come there, and seek no farther. There our hearts
settle, and no longer rove up and down in uncertainty after every thing we
fancy. For the hope of it gives us a full contentment within our selves; and
thereby preserves us from a needless pursuit of this and the other enjoyment;
and leaves us little else to do, but to secure the inheritance of so great a
Blessedness.

3. And that we cannot miss, if we keep it in our thoughts: for so great is the
efficacy of this Good, that it cannot be refused. It is not in our power to set
it at naught, (as we may do other things, which have something greater then
themselves to be their competitors in our affections;) because it is a Good so
excellent, that there is none above it, or equal to it. It will not let us so
much therefore as deliberate (when we attend to it) whether we will have it or
no; but forces it self upon us on any terms or conditions whatsoever. And can
there be a greater motive to do well then this; which not only baffles all
temptations, and quiets the heart so that it need not gad abroad after every
little thing in this world; but also quite takes away all liberty to reject it,
and leaves us no power to choose whether or no we will embrace it? Answer me in
your own thoughts; What is there more persuasive then that, which we can have
no will at all, if we mind it, to deny? Such is the condition of Eternal Life,
which inclines the will, just as a talent does the scales, when there is
nothing but air in the contrary balance, without any the least hovering or
deliberation which way to turn. And were it always present to us, it would
wholly deprive us of all our liberty to do otherwise then it would have us. By
reason indeed of its being in expectation hereafter, and that it becomes
sensible to us now only by serious thoughts, a strong and lively faith, and by
the power of the Holy Ghost; the will of man retains a liberty, (which while
this Good is before him he is quite despoiled of,) whereby he too often chooses
other things before this Eternal life. But were it not for this, he could not
choose but embrace it entirely: which sufficiently manifests the force of it in
its own nature, if we will but be at the pains, by consideration, faith, and
prayer for the Holy Spirit of God, to bring it into frequent view and set it
before us. And what is there imaginable of greater efficacy to move us to such
constant diligence to bring it near to our hearts then this, that when we see
it, our wills have no power to be indifferent, either to it, or the well-doing
which leads unto it. Nay, I may add this; So great is the force of this
argument, that, though only the absence of it some time from our thoughts can
make it possible we should perish; yet the Will, being mightily affected with
its presence, does not only love it, but lays its commands upon the mind also
to inquire and advise more seriously about the way to attain it at last, by
preserving a constant sense of it at present. It has no list to part with so
great a Good; and therefore excites the Understanding to find out the means to
keep and maintain a lively apprehension of it, and requires it to be careful
and diligent in the continual use of those means.

4. And truly it is such a Good (by which also you may judge how forcible a
motive it is) as makes all means whatsoever, whereby we may attain it, lovely
and desirable. There is no Rule more known then this, that the End we design
prevails with us to love those Means, which we would not love for themselves.
As the hope of having our health restored, makes bitter pills and distasteful
potions go down well enough. But what is there, except perhaps the desire of
saving our lives, which will render every thing whatsoever acceptable? It is
the privilege of this Good alone, to dispose a man to refuse nothing, no not
death it self, that he may enjoy it. It commands over all the evil things in
this world, as well as over the good; and makes a man willing to endure the
one, as well as turn away from the invitation of the other. It makes the
greatest ends a man has in this world to submit to serve as means to bring us
to it. And what will you imagine of greater virtue then that, which will be
received by all means? Suppose a man should be content to lose his pleasures
and recreations, and health too, for the getting riches; which is all he aims
at while he lives: but see here a Good which will make him willing to lose them
too, for so glorious a purchase. Or suppose a man will choose to lose all his
worldly goods which he has got, that he may preserve his liberty, and not be
inslaved: here is a greater Good still, which will dispose a man to kiss his
cords or his chains, and sing, like Paul and Silas, in the innermost prison. Or
suppose again, that, to save his life, a man should embrace the chains and
fetters which tie him fast to his oar: nere is something still beyond this,
which is the only thing that can make a man cheerfully sacrifice his life; for
the loss of which nothing else can make him any recompense. The reason is,
because there is no proportion between this and all other things, either as to
greatness, or goodness; not so much as between a Kingdom and a barly-corn.

5. And therefore I may add, that it will make us in love with all piety at
once; and with all the means leading to it, though never so troublesome. It
does not work upon us after the way of Art, but as Nature it self does. It does
not teach us virtue and godliness by little parcels, as a Statuary first forms
one part of his statue, and then another, now working on the face, and then on
the hands or feet; but instills it altogether in the whole mass, (as I may so
speak,) and works in us such an universal love to goodness, as to have a ready
will presently to do whatsoever God would have us. Just as you see the spirit
of Nature or a particular Soul work in the formation of the body of a plant, or
of an animal in the womb; which it begins in all its proportions together, and
so proceeds on still to bring the parts to a greater bigness and strength: even
so does this mighty Good operate when it touches the heart, not inclining it
first to the grace of temperance, and then by another touch to the grace of
charity, and after that by a third to the grace of contentedness, etc. but at
once begets an hearty love to universal goodness, and forms the whole body of
Christian Virtues all together; which grow up after the same manner all alike,
there being the same power inspiring us unto all. Which may spare me the labor
of showing what a Motive it is to enforce the practice of every particular
Virtue. Which it makes easy also; because this one thing, which is the reason
for all, is easily kept in our mind. Eternal Life is like a short Sentence,
which contains in it the pith and strength of a long Discourse: or like unto a
little Leaven, which infuses it self into the whole mass wherewith it is mixed.
And it makes all Divine graces entire and perfect also. For where the mind is
once impregnated with it, and it has begun a Divine life there, it will never
produce a monstrous birth. No lim of the New man, if I may so speak, shall here
be wanting. It will not suffer us, I mean, to be defective in any part of true
piety; nor shall one part draw all the nourishment to it, and overgrow the
rest. It will not let us spend our zeal about some particulars, while we are
cold and remiss in other Christian duties; but make us equally affected and
spirited unto all. From whence likewise arises another benefit; that while, by
the thoughts of this, we excite our selves to any one grace, we promote our
growth also in every one. When we stir up our selves to the practice of our
present duty, we are disposed thereby to the like cheerful obedience on any
other emergent occasion. When we call up our Souls by this to do God's will,
it impowers us also (though we should not then think of it) to suffer what he
would have us. And while we animate our selves hereby to suffer one thing, it
enables us to do and suffer all.

O the power of this Divine Good, if it once seat it self in the very throne of
our hearts! How it makes them beat with the love of God, and with the love of
our neighbor! How it inspires us with resolution, with confidence, with zeal,
with joy, with all other pious affections! It will let us scruple none of God's
Commands, because it is of equal force to make us submit to all. Neither
profaneness nor hypocrisy, neither listlesness nor despondency, can ever lodge
in that heart where this belief is deeply rooted; that God will give to our
little short labors here, an immense eternal recompense in the other World.

6. One cannot imagine how it should be otherwise, if we go on to consider once
more how naturally this belief fills our hearts with love to that blessed God,
who is so good as to design us such inconceivable Blessedness; and to his will,
as the only way and means to be partaker of it. We shall easily be persuaded
that the Will of him who promises us immortality must needs be the Rule of
Goodness. It will never enter into our hearts to suspect, that he who loves us
so much can enjoin us any thing but what is truly good for us. And so our wills
and affections will readily bow and stoop to his, without any dispute at all
about it.

But I have said too much already about this business, to have any room left
for a new argument of the power of this great Good.

IV.
Let us proceed rather to consider what the matter is, that a Motive in it self
so great and so powerful should have so little power upon men's hearts, to move
them to virtue and goodness. One may justly wonder at it, and ask, What is the
cause that men are so dull, so sluggish, so backward to do well, since the
reward is so certain, so transcendent; and it is as certain they will miss of
it in any other way but this of virtue and piety? Where is the Violence which
the holy Gospel speaks of, and which in all reason was to be expected when the
Kingdom of heaven was opened? One would have thought, upon the report of so
great a Blessedness, men would have thronged into heaven; and with eager
violence striven to thrust in themselves before others into such preferment as
was offered them in our Savior's Kingdom. His Disciples, sure, thought that
men could not choose, when they heard such news, but all flock to his fold, and
prepare themselves to receive his blessing. And there have been those Maldonate
and de Celada.
who have fansied the Apostles were so possessed with these thoughts, that this
was the reason they were troubled to hear our Savior say, whither he went,
they could not go; (that is, at present; xiii. Joh. 33.) because they imagined
all would run so thick toward the Bliss which he promised, that if they went
not to heaven with him then, it was to be questioned whether there would be any
room left for them, and all places might not be taken up before they came. And
to comfort them, our Savior, say they, bid them not be troubled, for in his
father's house were many Mansions: (xiv. 1, 2.) that is, there was room for all
comers, though never such multitudes. The discourse indeed of our Savior there
shows that this is but a fancy: yet if we consider the haste men make in any
other advantageous offers, and how they will strive to prevent and circumvent
one another, to gain any preferment here in this world; they might well think
that men would come in as great crowds to heaven, as we have seen them sometime
come to Church; and would all run as men do in a race, contending earnestly who
should carry away the crown. For bonorum quorundam, sicut and malorum, est
intolerabilis magnitudo; the greatness of some goods, as well as of some
evils, is so excessive and intolerable, (as Tertullian, if I forget not,
somewhere speaks,) that it weighs down all that can be cast into the scale
against it; and suffers not our wills, as you have heard, to deliberate about
it. Whence is it then that we see so little care and concern about that far
more exceeding eternal weight of glory? that good which is so vast, that in
this state we cannot bear the very thoughts of it? In stead of that forwardness
which might have been expected, there is a strange backwardness so much as to
think of these things. A prodigious numness and stupidity has seized on the
hearts of Christian people, who seem to have no life at all in them. To what
shall we impute it; seeing the Sun of righteousness has shone so brightly and
strongly on them, with these cheerful beams of Eternal Life, which he has
brought to light through his Gospel?

Is there any thing here that can pretend to vie with the Eternal Life he has
revealed? I will not stay for an Answer, the disparity is so great between this
and all other goods. What is it then which makes men so indifferent? Is there
little or no hope that God will bestow such great and glorious things, upon
such vile wretches as we are? No; he has promised, and prepared them, as you
have heard; and he cannot be worse then his word, nor lose all his own
preparations. What is it then that stifles their endeavors after this
immortal bliss? Will he not give it but upon very hard terms, and such
rigorous conditions as are enough to freez the warmest resolutions, when we
think of them? Not this neither: For he has prepared these good things for
those that love him. And what is there more easy, what more pleasant and
cheerful then love? especially of the first and chiefest Good? which will
certainly make all our duty as easy and delightful as it self is. Or will you
say, that we cannot love him; it is an impossible Condition? For shame
consider, that the very offer of such glorious things is enough to make us love
him entirely, if we did believe them. Were we persuaded that he will bestow
upon good men such happiness with himself, so great, so long; it would inflame
our hearts with the most ardent passion toward his service. Therefore I have
already named the true cause of all men's coldness and sloth. After all our
search, we shall find it nothing else but this, They do not believe. They are
not persuaded of the certainty of the rewards in the other World, or have not
fixed this belief in their Minds: for if they had, it would not easily slip out
again. They are moved strongly by what they see with their eyes, and feel with
their hands, and taste with their tongues; but faith has little or no place or
power in their hearts. This is proved to be too true by the lives of men; which
are so base and unworthy, as if they did not hope for the happiness of a fly in
the other World.

Therefore every one of our business must be, to awaken that faith in our Souls
which we profess; that Divine principle, which is of such force as to overcome
the World. For it is manifestly true, which the Apostle writes, that without
faith it is impossible to please God. We shall never do any thing worthy of
him, unless we believe that God is, and that he is the rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. As, on the contrary, it is no less manifest that, if we do
believe, we shall not only please him, but we shall please our selves in doing
so, and find it most delightful to be religious. It will marvellously inliven
us, and infuse, as it were, a new spirit and soul into us: so that we shall
differ as much from our selves, as the corn does when it is sown in the ground,
and when it shoots up again in all its verdure and beauty. It will make us
adorn our selves, I mean, with all the fruits of righteousness; and beget in us
such a spiritual life, as will fructify and increase in all good works.

And here consider, first, That the things themselves propounded to our belief
are such, as we cannot but desire it should be true, that God intends to bestow
them on us. Who is there that would not willingly live for ever? that does not
think Immortality the greatest prerogative of humane Nature? provided we may
live always in joy and pleasure, in uninterrupted contentments, and
never-fading delights. Though they should be less then our Lord has promised,
there is no heart but above all things wishes to be so happy. To see only the
beautiful orders of the heavenly hosts, the glorious Company of the Apostles,
the goodly Society of the Prophets, the noble Army of Martyrs, the venerable
Quire of Pastors, the whole multitude of holy men and women, who celebrate a
perpetual feast of joy; to live in happy friendship with them, to love them,
and to be beloved of them; to bear a part in their eternal Song of praise and
thanks to God; how desirable is it above any thing that we can fansy in this
world? No man has so little love to himself, as not to wish he might be
numbered among those Saints in glory everlasting. It Is impossible we should not
be pleased with the thoughts of having a consortship in such an incomparable
happiness; were we but persuaded that it is not a dream, but a real truth.
There needs nothing more to bring it into all men's favor, but only to be
satisfied that there is such an Happiness.

And that is the other thing I would propound to your thoughts; That as we
naturally desire such an Happiness, so, if we consider the evident
demonstations we have of it in the Gospel, this and a great deal more appears
to be the undoubted inheritance of all good Souls; who shall see God, and be
with our Lord, and behold his glory. Which wonderfully recommends the Christian
Religion to us; wherein we are gratified in our most important desires, and
have those things made sure and certain to us which we would all fain have for
our portion. For what is the general intent of the Gospel, but to discover to
mankind immortal life, and the way to it? This was the great end of our
Savior's appearing; who brought that glimmering light that was in men's minds,
of the other world, to a more perfect day. And upon this errand the Apostles
were sent, as you have heard, to call men to the obtaining of the glory of our
Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 14. Which made the Jews so unexcusable that
they would not come unto our Lord, that they might have life; (v. Joh. 40.)
though there was the greatest reason in the world to believe this Record, that
God has given us Eternal life; and this life is in his Son.

A voice from heaven, I have shown you, often testified as much: and so did the
Holy Ghost, which descended on our Savior at his baptism; and the many signs
and wonders whereby God the Father sealed him, and set, as it were, his mark,
stamp and character upon him; that all might know who he was, and believe his
word as undoubtedly, as if they heard God the Father himself speaking to them
continually with his own voice out of heaven. From thence our Savior came, it
was apparent; and therefore did not pretend to discover things of which he had
no certain knowledge, but only revealed that happy Country from whence he
descended. So he professes to a very wise man among the Jews, who was
convinced, by his many Miracles, that he was a Teacher come from God; iii. Joh.
2. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that we do know, and testify that
we have seen: ver. 11. For as he came down from heaven; (as he farther tells
him ver. 13.) so at that very moment he was there, and had a most intimate
familiarity and communication therewith: and therefore might well say, he had
seen the things he reported from thence. What they were, you may read in the
following verses, 15, 16. That whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life, etc.

The very same, as I have likewise shown, John Baptist testified, ver. 36. And
so did Moses and Elias; who appeared in glory, and discoursed with him
concerning his return to the other world, after he had done the will of God
here. ix. Luke 30, 31. At that time our Savior was transfigured, (an evident
token of the glorifying even of our bodies in the other state,) as three
persons of integrity witness; who saw his glory, and the two men that stood
with him, ver. 32. and were themselves overshadowed with a bright cloud, (an
emblem of the glory to come in another World,) and so ravished with the sight,
that they wished they might always remain in that happy place. Neither was this
only a sudden transport; but it made such a lasting impression upon their
minds, that ever after they looked upon it as a notable proof of the majesty and
glory of our Savior. 2 Pet. i. 16, 17. And so did the ancient Christians; as
appears by the Syriack Translatour of the New Testament, who before the Epistle
of St. James takes notice, that now follow the Epistles of the three Disciples
before whom our Lord was transfigured.

This we are to mark diligently, and take it for an eminent token of the glory
to which our Lord was to go, and which he should be able to give. For it relies
upon the report of those who were persons of known worth, and uprightness of
heart; who had no design in the world to serve, but only to promote such an
important truth, of which they were fully assured. They appeal to all that had
any acquaintance with them, whether ever they saw or had reason to suspect any
false or double dealing in them; and had not rather been witnesses of their
honesty and simplicity in the whole course of their Ministry. For we are not,
as many, says St. Paul 2 Cor. ii. 17. (...), that sell the word of God, and
make merchandise of it to enrich themselves thereby: (such might not stick to
corrupt God's word, as we render it, and mix their own dreams with it:) but
with all sincerity, as men who are authorized by God, and have him before our
eyes, to whom we must give an account of our actions, we publish the Gospel of
Christ. Whom they accounted it a great mercy and favor from God to serve. And
therefore having received this ministry, (says he iv. 1, 2.) we are not
sluggish in doing our duty, nor do we perform it in a base unworthy manner; but
have so renounced, or thrust away far from us, all secret devices of enriching
our selves, that we do not blush to think of our designs: (for (...) are such
practices as for mere shame men hide and cover, pretending, for instance, only
the good of Souls, when they intend nothing but to get their money:) nor do we
walk in craftiness, appearing one thing and being another; nor corrupt the word
of God, by mixing any of our own inventions with it; but in a free, open and
plain manner we commend our selves to all men's consciences, as having God
looking on us. All that know us cannot but approve us; (if they be not led by
passion more then reason;) and if they do not, God does. This he repeats again,
Chap. vi. where he gives a proof of their sincerity, in the exercise of their
Ministry, from these two things; first, that they got nothing by it, but many
afflictions; and then, that they did nothing but good to others, in recompense
for all the trouble they gave them. Of the former he speaks ver. 4, 5. of the
second, ver. 6, 7. and then returns to the other again. Which argument he
handles also at large toward the conclusion of the same Epistle, xi. 23, 24,
etc. and once more xii. 10.

And thus he writes also to the Church of Thessalonica, (1 Thessalonians. ii. 4.) who
knew very well how faithfully they had discharged their trust, and that they
did not accommodate themselves to any man's humor; but plainly delivered the
message which God had committed to them. No body could say that they had used
any flattering speeches, to sooth them up in a vain conceit of themselves,
(ver. 5.) nor used any colors to hide a covetous design: no, as to their words
and addresses, the Thessalonians could testify the contrary; and as to their
mind and heart, which God only could know, they call him to witness, it never
entered into their thoughts. Nor did they seek glory and fame either from them
or any body else, but despised it as much as riches: unless it were the honor
of obliging them, by communicating the blessings of the Gospel to them, and
receiving no reward from them: ver. 6. They might indeed have put them to
charge, and lived upon their cost, as other Apostles of Christ did, and that
honestly too: But He and his companions were among them with more gentleness;
(ver. 7.) they parted, that is, from their own undoubted right, to spare the
Thessalonians: and as a good nurse cherishes her children; so they defrauded
themselves, and took the meat, as we speak, out of their own mouths, for the
good of others whom they desired to breed up in Christian piety. This shows the
wonderful innocence and goodness of these men, who got nothing by the Gospel,
(no not what they might have lawfully and justly taken,) but only studied how
to win Souls to Christ. In short, he calls them and God also to witness, how
holily, how justly, how unblamably they behaved themselves among those that
believed: ver. 10. The first of which words refers to God; the second to those
actions which belong to humane society; and the third to those which every man
is bound unto severally by himself: in none of which could He, Silvanus and
Timotheus, be charged with any misdemeanour. On which argument he once more
insists 2 Timothy iii. 10, 11. being so confident of his unreprovable virtue, that
he desired nothing more of all that knew him, but to be followers of him, and
to walk so as they had him for an example. 1 Cor. iv. 16. iii. Phil. 17.

All which I have the more particularly noted, because it is from these men
that we receive the testimony of Jesus. Who, they assure us, chose to die the
most shameful death, when he could have avoided it; and with the greatest
confidence, when he was expiring, commended his Spirit into the hands of God.
Which is an unquestionable argument that he believed, and was assured, that he
should be with God, when he went from hence, and be able to do for his
followers all that he promised. Which they tell us moreover God justified, when
he raised him from the dead, and carried him, in their sight, up into heaven:
and afterward sent the Holy Ghost upon them, to testify that he was still
alive, and possessed of an unseen glory. In which, they also tell us, he
appeared to several persons; as I have already related. One of which was
caught up into heaven, and heard such things there as made him wish for nothing
more, then to leave this earth, and to be with Christ. To whom the Angels, they
also assure us, witnessed upon several occasions. For they attended him at his
birth, and in his life, and when he died, and after his resurrection, and when
he ascended into heaven: From whence he sent them many times, as ministering
Spirits, to his Apostles; of which we have very large testimonies in the whole
book of the Revelation.

From all which we may safely conclude, that there can no other reason in the
world be given, why any man thus informed should not believe the Gospel, but
only his own desperate wickedness. For the things propounded therein are most
desirable above all other. It reveals such a wonderful love of God to mankind,
that all men would rejoice to hear the news of it, were they not averse to
those pious and virtuous courses whereby, they are told, they must attain it.
Nothing attracts all hearts so much as the hope of a blessed immortality: which
is testified to us so credibly in the Gospel, that nothing could make men turn
their ears away from it by infidelity, but only the incurable wickedness of
their Nature; which will not let them part with those vices, which the Gospel
says they must quit for so great a Good. In one word, there is nothing in this
Book but what is suitable to all men's desires, save only the holy rule of life:
and therefore it can be nothing else but their hatred to this, which makes them
reject all the rest. They would follow their nobler appetite after those good
things which the Gospel promises, if they had not perfectly given up
themselves to those baser appetites, which must be denied for their sake. For
if our Gospel be hid, says St. Paul in the place before mentioned, it is hid
to them that are lost: In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of
them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who
is the image of God, should shine unto them. 2 Cor. iv. 3, 4. That which the
Gospel reports is as clear as the noonday. Nothing can be more visible then
the (...), the light or the splendor of the Gospel of the glory of Christ. By
which, says Theophylact, the Apostle means the belief of these great Truths,
that Jesus was crucified, that he was received up into heaven, and that he will
give future rewards. This is the (...) splendor the Apostle speaks of, which
if any man do not see, after such evident demonstrations of these things, it is
his wickedness hinders him. And such men, after they have long resisted the
light, fall under the power of the Devil so inevitably, that he blinds their
eyes. Mark, as St. Chrysostom observes, that the Scripture calls several
things by the name of a God, not from their own worth and excellence, but
(...), from the weakness of those who are subject to them. Thus Mammon is the
God of some, and the belly the God of others, and the Devil the God of all
such persons; because they are basely inslaved to the love of money, and of
their fleshly appetite, and He rules and governs them as absolutely as if he
were their God. Yet he has no power quite to blind their eyes, as he farther
observes, before they disbelieve that which is so credibly reported by such
Divine arguments: for, as the very words of St. Paul are, he blinds the minds
of them that believe not. (...), they became infidels of themselves; and having
given themselves over to unbelief, against such miraculous evidence of the
truth of the Christian Faith, God gives them over to him: to whose service they
have so slavishly devoted themselves, that they cannot be recovered; but, as
they deserve, must unavoidably perish.

From which miserable condition let all those who are inclined to infidelity
take care to save themselves, by timely considering those Divine demonstrations
which these holy men of God have reported to us; who beheld our Savior's
glory, the glory as of the onely-begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth. i. Joh. 14. Upon which words hear what the same eloquent Bishop writes;
who thus sums up a great part of the evidence we have for the Christian belief.

The Angels appeared in great glory upon the earth to Daniel, S. Chrysostom.
Hom. xii. in Johan.
David and Moses; but they appeared as servants, as those that had a Master. It
is the peculiar glory of our Savior, that he appeared as a Lord, as having
power over all: and though in a poor and vile fashion, yet even in that the
Creation knew its Lord and Master. A Star from heaven called the Wise men to
worship him. A great company of Angels often attended him, and sang his
praises. To whom others succeeded, who published his glory, and delivered this
secret Mystery one to another: the Angels to the Shepherds; and the Shepherds
to those in the city; and Gabriel to Mary and Elizabeth; and Anna and Symeon to
those in the Temple. Nor were men and women only transported with the
pleasure; but an infant that had not seen the light leapt in its mother's womb:
and all were strangely lifted up in hopes of what was a-coming. These things
all fell out straightway after his birth. But when he appeared in the World,
there were more Miracles, and greater then the former, appeared again. For not
so little as a Star and the Heavens, not Angels or Archangels, not Gabriel or
Michael, but the Father himself proclaimed him from heaven; and with the
Father, the Comforter came down with a voice, and remained on him. And
therefore well might the Apostle say, We have seen his glory, the glory as of
the onely-begotten of the Father. And not by these things alone, but by those
which followed after. For now not merely Shepherds, and an aged Prophetess, and
reverend men, published the glad tidings of the Gospel; but the voice it self
of the things he did, louder then the sound of any trumpet; which was heard
presently everywhere. For the fame of him, says the Evangelist, went into all
Syria; and revealed him to all, and cried everywhere that the King of heaven
was come to men. For Demons everywhere fled and got away; and the Devil
departed; and Death began to give place, and not long after quite vanished; and
all manner of infirmities were loosed; and the tombs dismissed the dead; the
Demons left those that were mad, and Diseases those that were sick. Wonderful
and strange things were to be seen, which the Prophets desired to see, and did
not. For one might have seen eyes new made, paralytick lims strengthened,
motion given to withered hands and lame feet, ears that were stopped up opened,
and the tongues of the dumb loosed. In one word, like an excellent workman that
comes into an house which is decayed and rotten by time, he repaired, or
rebuilt rather, humane Nature.

For who can tell how he made the Souls of men new, which is a greater wonder
then all the rest? For the wills of men oppose their cure, which the body does
not. They will not yield, we see, no, not to God himself. And yet these were
reformed by him; and all kind of wickedness expelled. Nor were they only freed
from Sin; but, like the bodies to which he gave the best habit after he had
cured their diseases, they were advanced to the highest degree of virtue. A
Publican became an Apostle. A persecutour, a blasphemer, a reproacher of
Christianity, turned the Preacher of the Word. A thief was made a Citizen of
Paradise: and a strumpet became illustrious by a great faith. And abundance of
others, worse then these, were listed in the number of the Disciples, till
whole cities and countries were strangely reformed by the Gospel. Who is able
to declare the wisdom of his Precepts, the virtue of his heavenly Laws, the
excellent order of his Angelical Conversation? For he has taught us such a
life, he has given us such laws, and instituted such a polity; that they who
use them, though before the worst of men, straightway become Angels, and like
to God, according to our power. The Evangelist therefore recollecting all these
things, the Miracles he wrought upon men's bodies, upon their Souls, and upon
the elements; the Precepts, the secret Gifts, the Laws, the Polity, the power
of persuasion, the future Promises, his Sufferings; he pronounced this
wonderful lofty voice, We beheld his glory, the glory as of the onely-begotten
of the Father, full of grace and truth.

For they did not admire him only for his Miracles, but for his Sufferings. As
for example, because he was nailed to a Cross and scourged; because he was
beaten; because he was spit upon; because those buffeted him, to whom he had
been a benefactour: upon the account even of these, which seem most shameful,
that voice is worthy to be repeated again; because he himself has called this
a Glory. For then Death was destroyed, the Curse was dissolved, Demons were
put to shame, and he triumphed over them openly, and the handwriting of sins,
or obligation to punishment, was nailed to the Cross and cancelled. And besides
these wonders, which were invisible, there were others apparent unto all; which
showed he was the onely-begotten Son of God, and the Lord of all the Creation.
For while his blessed body yet hung upon the Cross, the Sun withdrew its beams,
the earth was astonished and wrapped in darkness, the ground shook, the tombs
were broke open, a great many dead people walked out of their graves, and went
into the City, the stone upon his grave was rolled away, and he arose. He that
was crucified, he that was fastened with nails to the cross, he that was dead
arose; and filling his Apostles with great power, sent them to all the World,
as the common physicians of humane Nature, the rectifiers of men's lives, the
sowers of the knowledge of heavenly Doctrine, the loosers of the Devill's
tyranny, the teachers of the great and hidden Goods, the preachers of the glad
tidings of the immortality of the Soul, the Eternal life of the body, and the
rewards which (as they pass all understanding, so) never have any end. These
and many more such like this blessed man beholding, (which he knew, but was not
able to write, because the world could not have contained the Books,) he cried
out, We beheld his glory, the glory as of the onely-begotten of the Father,
full of grace and truth. Who is now as able, I may add, to give us new bodies,
and inconceivably-improved Souls, and then to perpetuate the happiness of both
in heaven; as he was to cure diseases, and raise dead bodies, and purify men's
minds, when he was here on earth.

Let our conclusion therefore, as he says elsewhere, be suitable to our
discourse. Hom. xiii. p. 607. 5.
And what is so suitable as Doxologies and giving glory to God, in such manner as
is worthy of him? Not by our words only, that is, but much more by our deeds.
So our Savior himself exhorts us, saying, Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.
For there is nothing more bright and shining then an excellent conversation, as
one of the wise men has said; The ways of the just shine like the light. And
they shine not only to those that light their lamps by their works, but to all
that are near unto them. Therefore let us pour oil continually into these
lamps, that the flame may rise higher, and the light shine more abundantly.

Having received such grace and truth by Jesus Christ, Id. p. 611.
let us not grow the lazier by the greatness of the gift. For the greater
honor has been done us, the more we are bound to excel in virtue. Let that
therefore be our business, to purify our selves so thoroughly, that, being
thought worthy to see Christ, we may not at that Day be delivered over to the
severe tormenting powers, but to those that are able to bring us to the
inheritance in heaven, which is prepared for those that love him. Which God
grant we may all obtain, through the grace and loving kindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ; to whom be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. XIV. A farther improvement of this RECORD.
THE grounds of Christian belief, you see, are not so slender, but I may take
the confidence to say, that he who will be at the pains to consider such things
as these, cannot any longer think it a piece of wit to be an infidel. It is
rank folly, as well as baseness; there being no reason in the earth to except
against these Witnesses, and to deny the Faith of Christ an entrance into our
minds and hearts. For what we know, as I have shown in the former Book, by
credible report, is as certain as what we see and hear with our eyes and ears.
And what can be better attested then the holy Gospel? Which is justly called
the testimony of God, 1 Cor. ii. 1. and the testimony of Christ, i. 6. Because
God testified these things to us as his will, by his Son Christ; and Christ
testified them to us by the holy Ghost. For so St. Paul says in the place last
named, (ver. 5, 6.) the Corinthians were enriched by our Lord with every gift;
even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed, or established to be a truth,
among them.

After which mighty evidence, whereby we are assured God intends to bestow so
great a blessing on us as immortal Life, it is of no weight whatsoever can be
objected against this Doctrine; particularly, against that part of it which
concerns the Resurrection of the body, at the last day. For that Great Lord who
said it, we are certain, can perform it. He knew his own power; and would not
have said, I will raise you up at the last day, unless he had been able to make
his word good. He has also already fulfilled his word in other things which he
foretold, though no body would believe him till they saw it: which is a good
ground, as St. Gregory Nyssen observes De opificio hominis cap. xxv.
, to expect this, though it seem never so difficult, and incredible, had he not
promised it. Suppose, says he, that an husbandman, discoursing of the virtue
of Seeds, should not be believed by a by-stander, that had never been bred in
the country, nor seen any thing of that nature: would it not be sufficient for
his satisfaction, to take but one single grain out of an heap of corn, and to
tell him he should see in that the virtue of all the rest? For he that sees one
grain of wheat or barley cast into the ground, coming up after some time a full
ear, will never doubt of the fruitfulness of all the rest of the same kind.
Even just so, says he, it seems to me a sufficient testimony of the
Resurrection, that the truth of other things, which he foretold, cannot be
denied. In them we have an experiment, whereby we may judge of every thing else
that he has said.

But to demand that every thing should be made out by reason, before we receive
it, is to make us Philosophers, not Christians; whose name is Believers. And
besides, the best Philosophers cannot tell us how the Corn, I now mentioned,
grows up from a little Seed cast into the ground, or a Man from so small a
beginning in his mother's womb; or any thing considerable of the manner how all
natural productions are performed. And therefore what folly is it to resolve
not to be satisfied, unless we show how a dead body can be raised? It is
sufficient to know that idoneus est reficere qui fecit, as Tertullian speaks in
this case; He that made it at first is able to make it again. It being more, as
he goes on, to make, then to re-make; to give a beginning to a thing, then to
restore it after it is dissolved. And we have this also to satisfy us; that
multitudes saw our Savior raise men from the dead, and by other miraculous
works demonstrate, that he wants not power to do any thing he has promised.
His word may well be taken for any thing to come, who has already done such
wonders as are credibly reported to us, by those that were spectatours of them,
in the Gospel.

And it is very remarkable how he deals with us as a Mother does with her
Child: Greg. Nyss. ibid.
into whose tender mouth she first thrusts her breast to nourish it with milk;
and when the teeth come, gives it bread; and when it is grown stronger, feeds
it with solid meat. Even so our Blessed Lord (...), etc. beginning with lower
Miracles at the first, prepares our faith by degrees for the highest. He began
with the cure of desperate diseases, in which (...), he prefaced to his power
of raising the dead: For that which men thought impossible, he showed hereby
was not incredible. Who could have thought, that one sick of a burning fever
should be made so well by speaking a word, as to rise presently, and minister
to the company? yet Simon's wife's mother was an instance of this Miraculous
power in our Savior. Who added something to this Miracle, when he restored the
Nobleman's son to health, though he was at the point of death, as his Father
thought: (iv. Joh. 47.) and this without touching, or coming near him. For he
did not stir from the place where he was at Cana, and yet sent life to him as
far as Capernaum, by the sole power of his command. After which he proceeded to
an higher Miracle; for he restored another Ruler's daughter to life, who died
before he came to her rescue. And again he exceeded this Miracle, by raising up
the woman's son of Naim, when he was carrying out to be buried. And at last (as
has been before observed) he raised his wonderworking power so high, that he
called Lazarus out of his grave, when he had been dead four days.

Thus he raises our minds by little and little to the highest pitch of Faith;
to believe, that is, the Resurrection of the dead. He teaches us to expect that
in general, the experiment of which he has shown in particulars, For, as the
Apostle faith, (1 Thessalonians. iv. 16.) the Lord shall descend with a shout, etc. at
the restoration of all things, to raise the dead to a state of incorruption:
even so now, he that lay in his grave was awakened by the voice of our
Savior's command, and shaking off his corruption, came whole and sound out of
his tomb; the bands wherewith his hands and feet were tied nothing hindering. Is
this nothing to confirm our belief of the Resurrection? when we have not only
our Lord's word for it, but, by those whom he restored to life, we have in deed
a demonstration of what he has promised? What pretense is there now for
unbelief? Why do we not slight all those who by Philosophy and vain deceit set
themselves against a simple faith, and stick to this naked confession, that
there will be a resurrection of the body to Eternal Life?

And to make our holy belief more acceptable to all Christian Souls, let me
briefly add, That Faith being as certain a way of knowing as any other,
Believers must needs be the most knowing men in the world. Which is a very
great motive to Faith; whereby we are informed of a great many things, and
those the most excellent, of which other men's minds are perfectly ignorant. It
gives a new light to the Soul, whereby to see things invisible. There is no
less then a whole world of things that Believers are acquainted withal, which
are hid from their eyes who remain in darkness, by continuing in unbelief.
While the thoughts of such Souls are confined within the narrow bounds of this
visible world, and know but little of it neither; the Minds of Believers are
enlarged beyond the limits of all things seen, to behold another and far more
glorious world: in which Jesus is the Sun, and the Angels and Spirits of just
men are the Stars, and the brightness of the Divine Glory is the Light and
splendor. In this the ancient Christians justly made their boast. And there
being a company of vain men, who pretended to be (...) Knowers, men of
intelligence beyond all others, but indeed unbelievers, Clemens Alexandrinus
reproves their folly, L. v. Stromar.
and tells them, (...). We are they who believe that which is incredible to
others; and therefore are they who know that which is unknown to others.

None so knowing as they that believe the Gospel: and therefore let us not
shut this Faith out of our Souls, and thereby exclude the greatest Good. Nor
let us think our selves unhappy, because we do not see that which we expect:
For this would be to complain of our privilege and preeminence above those that
depend merely on Sense, and will not be wise beyond the narrow confines of
their eyes. Faith is that divine gift, whereby God raises our minds above the
pitch of vulgar Souls. He brings us acquainted by this means with the most
noble and glorious objects, and illuminates us with the most comfortable
knowledge: without which we shall remain, notwithstanding all our other
wisdom, in a sad dull night of ignorance and darkness.

And if this Faith touch our hearts also, it will raise us to as excellent a
temper of spirit, and make us truly heavenly and divine. We shall feel it
altering the very frame of our thoughts, designs, and desires. It will lead us
to such a pitch of Virtue, that we shall adhere to God and goodness whatsoever
befalls us; and solely depending on his promises, trust our selves with him,
both when all other things fail us, and when we have the greatest supports that
they can lend us. Which is no easy thing to flesh and blood, as Philo L. Quis
rerum Divin. haeres, p. 493.
excellently observes: (for that inclines us to trust in riches, and power, and
dignity, and friends, and strength of body, and a number of such things:) but
(...), the work of a great and heavenly Mind, which cannot be enticed by any
thing on earth to rely upon it. An example of which we have in Abraham; who
believed God and obeyed his voice, when he called him from his own country and
his father's house, and he went out not knowing whither he went. Diverse such
instances there are of the power of divine Faith in him and in others, in the
xi. Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews. From which we may certainly
conclude, that nothing can be too hard for the Faith of Christ; which is built
upon surer grounds and a stronger foundation then theirs was. It is of such
mighty force, I have shown, that one would think there needs no more to be done
to make all the World good; but only, by such means as I have declared, to
implant this Faith in all men's hearts.

But such is the perverseness of humane Nature, that our work is not done, when
the judgment is convineed. There must be new arts of insinuation used, by
those convictions to awaken and engage the affections. The Motives are certain
and sure, strong and powerful; but Men are weak and impotent, careless and
unconcerned about their own good. After they know how things are, they must be
made to consider; lest a quickening Motive lie in a dead hand or a cold heart,
which draws forth none of its virtue. And there is no way, that I can think of,
to stir them up to consideration, but by propounding a few sensibly-affecting
Questions to them; which shall be part of the business of this last Chapter.

V.
I. Let him therefore that believes this Record, that God has given us
Eternal Life in his Son Jesus, ask himself what he thinks in his Conscience is
the way to this supreme Felicity. May we live here just as we list, and yet
hope hereafter to live with Christ? Or can we reasonably think to come to him
without any thought about it; and to be received up to his heavenly Kingdom,
though we mind nothing now but what we can get in this World? Strange! that
Christian people should imagine Piety and Virtue to be things superfluous! and
take the mortifying the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride
of life, to be nothing else but a piece of Monastical austerity, and
melancholic devotion! a thing which mere black choler and a peevish
disposition makes men trouble themselves and the world withal! Are we so blind
as to think, that a careful endeavor after an inoffensive life toward God
and toward men is but a precise Nicety; which may be commended in those that
have nothing else to do, but is of no necessity to our living eternally with
God? We cannot, sure, be so forsaken of our reason. No; nor think that the
business of Religion is only to hear the word of God, and to be frequently on
our knees; and that we need not be so solicitous how to live and walk in the
ways of God's Commandments. What man instructed in the Gospel can be so
senseless, as to think by knocking often at heaven gates to get an entrance,
though otherwise he stands idle? Do the Holy Books inspire us with any such
conceits? Do they tell us some holy breath will waft us safe over the dangerous
Sea of worldly affairs, troubles, pleasures, and temptations of various kinds?
Needs there no labor at the sails or the oars? no wise guidance and steerage
of the vessel? no guard and defense against pirates? but a man may confidently
commit himself to the winds, and let his vessel run whither they will carry it?
May he live, I mean, just as the course of the world hurries him, and as he is
driven by the blast of outward accidents? sometimes this way, and sometimes the
quite contrary? in good company and after some pathetick exhortations doing
well, and then crossing all again when a new temptation to sin solicits him?
Sure such men, as can believe thus, fansy heaven a void and empty space, where
company is wanting; and imagine our Savior cares not who comes thither, so it
be but filled. They live as if all the regions above, the glorious Paradise of
God, were but so much waste ground, which needs a Colony of Planters; it
matters not of what quality they are, so it be but inhabited. O vile thoughts!
that can imagine God wants the company of such as care not for him; and that
Heaven, which threw out the Angels that sinned, will entertain those who join
with them in their foul rebellion! It is a wonderful grace, that he will invite
us on any terms to his most blessed society. We do him no kindness, but our
selves, in seeking his heavenly Kingdom. Into which if we will not enter at
such a gate as he sets open; we shall be shut out, and perish in our perverse
ingratitude, or foolish presumption.

Consider, I beseech you, what do all these WITNESSES say concerning the way to
it? Do they not tell us, that straight is the gate and narrow the way that
leads to life? vii. Matt. 14. that we must strive to enter? xiii. Luke 24. and
that there shall in no wise enter into the holy city any thing that defiles?
xxi. Rev. 27. and that without holiness no man shall see the Lord? xii. Hebr.
14. Which we must therefore excite our selves, by his promises, to perfect in
the fear of God; having cleansed our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit. 2 Cor. vii. 1. And giving all diligence, add to our faith virtue;
and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance,
patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and
to brotherly kindness, charity: For so an entrance shall be ministered to us
abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2
Pet. i. 5, 6, 7, 11. Examine every one of them, and they will tell you as much.
The FATHER, by a voice from heaven, bids us hear his Son; who says, Not every
one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but
he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. vii. Matt. 21. And the
WORD says, Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have
right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the cit^.
xxii. Rev. 14. Wherefore as the HOLY G^OST says, To day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts. iii. Heb. 7, 8. This was its language of old;
and it was poured also on the Apostles, that repentance and remission of sins
might be preached in our Savior's name among all nations. xxiv. Luke 47, 49.
Which is the end also of our being washed with WATER in his name: for we are
baptized into his death; and therefore ought to reckon our selves to be dead
indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Let not sin
therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts
thereof. vi. Romans 3, 11, 12. For his BLOOD was shed, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. ii. Tit. 14. For which end also he was raised from the dead, (by the
Eternal SPIRIT,) that he might bless us, in turning every one of us from his
iniquities. iii. Act. 26. And therefore this the APOSTLES say and testify in
the Lord, that we henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk. iv. Ephesians. 17. For
God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. He therefore that
despises, despises not man, but God; (says St. Paul) who has also given
unto us his holy Spirit. 1 Thessalonians. iv. 7, 8.

And if I should now send you to inquire, and ask for the old paths, as
Jeremiah speaks; would you find that the ancient Christians knew any other way
to bliss then this? Did they, who, while they were in the flesh, lived not
according, to it; who, being upon earth, had their conversation in heaven;
whose lives excelled the best laws and statutes of their several countries,
which they strictly obeyed; who loved all, though persecuted by all; who
blessed, when they were cursed; honored those that treated them despitefully;
did good to those who punished them as evil doers Vid pl. apud Ju^^in. Mart.
Epist. ad D^ognet. p. 497.
, etc. did these men, I say, believe that Heaven might be wone only by their
prayers, or by perpetual disputing about that Religion which they did not
practice? How come we then to have so great a fondness for our selves, as to
think that we shall carry that by the name and the profession of Christianity,
which they could not get without so much labor? and to have such cheap
thoughts of the Crown of glory, as to imagine it will bow and come down to
those idle wishes, unto which there is nothing so mean in this world but scorns
to stoop?

That one thought is sufficient to convince us what we have to do to be happy.
I need not send you so far as those elder times; go but to your selves, and
enquire how you do in the affairs of this world. Sure, men never got their
estates with so little care as they hope to get Heaven. Ask a man why he
follows his business so close; and he will tell you, that an estate is not got
by wishing: that a family cannot be provided for by lying in bed, or sitting by
the fireside: that there are opportunities, which must be narrowly watched; and
cheats, which are not easily discovered. And yet, to see the imprudence and
inconsiderateness of Mankind! The same person thinks to go to Heaven, and
possess all the treasures there, by his Prayers alone; though cold too, and but
little observed: or by a lame Repentance, which wants its effects: nay, by a
deathbed groan, a few forced tears, and promises never performed: by some
short snatches of Religion, a careless behavior, and an unwatchfull life. He
minds no occasion of doing or receiving good; is indifferent whether he lay
hold of opportunities and good seasons; seldom thinks of the place whither he
would go; denies himself nothing to which he has a mind; bridles no appetite;
curbs no passion; nay, will be drunk for company; and swear, rather then be
thought such a coward as to stand in awe of God, or to want the breeding of a
Gentleman; and, in brief, does not half so much upon the account of Eternal
Life, as many a man does for a single-peny.

What a strange dullness is this, to imagine that all ends which we aim at must
be compassed by means proportionable to their greatness, but only the very
greatest and last End of all? The Soldier gets not the victory by mere railing
at his enemy; but, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy ii. 3, etc. endures hardness,
and entangles not himself with the affairs of this life. And it is the
laboring husbandman, as it there follows, who partakes of the fruits. All
things in the world, as Solomon says, are full of labor. And do we think that
our Souls only are exempted, and may be saved by doing nothing? that Virtue
will grow there without our care? or that an eternal harvest of joy will
spring up to us, without laboring to do virtuously? It is a great shame to
say it, but such are the hopes of foolish men: who are perfectly like the
Israelites, of whom God says, x. Hos. 11. Ephraim is an heifer that is taught,
to plow; but loves only to tread out the corn. That is, as D. Kimchi glosses,
they were taught the Law, and instructed to do good; but minded nothing else,
but merely to enjoy the promises in a fat and fruitful Land which God had
given them.

Let such remember, for a story sometimes sticks longer in their minds then the
greatest reason, what a Wise man among the Jews said to a Friend of his, whom
he met exceeding sad and dejected about some affairs which went cross to his
designs. What Is the matter, said he, that thou go so heavily? does any thing
of this world trouble thee? Yes, said the other. And what have thou got, said
the Wise man again, by all thy care, solicitude and vexation? Alas! replied his
Friend, thou see by my troubled countenance how little I have got. Then, said
the Wise man, consider; if of this World, which thou have followed with such
diligence, thou have got so little; what art thou like to get of the other
World, which thou mindest not at all? A very good Meditation for those who,
after all their labor and thoughtfulness, are like to leave no great matters
to their posterity; and for those whose greatest cunning and industry is not
able to bring about their ends. And it may lead us to another profitable
Meditation, how unequal we are in our dealing, while we lay out so many
thoughts, and so much labor, upon things we are not sure to obtain; and so few
and so little upon those which, as sure as God is true, shall be the portion of
them that diligently seek them. The Soldier is not sure to win the victory,
after all the hardship he has endured. And the frost may nip, and the bitter
winds blast, the laborious Husbandman's fairest hopes. There is no design, save
only that we have for Heaven, but, after our best diligence, may miscarry.
What madness then is it, thus to misplace our endeavors, by employing them so
seriously about those things which frequently avoid us and fly from us; in the
mean time neglecting those of infinite more value, which earnestly court us,
and are desirous to bestow themselves upon us?

But there is no need of so many words to awaken our thoughts, to judge aright
in these matters. And yet this is all we have to do for our Salvation, (when
we believe the Gospel,) to think often what we believe, and expect to receive
from the bounty of Heaven.

II. Which if every one did, it might spare me the labor of asking again,
whether we think in our conscience it is any great matter God demands of us,
when he bids us, if we will obtain eternal life, obey his will revealed to us
by Christ Jesus. Review the Christian Doctrine, a brief account of which I gave
in the former Book;

1. What great matter is it that we find God expects we should do for him? Had
he bid us govern the World, and rule the Nations of the earth; he had set us a
difficult task indeed: But when he requires us only to govern our selves, to
set in order our affections, and to subdue our unruly passions, which give us
no small trouble, and expose us to great danger; what a reasonable demand is
this? and upon what easy terms does he offer Eternal life? We might have
complained, if he had but required every one of us to be rich, and to get great
estates; much more if he had expected we should be Philosophers, and be able to
give an account of the secrets of Nature, and resolve all the questions we meet
withal about the air and the water and the rest of the Elements: But when he
only bids us be content with our portion, and stay for what his wisdom will
dispense to us, and make a sober use of it; and be so wise as to acknowledge
him in all things, and to discern good from evil, and live virtuously in the
enjoyment of him and of our selves, and give a reasonable account of all our
actions; one may well wonder what men would have God to say, if they call this
a very heavy burden. But what if he should command us, with Abraham, to offer
up an only Son; or to feed all our life upon bread and water; or, with the
Anchorets, dig our graves in the wilderness, and have no other tools but our
nails to do it? should we not think it very hard; though we cannot say, as we
may of the former, that it is impossible? And yet, comparatively speaking,
Heaven would be a great bargain after all this. What a purchase then is it,
when he calls for no Sacrifice but that of our own bodies, which we are to
present him holy, chaste and pure, with true devotion and humility of spirit;
together with the sacrifice of praise continually; giving thanks unto him for
all his benefits; and not forgetting to do good, and to communicate; which are
all reasonable services, and sacrifices with which God is well pleased? xii.
Romans 1. xiii. Heb. 15, 16. At what lower rate can Eternal life be set then
this, that we will not be unreasonable? When will we be pleased, if it will not
satisfy us to know that God will give us Eternal life, provided we will live
soberly, and be grateful to him who is the giver of all good things, and do
to others as we would that they should do to us? Is God beholden to us, when
we accept of these terms of Salvation? They that imagine this too great a
mortification, and that they do some mighty matter when they take this course
to go to heaven, must mortify that conceit, or it is not likely they will come
thither.

2. But let us proceed, to consider what it is we must deny and suffer to
attain this Felicity; and see to what the reckoning will come. If we put our
sins into the number of those things we must forsake; it is apparent already,
it would be a trouble to keep them. We are required indeed to crucify the
flesh; which seems an hard saying. But when we have enquired the meaning of it,
there is no severity to be found in it. For it does not oblige us to destroy,
or so much as to impair, any faculty belonging to us: neither to weaken the
Understanding, nor dull the Apprehension, nor overload the Memory; no nor
consume our spirits, nor deform our bodies, nor prejudice our healths, nor
spoil our beauty, or any thing else that God has made. There is no true
pleasure of which he deprives us; unless it be sometimes for a better and more
excellent end. He only abridges our unjust liberty, and limits the hurtful
excesses of our desires and passions; which we are not to gratify against our
reason, to the injury of our selves or our neighbors, and to the indangering
the loss of some better good. In brief, He allows us to please our selves, so
that every part of us be pleased; our Judgment and Conscience, as well as the
lower Appetites. And what now does all this amount unto, but the doing our
selves a real and entire kindness?

But in some state of things God will have us forsake all our worldly goods and
possessions, for the kingdom of heaven's sake; as he required the Apostles and
the first Disciples to Christianity. True. But do we not set too high a price
upon these things, if we value our obedience at a great rate, upon this
account? I will let alone the comparison we ought to make between our loss and
our gain. Weigh things impartially by themselves, and consider what it is we
part withal; should we suffer all our worldly goods to be taken from us,
rather then part with our Religion. Do we lose any more then a Philosopher has
left of his own accord, for the convenience of his study; and that he might not
be encumbered in his contemplations? And while we had them, were all those
things necessary for us? Does Nature require so much? Did not a great many of
them lie by us unused? What a small matter now does the account come to, when
we have made this abatement? And how little reason is there, that the parting
with these things should make such a noise, as if we had made some exceeding
rich present to God's almighty love, from whom we received them?

But let us look upon them again, together with the loss of life; and consider,
Are they things which we could have kept very long? Do we any more then part
with them a little before the time? And what difference is there between their
leaving us, and our leaving them; but the advantage we have, by living a while
after them, to give a proof of a little very short patience, and of entire
trust in God, and absolute resignation to his will? Let the things we leave for
God's sake be rated as high as we please, all that can be made of them comes at
last to this; that, in obedience to God, we let them go a little before we
could not enjoy them. And suppose we be required to die; it is but to go
another way out of the world, then we must shortly, perhaps presently, have
done. There is no difference at all, but only as much as there is between a
sword, and an acute disease; between the flames of fire, and those of a burning
fever.

But we may endure many torments, perhaps, in the world before we die; which
are worse then death it self. It may be so; and there is a possibility, it may
not be so. Now supposing we do not suffer any torments, what a small matter is
it that God asks, that we may go to Heaven? where we shall have an Happiness so
great, that we may well, if need be, (as St. Peter speaks,) consent to endure
something that looks more like selfdeniall then any thing I have mentioned, to
obtain it. And yet when that necessity comes, this will arise to no great
expense. It is no more then we may naturally suffer by the stone, or the gout,
or by some such disease which may seize upon us; and not carry us to heaven
neither. And it is likewise considerable, that wicked men many times take more
pains, and endure a great deal more then this comes to, to go to hell. Do we
not see what attendance their lusts require from them? and that they make
provision for their satisfaction with much solicitude and trouble? Nay, do not
their expenses frequently run very high, to gratify some worldly or fleshly
desire? One man breaks his sleep; another pines his body; a third consumes his
estate; a fourth nourishes loathsome and foul diseases; a fifth breeds cruel
and tormenting pains, which set him upon the rack; a sixth ventures his life,
and runs the hazard of the gallows, or of a severer death. And all sinners
contrive and plot and trouble their brains to find opportunities, and are often
vexed with disappointments, and as often put to shame, and always troubled with
their desires, till they meet with some satisfaction; and being never
satisfied, are always troubled with their restless desires.

Let all these things be considered soberly; and then tell me, whether God
demands great things of us, to obtain Eternal Life: and does not rather
wonderfully oblige us, in accepting so graciously our poor services; nay,
carries us from the happiness of doing his will here, to the happiness of
having it rewarded with a most glorious recompense in another world.

And cast in this consideration also, (which Clemens Alexandrinus Admon. ad
Gentes p. 55.
propounds to the Gentiles,) how much many men would be willing to give, if it
were set at a price, to purchase everlasting Salvation. And therefore what
account can they give of their unwillingness to accept of that on such easy
terms, which cannot be bought with all the gold, if we had it, of the fabulous
Pactolus? We may purchase this most precious Salvation, if we will, (...) with
our own Treasure, which we have within our selves; viz. Charity, and a lively
Faith. This is its just price, says he, which God will gladly accept. For we
hope in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of the
Faithful. But it cannot be obtained by any other means. For they that stick to
this World as weeds do to the rocks in the sea, slight immortality; and judge
themselves unworthy of the other World, which at so low a rate offered it self
to their Faith and Charity.

But we have just reason to proceed a great deal farther then all this; and
supposing a man could always live here without the least trouble, and in the
fullest contentment that either his Soul or body can now enjoy, I ask again,
whether a man that believes the Gospel would be willing to have his Eternal
life in this World: and not rather choose to go thither, where both Soul and
body shall be so wonderfully improved, as to be capable of more solid, pure and
durable pleasures, then this Earth can ever afford. He that considers how weak
humane Nature is in this state, and how unable to entertain it self long with
any of those things which please our senses, will not take much time to resolve
this question. Should we be furnished with the best delights that Nature can
crave, in the most perfect health and vigorous strength; still we should find
either fullness and satiety, or lassitude and weariness follow the enjoyment.
This is a great part of man's vanity in his best Estate; that all his fruitions
either suppose, or make, a consumption of his spirits.

And how short our understandings are and will be while we apprehend by the
brain, and are forced to spend so much time in serving our bodily necessities,
we cannot but be sensible: and therefore shall always be possessed with desires
which cannot here be satisfied; and long to know those things, of which, should
we stay never so many Ages here, we must remain ignorant. Who would not then,
that has any hopes in another world, freely consent to a dissolution, in order
to a better conjunction of Soul and body, in a state of greater strength and
spriteliness to enjoy a fuller good; with greater constancy, without any
weariness or dejection of appetite, with perfect satisfaction, and an eternal
pleasure in enjoying the same again?

And if we agree to this, judge then what reason there is to be exceeding
solicitous to attain that heavenly Bliss, which so inconceivably transcends all
that we can fansy to our selves, but are never like to enjoy, in this world.
And judge again, how unworthy then this short, this troublesome life, which is
but like a dream, full of distracted thoughts and cares and fears, is, to come
into any competition with that Eternal life which we expect. And once more,
how mad they are, who prefer a brutall, wicked life, which mere rational men
have hissed out of the world; before that happy state, which far exceeds even
the life of innocence in a Paradise upon earth.

VI. And let us hence take occasion to consider again; if it be not desirable
always to stay here on this Earth, how far distant are they from the happiness
of the other World, who have their thoughts very rarely there? What shall we
think of such careless believers, as love not to have their minds troubled with
the thoughts of Death and of Eternal Life; with which they desire to have as
little acquaintance as may be, till they come thither? Are they afraid of
believing it too strongly, for fear it should spoil all their earthly delights,
and make them lose the relish they have of bodily pleasures; or hinder their
business, and make them have no list to follow it? There is no danger of this:
for a lively belief of the Life to come heightens all our other joys, by making
them innocent; and furthers our affairs, by making us diligent, but not too
solicitous. But some such fancy possesses the hearts of men; who have no
inclination to entertain any familiarity with Heaven, till they think they are
shortly to leave this Earth. For if we desire them to think often and seriously
of Eternal Life, they return such an Answer as Antipater made to a man that
presented him with a Book concerning Happiness, (...), I am not at leisure:
Tell me of this when I have nothing else to do; now I have other more weighty
employments. This is the sense of men's gross negligence, and their seldom
retiring to look up unto Jesus. Who justly expected not only that greater
multitudes, upon the publishing of such an incomparable glory and happiness,
should become Religious; but that their Piety should arrive to a greater height
of Virtue, by perpetual contemplation of it. Christians, one would think,
should love Virtue more dearly, and be more entirely devoted to the study of
it, now that it has such a dowry; then any Philosophers ever were, who loved
it for it self, and thought it to be its own price and portion. And so they
would, if they did not lay aside all consideration, and suffer the thoughts of
Eternal Bliss to slip out of their minds.

It is a saying among the Jews, that when God first created Man, his stature
was so tall, that he reached from heaven to earth, and could grasp all this
world in his arms, as a very little thing. But post peccatum Deus eum minuit ad
centum cubitos; after he sinned, God took him down to the height of an hundred
cubits. And still as men grew worse and worse, they sunk lower, till they
dwindled away, as we see by our selves, almost to Nothing. The Moral of it is
very true. And if the Christian Faith, like the breath of life wherewith God
inspired Man at the first, did thoroughly possess and renew our Souls; we should
grow up again to such an excellent pitch, as to be above all the Earth, and
tread it under our feet. At the very entrance of it, we should be inflamed with
a most vehement desire and hope to grow till we be above the heavens, and made
associates with the Angels, and sit down with our Blessed Savior in his
Throne. And the lively hope of this will make us presently discharge our selves
of all those evil affections, which have degraded us and sunk us so low, that
many men can scarce be discerned from the brutes that perish. They can speak,
indeed; but that too is so sottishly unreasonable, as it only serves to
proclaim into what a pitiful condition they are fallen. Out of which nothing but
the Christian Faith can raise us; which delivered the Gentile world from their
Idolatry, and purged their hearts, when they lay (...), as Origin often speaks,
in the most confused mixture of all filthiness and impurity. It retains its
virtue still, did we but inliven it by such affectionate considerations as
these. Which make us so ashamed to continue wallowing in the mire, that they
will not suffer us to content our selves with a mean degree of purity; but as
he which called us is holy, so they press us to be holy in all manner of
conversation. 1 Pet. i. 15.

V. And can any man now imagine, there is no danger at all in resisting so
mighty a motive as this, to all well-doing? or that a man shall be no more
miserable after his neglect of such great Salvation, then he would have been if
no such proposal had been made to him? Where have those men lived? what have
they been thinking of all their days, into whose hearts such a belief can
enter, that Christians may sin at as easy a rate as heathens? What? will
despite done to such astonishing love of God to men, as is manifested to us,
not at all inflame the reckoning? Can a man see the Kingdom of Heaven set open
before his eyes, and offered to him; and after he has so contemned it, as to
prefer a little of this World before it, be used as favorably in hell, as if
he had never heard of it? What does our Savior mean then, when he says, It
shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, then for
those places where the Gospel of God's grace was preached? This very thing
will make the fire more devouring, to think for what poor pleasures or gains
they set at naught so stupendous a grace; and that withal they have lost
those things for which they lost Heaven. When they see how inconsiderable all
their past delights were, it will make the madness seem greater, and the more
distract and torment their enraged Minds, to think how dear they now pay for
them. The miserable Soul will then continually pour upon it self the hottest
and most scalding thoughts of its own gross stupidity, and senseless
negligence. It will flame with anger and burning wrath against it self, for the
frantic choice which it has made. And rolling it self in the fire of its own
fretfull and impatient displeasure, will take such a furious revenge upon it
self, as to become its own dreadful executioner. In this misery it will lie
frying for ever; sibique perpetuum pabulum subministrabit, and afford to it
self perpetual fuel, to keep alive the boiling rage and fierce displeasure
it has conceived against it self. The stings thereof will be sharper and more
frequently returning, then any pain, which we are now sensible of, can
represent. The flashes of Lightning are not so searching; and they will be as
quick as the thoughts of a Spirit. And what the hideous and doleful groans of
a Spirit are, we cannot tell; especially that lies under the load of this
thought, that it might have been as happy as now it is miserable.

You may take a review of what was said in the beginning concerning ETERNAL
LIFE, and by that make some judgment of the Misery of those who are so unhappy
as to lose it. They will be deprived of all that Bliss which the Souls and
bodies of the just shall enjoy; and not be able to avoid the sorest pains,
which even from thence will necessarily arise. For the greater you can suppose
their knowledge of God to be in the other World, (which is the Life of pious
Souls,) so mu^^ the greater will their sorrow and heaviness be, to think that
they have lost the favor of the Creator of the World, the Fountain of all
Good. And when they behold the glory wherein the just appear with our Blessed
Lord, this will be a new grief to them, and most miserably afflict their
hearts; whenever they think what praise is given to those holy men whom they
despised, in what glory they shine, and unto what dignity they are preferred;
and on the other side consider their own shame and reproach, and how vilely
they lie under a perpetual curse, pronounced against them before Angels and
men, by the Lord of all.

And it will increase the torment, to consider that they are the cause of all
this misery, which they have drawn upon themselves. Their negligence will come
to mind, which gave no heed to the Divine illuminations. Their contumacy also,
which resisted the Divine motions. Their horrid wickedness, into which they ran
against the cries even of their own consciences. And these considerations they
will not be able to avoid, nor put off the thoughts of the greatness of their
misery. But they will stick close to them, and perpetually sting them; so that
all their Knowledge, which is so comfortable to others, will breed in them the
most exquisite grief and sorrow. This our Savior means by outer darkness, into
which they shall be cast. From whence we may guess in what conditions their
Wills and their Affections must needs be: in which there will be no love of God
at all; nothing, that we can conceive, but envy at the glory of the blessed;
hatred of themselves, as the cause of all this mischief; vexation of heart, to
see how great it is; and desperation of seeing it grow less.

But I shall pursue it no farther, because it would take up too much room in
this discourse, which already begins to grow too big. I shall only add, that
none knows what flames the breath of the Lord will kindle. The power of his
anger is inconceivable; especially when incensed by the slighting of his love.
And therefore what can we say of the dolours which the fire that never goes
out, and the worm that never dies, when they meet together, will cause both in
the Souls and bodies of such contemptuous sinners? Who will begin then to wish
they had never been acquainted with the glad tidings of Salvation; that so they
might have lain in some more private corner of the miserable World, in a bed of
softer and more gentle flames, and without that open disgrace to which they
will be exposed. What an ease would they think it, if they might but have the
favor to houl among the poor Indians, and shriek no louder then other wicked
Pagans; and have no worse Devils to lash them then the lewd Mahometans, who
never had a thought of any thing higher then a fleshly Paradise? And yet the
Pagans themselves thought their condition would be bad enough, if they lived
impiously; and that it was impossible to escape a just punishment in another
world. As appears, among a number of other records, from that discourse I
mentioned of Gobryas; who says the first place men come into when they depart
this life is (...), the Field of truth. So called, because there Judges sit to
examine how every one has passed his life: and there is no way to evade their
sentence by subterfuges or lies, (as his words are,) but they will dispose of
all men with exact justice, according as they deserve. What they had some dark
fancy of, is now plainly and clearly revealed unto us; who are instructed, that
God has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness,
by that man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given assurance unto all
men, in that he has raised him from the dead. xvii. Act. 31. And therefore we
ought to be afraid of treasuring up unto our selves wrath against the day of
wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God; Who will render to
every man according to his deeds: To them, who by patient continuance in
well-doing seek for glory, honor and immortality, eternal life: But unto them
that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath; Tribulation and anguish upon every Soul of man that
does evil, of the Jew (we may say Christian) first, and also of the Gentile.
ii. Romans 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

VI. Consider then, I beseech you, once more, (which is all the questions I
shall ask,) what you are now resolved to do. Will you put it to the venture,
whether you be immortally happy or no? Is it true that Jesus lives, and is the
Lord of all, and will give Eternal life to his servants, worth more then all
the pains they can take for it; but which cannot be wone by trifling and
careless endeavors; and yet offers it self graciously to those that will
accept of it on most reasonable terms, which we cannot refuse without the
greatest disrespect to God and danger to our selves? Consider then, I beseech
you, what is the wisest course for him to take that believes all this, and does
not think we have been all this time discoursing of a fiction. Is every man
that reads these things resolved to become a new creature? and to say, as St.
Paul did after he had seen our Savior, Lord, what would thou have me to do?
or as the Israelites, who beheld no such sights as are set before our eyes, All
that the Lord our God speaks to us, we will hear it and do it?

O that there were such an heart, as it there follows, in every one of us, that
we would mind these things, and no longer neglect such great Salvation! For
what will become of us, if, being thus convinced what we ought to do, we
should put away this Blessedness from us, and judge our selves unworthy of
Eternal life? God forbid that we should be so wicked, and so miserable. Shall
such glorious things, and so certain, be proposed to us, and few or none regard
them? A Kingdom, a Crown of glory lie before us, and we scornfully overlook it?
Woe be to us, that the Father from heaven should speak so often and so loudly,
and we not hearken to his voice! That the Eternal Word should appear in glory,
and we fools be taken more with fading beauties! That the Holy Ghost should
descend from heaven, and the Devil still carry all before him! That the Lord
Jesus should shed his precious blood for us, and we not part with a vile
affection! What is become of our wit? where do our Souls dwell? or what company
have they kept, that they are grown so void of all reason? Or do they think
themselves so wise, that they have found something better then God? something
more valuable then Eternal life, and more certain too? When did the World get
it self made so great a Good? On what day was it that it engaged hereafter to
be more constant to its Friends? Where are the Witnesses, and the Seal to this
bond?

Ah wretched fools that we are, to let our Souls be cheated so easily of such
an happiness! or rather thus to impose upon our selves with such weak and
childish imaginations! Is any thing here grown so big, that we cannot see the
disproportion between it and Heaven? or is this World of such grand concern to
us, that we cannot be at leisure to hear what our Savior offers us? Have we no
greater regard to these Witnesses, then to suffer them to be baffled by every
fleshly reasoning, though never so silly and inconsiderable? Let us bethink our
selves a little better. Let us do them so much right, as to examine them
impartially; and then if they deserve not belief, let the Devil and the World
take all. But if they declare beyond all exception, that Jesus is the Lord, and
has Eternal life, and will bestow it on those that obey him, let us not be so
bold as to slight him any longer; but go and humbly tender our hearts to him,
and give him thanks that he will accept them. Is his yoke, think you, uneasy,
and his burden too great a load? What was the load then which he carried, when
all our sins were laid upon him? what a yoke was the Cross it self, and all the
indignities that he suffered? And yet for the joy that was set before him (and
which he has now set before us) he endured all with admirable patience. And
indeed what can be too hard for him, who knows he labors for an infinite
reward? Do we not all part with things very desirable, for a small gain we are
to get by the exchange? And how earnest, how fierce are we to drive on such a
bargain? How contentedly can the tradesman lose his dinner on the market day,
rather then lose a customer, by whom he hopes to gain a shilling? All the
traffic in the world is carried on by giving one thing for another; and many
times upon a little advantage. And therefore what makes us so unwilling to part
with any thing in the world that God calls for, when he offers to give us goods
of inestimable value in the room of it?

It is not a small portion that he assures us in his love, but he says we shall
inherit all things, and that for ever. When we have served him threescore years
and ten, (and who is there, alas! that serves him so much?) he does not promise
to settle on us an estate of so little as fourscore score or an hundred years,
of incomparable happiness in the next World; (though we count it no mean
bargain here, to part with a Lease of 70 years for one of 80 that is of equal
value;) but more then so many Ages, more then millions of lives, even an
Eternal life with himself in the heavens. Is there not a vast difference? Is
not the disparity inconceivable between what we lay out, and what we receive;
and between the bargains we are so greedy of here, and this happy exchange
which God offers us? Why then is it neglected, as if it were too dear at the
rates on which it is proposed? Are we not willing to give so much for it? Or is
not the security good which God gives us for those heavenly possessions? Look
over the Evidences again which we have examined, and you will be ashamed to
call them in question. And if you be satisfied, it will be a greater shame not
to pursue this gainful purchase, with the same eagerness, care and diligence,
that we do our several employments in this world. We ought to account that day
best spent, not wherein we have got the most money, but wherein we have made
some considerable improvement in true wisdom, and done some singular service
to our Lord Jesus, who is our hope. And in all our external affairs let us
exercise such justice, charity, thankfulness, and contented humility, that we
may be able to say, if any body ask us what we are doing, We work for Eternity.

And that we may do so, and not like Esau sell our inheritance for a mess of
pottage, (which will not be worth the tears it will cost us in this world, if
ever we reflect upon our folly,) let us often cast our eyes upon this
Happiness, frequently meditate on the joy of our Lord, and study seriously
those holy Writings, wherein these precious promises are recorded. The Jews are
so proud of their Law, (which has no such Jewels in it neither,) that they
fansy the Angels contended with Moses about it; and would needs persuade him
that it belonged to them Pirke El^^zer Cap. XLVI.
. I am sure St. Peter says, that those heavenly Ministers have so great a value
for the Gospel, that they desire to look into these things: wondering that we
Gentiles should be made, not only fellow-citizens with the Saints, but, equal
to themselves. They rejoiced when they heard the good news, that our Lord was
come down to men; and it seems he has told us things beyond all their
expectation. Shall not we then set a due esteem upon them, and look into them,
and consider them, who have them so near unto us, and are so much concerned in
them? Then it were better for us if we had no eyes, or if we lived in those
places where no such things are to be seen: for none will be so miserable, as
they that might have been exceeding happy, and chose to remain miserable; and
that when so few thoughts would have secured their happiness. For there is no
way to be undone, but only by not believing, or not considering the Gospel of
God's grace. Secure but these two passages; and strict piety will necessarily
be our employment, and Eternal Life our reward. No temptation will be strong
enough to make us neglect our work; and, I am sure, faithful is he who has
promised, and will not fail to pay us more then our wages.

VI.
And what now remains, but to put those in mind who obediently believe in the
Lord Jesus, what cause they have to entertain themselves beforehand with great
joy, in the comfortable expectation of God's mercy in Him to Eternal life? Let
all his true-hearted Disciples, who hear his voice, and follow him, rejoice;
yea, let them be glad in him with exceeding joy. Let them say, O how great is
the goodness of God! how rich are those blessings which he has laid up for
them that love him! how exceeding great and precious are the promises he has
made them! Our calling in Christ Jesus, how high is it! what is there nobler
then his kingdom and glory? To which also he has called us, by glory and
virtue. Heaven and earth concur in the most glorious and powerful manner to
give us assurance, that it shall be well, exceeding well, with all those that
love the Lord Jesus in sincerity.

Why should we suffer our selves then to be dejected at any accident in this
world, which falls cross to us? Shall we take pet when any thing troubles us,
and let our spirits die within us, who have such glorious hopes to live upon,
and mightily support us? Jesus is alive: He is alive for evermore: And in him
is Eternal life for all his followers. The Father, the Word, the Holy Ghost,
are come to comfort us with this joyful news. The Water, the Blood, and the
Spirit, all say the same; and ask us why we are so sad, when life and
immortality is brought to light by the Gospel. It is the desire of the Lord
Jesus, that we would not mourn; as though he still lay in his grave, and could
do nothing for us. He is certainly risen, and gone into the heavens; where God
has made him exceeding glad with his countenance. And it will add to his joy,
if it be capable of increase, to see us rejoice with joy unspeakable and full
of glory. And therefore let us do him the honor, to glory in his holy Name:
and let us say always, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which, according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively
hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead; to an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
us. 1 Pet. i. 3, 4.

We ought to say so with joyful hearts, even when death it self approaches;
which of all other is the most frightfull Enemy of mankind, but is made our
Friend by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death,
and has brought life and immortality to light, through the Gospel. 2 Timothy i.
10. Which has given us, as the same Apostle says, such everlasting
consolation, that it would be a great reproach to it to receive Death
timorously; which Wise men, before our Savior came, concluded might be, for
any thing they knew, (...), the greatest of all goods. Our Lord assures us they
were right in their conjectures; and has made that certain, which Socrates
(whose words those are) left doubtful. Plato Apolog. Socr.
And therefore we ought not to leave the world, as if it were the greatest
unhappiness that could befall us. It is for him only to fear death (as St.
Cyprian speaks L. de Mortalitate, p. 208.
) who would not go to Christ; and he only has reason to be unwilling to go to
Christ, who does not believe he shall begin to reign with him. This is the
only thing (as he writes a little after) which makes men take death so
heavily, quia fides deest, because Faith is wanting; because they do not
believe those things are true, which He who is Truth it self has promised: But
though they give credit to what a grave and laudable person promises, they are
wavering about that which God says, and receive it with an incredulous mind.
For if they believed, they would entertain that which now seems dreadful, as
St. Greg. Nazianzen Orat. xviii. p. 284.
says that blessed Martyr did; whose Death he doubts whether he should call his
departure from this life, or rather, (...), his departure of God, or the
fulfilling of his desire. And thus (if we may believe Calcidius) the famous
Trismegistus died, Fr. Archangel. Dogm. Cabalistica.
saying to his Son that stood by him, My Son, hitherto I have lived an exile
from my country; but now I am going safe thither. And therefore when, a little
while hence, I shall be freed from the chain of this body, see that you do not
bewail me as if I was dead. For I am only returning to that most excellent
blessed City; whither the Citizens cannot arrive, unless they take death in
their way. There God only is the Governor in chief; who entertains his
Citizens with a mavelous sweetness: in comparison with which, that which we
now call Life, is rather to be termed Death.

And what if, in our passage to it, we should fall into diverse temptations, or
trialls of our sincere affection to the Lord Jesus? There is no reason that
this should dishearten us, and deaden our spirits: For it is the singular
privilege of a Christian, to rejoice in the Lord always, (iv. Phil. 4.)
especially when he suffers for righteousness sake. In that case the Apostles
thought it an honor, that they were counted worthy to be beaten, and suffer
shame for his Name. v. Act. 41. And St. James thought their example was not
unimitable by other Christians, to whom he says, i. 2. My Brethren, count it
all joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations. And so they did, as you read in
the Epistle to the Christian Hebrews; of whom the Apostle gives this testimony,
x. 34. Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves,
that you have in heaven a better and enduring substance. This consideration
made them look upon the rapine, which the seditious people committed in their
houses, without that dejection which on such occasions appears in other
countenances. And yet they were men like our selves, who walked by faith, and
not by sight; that is, did not enjoy the thing it self which they expected. 2
Cor. v. 7. And therefore what should hinder the same effect in our hearts, if
we believe as they did?

And to show the mighty power of this heavenly principle, these three things
may be here pertinently noted, out of the records they have left us of their
spirit in all their sufferings.

I. And first, I find, that when the heaviest cross lay upon them, the sense
they had of things to come supported them under it with admirable resolution.
This was the least effect of their holy Faith; which made them, when the hearts
of others sunk under the load, and fell down, as we say, into their knees,
stand like a strong pillar, which bears up the whole weight of the house, and
never yield at all. The thoughts of what our Lord had promised, not only
preserved them from murmuring and repining at their present condition (knowing
what good provision he had made for them hereafter,) but from fainting, and
being sluggish in their Ministry. For which cause we faint not, or do not grow
lazy, says St. Paul: (knowing, that is, that he who raised up the Lord Jesus,
would raise up them also:) for though our outward man perish, (or wear away,)
yet the inward man is renewed (or grows more youthful) day by day. 2 Cor. iv.
14, 16. And (2.) this faith also preserved them from swounding fear, either of
disgrace, or pain, or death; being in nothing terrified by their adversaries:
(says the same Apostle i. Phil. 28.) who, seeing them undaunted under all
their sufferings, had reason to look upon this as an evident token of their
perdition, and of the Salvation God would give to these his valiant Champions.
And (3.) from sorrowing also, and lamenting the loss of any thing; because this
Good, they found, was still secure. 2 Cor. vi. 10. Which made them, as he there
says again, to be always full of joy, though in the eye of the world they
looked very sorrowfully. And so ( lastly) they kept their stedfastness, and
turned not away from the holy commandment delivered unto them. Whereby they
marvellously promoted Christianity: And the God of all grace, who has called
us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that they had suffered a
while, made them perfect, stablished, strengthened, settled them. 1 Pet. v. 10.

II. But the hope of Eternal life did not merely support and uphold their
spirits; it wonderfully refreshed and comforted them in all their afflictions:
so that they durst confidently promise to all other suffering Christians the
same heavenly comforts from God. Who comfort us (says St. Paul) in all our
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by
the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. And our hope of you
is steadfast, knowing that as you are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye
be also of the consolation. 2 Cor. i. 4, 7. Their comfort and rejoicing was,
the testimony of their conscience, that everywhere they acted sincerely; (ver.
12.) and that they served a good Master, who had promised them better fare in
the next World, where he reigns in full power and glory. His Kingdom, they
knew, was not of this World, even as he was not of the World; and therefore
they did not expect he should give them a portion of good things here. No; He
told them plainly, in the World ye shall have tribulation; but adds in the same
breath, be of good cheer, I have overcome the World. xvi. Joh. 33.

III. Which victory of his over death and the grave encouraged them to follow
him in all their tribulations, not merely with simple comfort, but with joy, as
I have observed already; and more then that, made them exceeding glad, and even
shout for joy. So our Savior himself required them to do, when they were
reviled and persecuted for his Name sake. v. Matt. 12. Rejoice, and be
exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven. And so they did, as St.
Paul tells us v. Romans 2, 3. We rejoice in hope of the glory of God; and not
only so, but we glory in tribulations also. For they had this strong
consolation, as the Divine Writer to the Hebrews calls it; First, that nothing,
either in this World or the other, could take away that heavenly Good from
them. As St. Paul also testifies in that triumph of his, viii. Romans 38, 39. I
am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. When their goods were taken away, they could make their
boast in Christ, and say, Our inheritance is immovable. When they were driven
from house and home, (as we speak,) they could triumph, and say, Our house is
eternal in the heavens, from which none can exclude us. When they were in
pain, they still remembered our Savior's own words, Your joy shall no man take
from you. In death it self they could glory, and say, Jesus, our Life, dies
not; and because he lives, we shall live also. And (2.) as they knew they could
not lose their future Happiness, so they knew it to be incomparably greater
then all their sufferings. viii. Romans 18. For I reckon, that the sufferings of
this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor. iv. 17. Where
there is a Third Reason of their exceeding great joy; because these
afflictions, which they endured for Christ's sake, would increase their glory
hereafter, and make their crown beyond all expression heavier. And more then
that, (4.) hereby not only their present afflictions were alleviated and
seemed trivial; but they gave them a clearer sight of that most excellent
glory beforehand: while they looked not (as it there follows ver. 18.) at the
things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; The removal of
these things here below from before their eyes, fixed them more steadfastly on
the invisible World. Now their joy was full, as our Savior speaks xvi. Joh.
24. now it overflowed; when all things else had forsaken them, and nothing else
but those unseen enjoyments remained to comfort them. This heavenly glory shone
brightest in the dark and horrible pit: where their afflictions brought them
sweeter contentment, then ever was the fruit of any earthly pleasure. And so we
may still hope, that when other things, by any calamity in this world, stand
afar off, and can do nothing for us; there will be the more room for the
thoughts and sense of this future bliss, to spread it self, and fill the whole
capacity of pious hearts. Then they will be most at leisure; then invisible
things will seem most real; then they will most strongly affect the heart: so
that they will not be the worse for their afflictions, but the better; and
their pains will but bring them the sooner to heavenly joys.

And should not our Faith work thus mightily in our hearts, at least supporting
us with true satisfaction under all our troubles, it would be an exceeding
great shame to us: when we consider with what resolution, courage and
cheerfulness, they, whose knowledge of heavenly things was darker then ours,
received the most dreadful sufferings, even death it self, before the coming
of our Savior. The Mother and her seven Sons, whose story is recorded in the
second Book of the Maccabees, Chap. vii. are a famous instance of this; who in
hope of a blessed Resurrection, when the belief of it stood on a feebler
foundation then ours, offered themselves to the sharpest torments, rather then
break the Law of their Creator. Neither the Strapado, nor the Wheel to rack
their joints, nor Hooks of iron to tear their flesh, nor the fury of wild
Beasts, nor boiling Caldrons, nor the fiercest Fires, no evil present, no
evil to come, could move the hearts of these young men, who were in their
flourishing years; or make them yield a jot to the wicked tyrant, who would
have had them transgress the Ordinances of Moses. They are the words of that
great man, Orat. xxii. (...), p. 401, etc.
St. Gregory Nazianzen; who has admirably summed up their speeches, in an
Oration of his which he made in their commendation: where he proceeds in this
manner. One of the Brethren spoke in one fashion, and the rest in another;
according as the words of the Tyrant, or the order of their sufferings, gave
occasion. But to comprise all in a little compass, this was the substance of
what they said. O King Antiochus, and all you that are here present, be it
known unto you that we have one King, even God Almighty, from whom we come, and
unto whom we must return. And we have one Lawgiver, Moses, whom we will never
betray nor reproach; though another Antiochus, more fierce and severe then
thou, should threaten us. (...). Our only security is, to keep the
commandment; and not to break the law whereby we are guarded. Our only glory
is, for such great things to despise all glory beside. Our only riches are,
the hopes we have hereafter. Our only fear, lest we should fear any thing more
then God. With these reasons we now come armed into the field of danger. We are
but young, it is true, and this World is sweet; our native Country, our
Friends, our Kindred, our dear Companions, invite us to stay with them. But
none of them are so sweet as God, none so dear as those very dangers, which we
expose our selves unto for Virtue's sake. Harbor no such thoughts, we humbly
beseech you; for there is another World also which expects us, more lofty and
durable by far then all that we behold in this. Jerusalem that is above is our
Country; which no Antiochus can besiege, no power on earth can touch or
endanger. All those that are born of God, are our Kindred: the Prophets and
Patriarchs our Friends, from whom we have received a pattern of piety. And our
Companions are all those who hazard themselves with us this day, and are our
contemporaries in constant suffering. Heaven is more glorious then our Temple
it self: the Quire of Angels infinitely beyond our solemn Assemblies: And there
is one great Mystery, GOD himself, whom all our sacred Mysteries here respect.
And therefore cease to make us any more offers and promises of little things,
which are nothing worth. We love not those shameful honors, which we shall
get by denying God. We were not bred to make such unthrifty bargains; and
cannot traffic with thee on such base and ignoble terms. And therefore cease
also to threaten us; or we can return more dreadful threatenings, which will
reprove thy weakness. For know that we have a fire, into which to throw our
Persecutours. Do thou think thou have to do with Gentile people? Those, it
is true, thou have overcome: they have yielded to thy threatenings and power.
And no wonder; for they did not fight for such glorious things as we. They
only defended their cities and goods; but we defend the Law of the most High.
Thou opposest thy self now against the Tables writ with the finger of God;
against the most holy and divine Service; against the Rites of our country,
which reason and time have made honorable; against seven Brethren, who are
linkt together by one Soul; whom it is no such mighty business to overcome, but
to be worsted by them will be most shameful. And be assured, we will set up
seven Monuments of thy disgrace: for we are the progeny and disciples of those
who were led by a pillar of fire and a cloud; to whom the Sea parted it self,
and the Sun stood still, and Bread rained down from heaven; and who triumphed
over mighty kings, by prayer and lifting up their hands to heaven. And to say
something that comes within the compass of thy knowledge, we are bred up under
Eleazar, whose fortitude and courage thou art not ignorant of. The Father led
the way; the Sons follow him to the like combat. Therefore it is to no
purpose, to add any more threatenings: we can suffer greater things then those
thou speak of. (...), There are none more valiant then they that are ready
to endure all things. Why do you delay to begin your cruelty? what do you stay
for, or expect? Do you think we may change our minds, and recant? No; we
protest again and again, we will never eat impure flesh: we will never break
the Law of our God. Thou shall sooner turn to our Religion, then we to thine.
Let hotter fires be kindled; let more ravenous beasts be brought forth; let
more exquisite torments be invented: in short, either devise some new
punishment, or know that we despise these that are before us.

These, says he, were their words to the Tyrant; in the relation of which I am
wonderfully delighted. And then embracing and kissing one another, with no less
cheerfulness then if they had been come to receive their reward, Let us go,
said they with a loud voice, let us go to meet these dangers. Let us make
haste, while the Tyrant is hot and chafes; lest he cool again, and we lose the
Salvation. What though it cost us our lives? must not we leave them some time
or other? must we not pay the debt we owe to Nature? Let us convert then a
necessity, into our choice and a glory. Let us deceive the grave; and make that
peculiar, which is common. By death, let us make a purchase of life. Let none
of us faint in our undertaking, nor be desirous to live here any longer. Let us
make the Tyrant despair of moving others, by seeing our constancy. Let him
appoint our sufferings, we will put an end to them. Let us make it appear that,
as we are Brethren by birth, so we are in all things else; not excepting death.

Such was the resolution, says he, of these men; who did not serve pleasure,
nor suffered themselves to be governed by their passions: but purified their
bodies and their spirits, and in this manner were translated (...), to that
life which is incapable of any passion, and free from all the troubles and
miseries to which here we are exposed. It would be too long to relate the
speech of the Mother; who likewise gave an illustrious testimony of her faith
in God, and has left a rare example, to all posterity, of constancy and
patience under the greatest sufferings. The Apostle himself has perpetuated
their Memory in his Epistle to the Hebrews, and made it sacred to all
generations. Where it will stand to our great confusion, if we should not learn
of those who had so great a Faith, under so dark a revelation. What would not
these persons have done, says the forenamed Father, if they had lived in our
times; who were so courageous before the sufferings of Christ, and the glory (I
may add) that followed after? If without example they behaved themselves so
undauntedly; what rare Souls would they have been with one; especially with the
example of Christ Jesus? Such we ought to strive to be, not only as they were,
but as we conceive they would have been under our Master. Strengthened, I mean,
as St. Paul speaks, with all might according to his glorious power, unto all
patience and long-suffering with joyfulness; giving thanks unto the Father,
which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light. i. Col. 11, 12. And so we shall, if the same spirit of faith be in us
that was in them. For it tells us how Jesus went this way to heaven; and that
if we overcome, we shall shine with him in his glory, and sit down with him in
his throne, and inherit all things.

There need no more be said to encourage even those Christians who have been
most delicately bred, or that are of the tenderer Sex, to wade through the
greatest difficulties. Let them but look up unto Jesus, and He will inflame
them with such ardent love, that they will be glad to follow him to his Cross,
if they must go that way to come where He is. This moved Dorotheus and diverse
other Courtiers, (who, as Eusebius L. viii. Eccles. Histor. c. 6.
reports, were (...), of the Emperor's Bedchamber, and in such high favor,
that they were no less beloved then if they had been the Emperor's own
children,) to prefer the reproaches and pains of piety, and the new-devised
deaths they were to suffer for its sake, before all the glory and delights
wherein they lived. And St. Peter, we are told by Clemens Alexandrinus L. vii.
Stromat. p. 756.
, seeing his own Wife led to death, rejoiced at the grace to which she was
called; thinking now she was upon her return home. And cheerfully exhorting her
to proceed to the execution, he called her by her name, saying only these few
words, (...), REMEMBER THE LORD. That was sufficient, he knew, to make her
constant and courageous: It being a faithful saying, (an undoubted principle
of Christianity, on which we may ever safely build,) For if we be dead with
him, we shall also live with him: if we suffer with him, we shall also reign
with him. 2 Timothy ii. 11, 12. And it was no less steadfastly believed, that they
who suffered with him should also reign with him in a greater glory then
others; as we heard before from St. Paul, who says, their afflictions would
work for them a most ponderous crown of glory. Nay, they gave the like
encouragement to all those who did any eminent service to our Blessed Lord.
They that labored hard, for instance, in the Word and Doctrine, St. Paul
says, were worthy of double honor, or reward, in this World. 1 Timothy v. 17.
Which few receiving, (but quite contrary, they were least esteemed, as he
himself found by experience, who took the most pains,) there was the greater
reason to hope to find it in another life: when the chief Shepherd appearing,
they were sure to receive an excellent crown of glory. 1 Pet. v. 4. To every
Saint our Lord promises a crown of glory: (as those crowns were wont to be
called, that they used in times of greatest joy:) the word (...) added to it
(which is never used in any other place of Scripture, and is that whereby some
of the crowns given to persons of desert in other Nations are called,) denotes,
I think, something extraordinary in the glory of those good Shepherds, who fed
the flock of God according to the directions the Apostle had been giving them.

The Martyrs, we are sure, expected it; who building on this foundation, that
they who suffer with him, shall reign with him, gave God thanks when they
received the sentence of death; and went to the execution singing; and expired
with hymns in their mouths; and exhorted others, in the midst of their
torments, to the like cheerful constancy. Of all which I could produce
instances out of the Ecclesiastical story; but I shall only set down that of
Liberatus and his Monks. Who defending the Christian Faith against the Heresy
of Arius, when they were condemned to be thrown bound into a ship full of
faggots, and there to be burnt in the midst of the Sea, sang aloud this hymn;
Victor Uticensis L. iv. Vandal. Persec.
Glory be to God in the highest. Behold, now is the acceptable time: Behold,
now is the day of Salvation; in which we suffer punishment for the faith of our
God.

And why should not this faith, much more easily, comfort us against the death
of our dearest Friends; when we can reasonably hope they depart from us, to go
into the eternal Happiness of a better World? Their gain is so great, which
they have made by the exchange, that we ought not so heavily, as we are wont,
to take our own loss. This Photius represents very handsomely to his Brother
Tarasius; after he had said a great many other things, to stop the tears that
he shed immoderately for a daughter who was dead. Suppose, says he, Epist.
ccxxxii. p. 352.
thy Daughter should appear to thee, and, taking thee by the hand, should kiss
it with a cheerful and smiling countenance, saying, My Father, why do thou
afflict thy self in this manner? why do thou bemoan me, as if I was gone to
an evil condition? My lot is fallen unto me in Paradise; a place most sweet to
behold, and far sweeter to enjoy: (...), but the experiment exceeds all belief.
Into this the crooked Serpent cannot wind himself, as he did into that of our
Forefathers; nor so much as whisper any of his deceitful temptations. There is
none among us, but whose Mind is impregnable, and cannot be overcome by any
artifice; nor can we desire to be gratified with any greater good. For we are
all of us wise, with the Divine and heavenly wisdom; and our whole life is a
continued magnificent festival, in the enjoyment of infinite and unspeakable
goods. Splendidly clothed, we see God in a splendid manner, (as far as man can
see him;) and ravished with his inexplicable, inconceivable beauty, we rejoice
always, and are never weary. Which abundant pleasure is the very perfection of
love; and the power of enjoying accompanying love, begets that ineffable joy
and exultation of spirit. So that now, while I converse with thee, a most
mighty love to those things draws me away, and suffers me not to expound the
least part of them. Thou, and my dear Mother, shall one day come thither; and
then confess I have said very little of such great Goods; but accuse thy self
very much for bewailing me, who happily enjoy them. Therefore, my dearest
Father, let me go away with joy, and do not detain me any longer; lest thou
suffer a greater loss, and for that be more bitterly afflicted.

If thy Daughter, I say, could after this or the like sort speak to thee,
would thou not be ashamed to continue thy lamentations? and choose rather,
with joy to let her go away rejoicing? Consider then, if upon a Child's saying
such things, we should presently grow better, and be of good comfort; shall we,
when our common Creator and Lord cries, He that believes in me, though he
die, yet shall he live; and, God has prepared for them that love him such
things as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have they entered into the
heart of man; be nothing better for such joyful tidings, but, like infidels,
go on still to increase our sad lamentations?

We cannot answer this Question any other way, but by silence; or rather,
cheerful thanksgivings to God, who has given us such everlasting consolation,
and good hope through his grace, as may well enable us to say in every other
troublesome condition, Why art thou thus cast down, O my Soul? why art thou
disquieted within me? Hope in God, and rejoice in his holy Name, who, thanks be
to his goodness, gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us
shake hands with grief, sadness and sorrow; and leave them to those who have no
hope of Eternal Life. Let us make our boast in the Lord, and say that He is
good, for his mercy endures for ever. Come, my Soul, what is it that afflicts
thee? Will not the thoughts of the joys of heaven give thee ease, nay perfectly
cure thee? Will not a sight of Jesus, sitting on the throne of his glory,
revive thee? It is but a moment or two, and we shall be with him where he is.
Let us have patience for a few days more of banishment from our heavenly
country. Hold out, my Soul, for a short pilgrimage, and we shall arrive at our
promised inheritance. Shall we bemoan our selves thus miserably, for whom our
God has made such gracious provision? Shall we be weary, who want but a few
steps, and we are at our eternal rest? Behold, behold thy Savior: Yonder he
is: I see him shining in his celestial glory. He looks upon me, methinks, and
says, Be of good cheer, for I am preparing a place for thee.

Do we not forget, O my Soul, that Jesus is so highly advanced; when we suffer
our selves to be thus cast down and sadly dejected? Do we not reproach his
memory, and, in effect, say too grossly, He is dead, He is not risen; who can
choose but mourn and be sorrowful? For shame let us stay our tears, till the
testimonies we have heard can be disproved; till it appear that Jesus is still
in his grave, and these are Six false Witnesses, which stand up for him. But in
the mean time let us rejoice, that they never yet could be confuted; but have
born down all the opposition of the World and the Devil for more then Sixteen
hundred years, to the eternal honor of Jesus.

O sweet Name! why do we dishonor it with sour faces, and sad countenances,
and a melancholic life? If he live, sure he will be as good as his word, that
we shall live also. Let us never forget those words of grace, Because I live,
ye shall live also. And let us never remember them, but with new delight. Let
it delight us to repeat them a thousand times in a day. As long as we live, let
us comfort our selves with this; Our Lord has said, Because I live, ye shall
live also. Does it not fill a Merchant's heart with joy, to hear that his Ship
is arrived at a safe port; though many leagues from his own house? Does not the
Countryman look brisk when his Seed-time is good; though he must wait many
weeks before he reap his desired Harvest? Let not us then be the only lumpish
insensible things, who hear the joyful news that Jesus is alive, and safely
arrived at our Father's house, where there are many Mansions. Let not us be so
stupid as to be discontented, who have his word for it, that we shall live with
him. But let us rejoice, and say as the Psalmist does, (we have more reason for
it, Psalm. lvi. 10, 11.
) In God will I praise his word: in the Lord will I praise his word. In him
have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man, or any thing else, can do
unto me. Jesus has said I shall live: I will depend on his word; and expect,
after all my tossings up and down in this troublesome World, to land shortly in
the Paradise of God.

Paradise! O that comfortable word! that sweetest of all words! What should we
not have given to hear of any hopes of it, if God had not promised it? And
shall we now make light account of it? God forbid. We will not sigh at the
thoughts of death it self; seeing it is but the gate of Paradise. We will look
upon it with a smile, and say it is welcome. We will tell it that it is a
long-lookt-for friend; and bid it do its office, and make way for our entrance
into the place that Jesus has prepared for us. What though we have not much
acquaintance with that World? what though it be a place where we never were;
and from whence no Friend that is gone thither has returned, to tell us what
it is? Jesus knew it very well, (that is enough;) else he would not have endured
so much for it. He is perfectly acquainted with it; for from thence he came,
and there he is. And therefore let us not be timorous, when we think of
removing to a strange country; but confidently rely on his knowledge more then
our own. Let us remember the words of these Witnesses, which say, He is the Son
of God, in whom is Eternal Life. Let us trust his judgment, who thought it
more desirable to go away, though upon a Cross, then to stay here in the
greatest pleasure. And since all these Witnesses say, He is in heaven; let us
resolve that we will die looking up to him, and saying,

Lord, remember it is the will of the Father, that we should have Everlasting
Life. Thou thy self appearedst to St. Stephen, and made him confident thou will receive our Spirit. The Holy Ghost, which is the Spirit of Truth, says
thou art glorified, and wilt glorify us with thy self. This thou have preached
to us. This thy Blood has purchased for us. This thou did rise again to
prepare, against our coming to thee. This thy holy Apostles say thou sentest
them to publish to the World. This thou have made us believe, and wait for, and
suffer for, and long to enjoy. O Dearest Lord, and most merciful Savior, who
art the true and faithful Witness, though we miserable sinners deserve to be
denied, yet deny not thy self: let not the price of thy precious Blood be lost;
let not the Word of the Father, of the Holy Ghost, thine own Word, fail. If
thou art not alive, I am content to perish. But if thou art, as thou have
persuaded me; then I will not cease to call upon thee: I will die with these
words in my mouth, and be confident thou will hear me, LORD JESUS, RECEIVE MY
SPIRIT.

Thus the blessed Martyr St. Stephen expired; looking up steadfastly unto Jesus,
the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who then appeared in glory to him. Whose
example all the rest of that Noble Army followed; triumphing over death, in an
assured hope of immortal life. Which they had not the least doubt of, it is
manifest from hence, that (as Clemens Alexandrinus observes L. vii. Stromat. p.
756.
) (...), in the very extremity of their torments they gave thanks to God, who
they knew would reward their fidelity; having in this very way consecrated
Jesus to the highest Office, of being the Finisher or Crowner of our Faith.
Therefore their heart was glad, and their glory rejoiced: And they sang
cheerfully, with the holy Psalmist, but with a far greater confidence; God
shall redeem my Soul from the power of the grave, for he shall receive me.
xlix. Psalm. 15.

And, O thou Lord, Greg. Naz. Orat. x. in Caesarium fratrem, p. 176.
and Creator of all things, especially of this thy Workmanship! O thou God,
and Father of thy Men! O thou Lord of life and death! O thou benefactour of
Souls, and dispenser of all good things! O thou who did form all things, and
in due time, thou best know how in the depth of thy wisdom and
administration, wilt transform us, by that Divine Artificer, the WORD! Receive
me also hereafter, when thou see most convenient; in the mean time governing
me in this flesh, as long as it will be profitable. And receive me in thy fear,
prepared, not disturbed, nor hanging back at the last day, and dragged by force
from hence, (like the lovers of the World and the Flesh,) but cheerfully and
willingly, unto that everlasting and blessed Life which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

And, Id. Orat. xlii. (...), p. 696.
O thou WORD of God! thou Light! thou Life, and Wisdom and Power! (for I
delight in all thy Names:) O thou Offspring and Image of that great Mind! O
intellectual WORD, and visible Man, who upholdest all things by the word of
thy power! May it now please thee to accept of this Book, (though not the
first fruits, yet the last perhaps that I may be able to offer thee,) both as a
grateful acknowledgment for all thy benefits, and an humble supplication that
I may have no other troubles, beside the necessary, sacred ones of my Charge.
Stop the fury of any disease which may seize on me; or thy sentence, if I be
removed by thee. And if thou art pleased to grant me a dissolution according to
my desire, and I be received into the Heavenly Tabernacles; there I hope to
offer acceptable Sacrifices to thee, at thy holy Altar, O FATHER, and WORD, and
HOLY GHOST: for to thee belongs all Glory, Honor, and Dominion, for ever and
ever. Amen.

THE END.
Books written by the Reverend Dr. Patrick, and Printed for Richard Royston at
the Angel in Amen-corner.
THE Christian Sacrifice: a Treatise showing the Necessity, End and Manner of
receiving the holy Communion: together with suitable Prayers and Meditations
for every Month in the Year; and the Principal Festivals in memory of our
Blessed Savior. In Four Parts. The Third Edition Corrected. The Devout
Christian instructed how to Pray and give Thanks to God: Or a Book of Devotions
for Families and particular persons in most of the concerns of Humane life. The
2. Edition, in Twelves. An Advice to a Friend. The 2. Edition, in Twelves. A
Friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist, in Octavo. In two
Parts. The Witnesses to Christianity; or, The Certainty of our Faith and Hope:
In a Discourse upon 1 S. John v. 7, 8. In two Parts, in Octavo, new. A Sermon
Preached before the King on St. Stephen's day, Printed by His Majesty's special
command.

