SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the WOOD CALLED Lignum Nephriticum, Imported from
HISPANIOLA: SHOWING Its Admirable VIRTUES In Dissolving The STONE in the REINS
and BLADDER, Helping the Strangury, and Stoppings in the Water, and Easing all
Pains proceeding from thence, etc.

Written by a Doctor of Physic in the Country to the President of the
College of Physicians in London.

Printed in the Year 1694.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Nephritick Wood, IMPORTED FROM The INDIES: In
a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
YOu may justly wonder that I who am a Stranger to you, should communicate a
Specific Medicine to one whose Experience can furnish him with many; but the
Reason why I do it, is, because your Eminent Station in the College renders
you the more capable of recommending it to the Practice of other Physicians. I
confess the thing has been known by Name a long time, but it has not been
brought into general use; and this was the Fate of the Peruvian Bark, until we
know who made successful Experiments of it, and brought it into Great
Reputation.

I have in my Travels through several Parts of the World, made many curious
Observations upon the use of specific Remedies, and I have Communicated
several, as some at London can tell you. I know no more need of Publishing my
Name, than the Author of The Whole Duty of Man had for Not-divulging his. I am
sure my Design is not private Advantage, but Public Benefit.

I hear of very considerable Cures that have been wrought at London by the Use
of some Spicificks that I have made made Public, and that encourages me to
tell the World of more, in Imitation of the Example of the great Esquire Boil,
who was my particular Friend.

The Learned and Curious Sir John Floyer at Litchfield, has been wonderful
Kind in Communicating many Specificks, and put us in a way to find out the
Nature and Quality of Druggs by their tastes and smells; and he says that he
does not question but that the Artificial Jumbles of many Medicines together
will in time be rejected, and every Ingenious Practicer will chiefly make use
of Simple Medicines, by which his Patient will be more suddenly, safely and
pleasantly Cured.

When I call to mind the Practice of Hypocrates and Galen, who wrote their
Books and Published their Receipts in the Language of the Country where they
dwelt, I judge I may well be excused from Blame.

The Specific that I recommend is the Tincture drawn from the true Nephrittick
Wood, which comes from Hyspaniola; it may be known from the spurious sort by
its communicating a Blew Sky-colored Tincture unto Spring Water, which the
other will not do: By its peculiar quality it resists the Petrifactive
Disposition of the Reins and Bladder, it cleanses those parts from
mucilaginous slimy Humors, which are apt to lodge in the Urinary Passages, and
by its Abstersive Property it prevents the Coagulation of Sand and Gravel, it
dilates and lubrifies the Uretors, and causes an easy expulsion of small
Stones, and cures a Suppression of Urine and Strangury; it heals the
Excoriation, caused by the Acrimony of the Humors, and eases Pain in making
Water; it cools the Reins, and mitigates the scalding Heat of Urine, and
dissolves the Stone as far as any Medicine is capable of doing it.

I could give you many strange Examples of great Cures wrought with it: And
particularly a Woman much afflicted with the Strangury, with an acute Pain in
her Hip, and frequent reaching to Vomit, she took Sixty Drops of the Tincture,
Morning, Noon, and Night, in Ale and White Wind dulcified with Syrup of
Marshmallows, she voided in a Months time Nine Ounces of Gravel, and thirty
small Stones like great Pins-heads, and found great Ease.

A young Gentleman who was so exceedingly wrackt with the Stone that he was
advised to be Cut, but a Friend coming in advised him to take the Drops of the
Tincture drawn out of this Wood in Oil of Walnuts, and it gave him Relief, and
prevented the Return of his Pains, he continued it two Months.

I my self frequently take the Spirit, and sometimes the Extract, in all my
Drink, fifty or sixty Drops at a time, and find great advantage: I draw the
Spirit and Extract with Rhenish Wine.

An old Man who had frequent stopping in his Water, with twitching smart Pains,
and sometimes bloody Urine and great scalding, was wonderfully eased by the use
of this Tincture, taken in Spaw-waters, and sometimes in Milk sweetened with
Honey. It Is endless to give Instances, I therefore take leave to Subscribe my
self

Your Humble Servant, etc.


