SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Bermudas Berries: Imported from The INDIES:
SHOWING Their Admirable VIRTUES In CURING The Green Sickness.

Written by a Doctor of Physic in the Country To the Honorable Esquire; BOIL.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1694

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Bermudas Berries, IMPORTED FROM The INDIES: In
a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
I Received yours with Intimations of your kind Acceptance of the last
Specific that I communicated to you, and with an Invitation to proceed in so
useful an undertaking: And I do assure you, that seeing your self and some
great Physicians in London, are so well pleased with what I have done in this
Kind, I am resolved to go on, and tell you what Experiments I have made in the
use of Simple Medicines. I remember Sir William Temple tells us, that the
Legislators amongst the Indians made a severe Law against the use of Compound
Medicines. I my self have known such great Cures wrought by Simple Medicines,
that I am under a great temptation to despise Compositions, except in
complicated Distempers.

For my part I firmly believe, that (universal Evacuations being premised) the
greatest Cures wrought in the World, are by the use of Specifical Medicines,
and yet I have this fifty years been an exact Observer of the Methodus Medendi.

I never yet found a better Medicine against the Green Sickness than the
Bermudas Berries, taken familiarly in any Liquor; but I find the Tincture of it
made with White Wind, and also the Spirits and Extract of the same, more
efficacious than any other Form.

They wonderfully open the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, mend an ill
habit of Body, cures the Green Sickness, by refining the Mass of Blood, and
restoring the Ferments to the Parts; it helps digestion, and removes a depraved
Appetite, desiring hurtful things: it clears the Cloudiness of the Skin, and
mends the Complexion, and unloads an oppressed Stomach of those indigested
humors which corrupt good Nourishment, and cause shortness of Breath and
Stoppages.

A Gentlewoman ahout Twenty Eight years of Age, who was troubled with
Obstructions, and her Complexion extremely altered, her Lips and Cheeks turned
as white as a Cloth, her Eyes and Face bloated, her Legs swelled, and the
Regular Course of Nature stopped; after she had taken great quantities of
Powder of Steel to no purpose, she took the Tincture, Spirit and Extract drawn
out of these Berryes, Morning, Noon and Night, and her Stomach mended, her
Color returned like a Rose in June, and she could with pleasure run up four
pair of Stairs at a time: She took the Tincture in Beer, the Spirit in
White Wind, and the Extract in Pennyroyal Water.

We have in our Country a large Boarding-School of young Gentlewomen, and I
have known half a score of them at a time afflicted with this uncomfortable
Distemper, which made them uneasy to themselves, and unpleasant to their
Relations; and in one Course of the Moon, by the use of the Medicines drawn out
of these Berries, they were recovered to a Miracle, and grew cheerful and
healthful: But all Remedies in this Distemper are most efficacious when used
with Exercise.

I knew one Gentlewoman, whole case was by most Physicians thought to be past
Recovery, being brought by this Distemper to the brink of the Grave; her Flesh
was wasted, her Legs swelled, her Stomach lost, and her Legs so weak, not able
to support her body; yet in the use of these Berries she revived, and lived to
be a hale woman, and had many Children.

And now because I know your Philosophical Inclination, I Will tell you a
remarkable Observation lately made by me upon a young Virgin, who dyed of this
Disease, she was extremely far gone into the Green Sickness, lost her Strength
and Spirits, had taken great quantities of Powder of Steel, been blooded in the
Foot twice, and at length dying; upon Dissection we found a Mortification in
her Stomach and Bowels, caused by a sharp corroding Humor, which caused very
acute Pains in her Body: Had I been called to her, I should certainly have
applied these Remedies, and I have great reason to believe they might have
proved serviceable: if you think fit to recommend the use of them unto any of
your Acquaintance, I don't doubt but they may be procured at London.

FINIS.

