A Word in Season: BEING A SERMON PREACHED In the Parish - Church of St. James
Clarkenwell, on Wednesday the 11th. of December, 1695.

Being the Fast Day.

By D. Pead, Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Newcastle.

LONDON, Printed for Roger Clavel, over against St. Dunstans-Church
Fleet Street, 1695.

ISAIAH XXX. Ver. 1. Woe to the Rebellious Children, says the Lord, that take
Counsel, but not of Me, and that cover with a Covering, but not of my Spirit?
that they may add Sin to Sin.
THUS stood the case of the Jews at the time of this Prophecy; Sennacherib (or
by Interpretation the Bramble of destruction) had threatened to Invade the Land
of Judah with a Strong and Potent Army: These sad Tidings did fill the Jews
with so great Consternation, as both dispirited their Men of War, and
distracted the Counsels of the Ancients; insomuch as many concluded their best
expedient was to comply with the Assyrians; and these practiced underhand to
betray all unto the Enemy; nay, so far had their Fear transported them, that
the better (as they thought) to commend themselves to the favor of the
Conqueror, they had already resolved to espouse as well his Religion as his
Language: Others more steadfast to their God and faithful to their Country,
could not, nor would not with so great Sacrifices endeavor the appeasing of
the Tyrant's Wrath. However, these held it necessary to dispatch an Embassy to
Egypt for Aid; these instead of seeking to the Lord their God to cover them
from the Fury, Rage, and Insults of Assyria, have recourse to Pharaoh, and by
this means (as says the Prophet) they added Sin to Sin; that is, to their
first sin of forsaking God, and not entreating Counsel and Strength of him,
they added the other, of trusting in the Arm of Flesh: Against both these the
Royal Prophet came armed with a terrible denunciation of Woe, as you read in
the Text.

Our Present Circumstances in part resemble theirs; we are threatened by another
Sennacharib, a Tyrant Ill-bred and Ill-conditioned, a very Bramble that creeps
and spreads it self, if possible to pull down or at least hinder the growth of
his betters; a very Bramble, good for little but burning; his threatenings are
Bold and therefore to weak hearts Terrible, insomuch as some among us (though
called Christians) are turned very Jews, and would if they could through their
unaccountable fear (it being impossible they should do it from a Principle of
Love) betray all into his hands, these have already gone so far as beyond their
own Language and Religion to meet him.

Others among us strengthen themselves only in the Confederacy, these are such
as have ever walked frowardly with God, that have underhand, if not openly,
endeavored to throw down his Alter, to corrupt the Truth, to ridicule all pure
Religion; and therefore cannot in this Exigency have any great heart to put
their Confidence in the Living God: They have wore a Form of Religion for a
disguise, but that is no encouragement to believe that the Righteous God should
now cover them, they have often made it their mock, and therefore cannot
reasonably hope it will now be their Sanctuary. Though we have in these things
equaled, if not outdone the Jews, yet thanks be to God, the most of us are
better advised, and instead of either betraying our selves to the Enemy or
relying upon our supposed Friend in Egypt, we are this day met (as other
Congregations in other Places) to seek unto God for his blessing upon the
Consultations of this present Parliament; and I am of that Faith, that if in
this we are sincere, we shall still eat the good of the Land, we shall
notwithstanding all this noise and rumor quietly Praise God under our own
Vines, and under our own Figg-trees, and there shall be none to make us afraid.

If we muster up Legions of Devout, Humble and Fervent Prayers, We may once
again hear of Proud Sennacherib's Army destroyed by an Angel, 1 Kings 19.35,
37. If not of himself falling a sacrifice to his Son's Ambition; or his
Kingdom's Safety.

That which is commended to our observation belief and practice, from this
reproof of the Prophet, is,

It is the Wisdom, Duty and Interest of every Kingdom and Nation, knowing and
owning the true God, in all their straits and difficulties, in all their fears
and dangers to seek unto him for Counsel and Aid.

Should we in this be negligent or refractory, the diligence of Heathens and
Idolaters would condemn us, for they in perilous times sought to stocks and
stones; nay, to the very Devils whom they owned and worshipped.

So zealous in this point was Scipio Africanus, that it is Recorded of him, How
that early before the Morning watch he used to go into the Capitol, in cellam
Jovis, to the Chancel of Jupiter, and there made a considerable stay, quasi
consultans de Re Publica cum Jove, as being in consultation with his God about
the difficult affairs of his Kingdom.

And thus Isaiah tells us of the Idolaters in his time, how that in their
troubles they sought unto them that had familiar Spirit, and unto Wizards;
these they accounted as the immediate Servants of their God, viz. Baal: And
this their doing they justify; saying, Should not a People seek unto their
God? Isai. 8.19. Wherefore have they a God if in such Perilous times they seek
not unto him?

Thus did David, Josias, Jehosaphat and Hezekiah; they sought to God in the
days of their trouble and danger, and if any shall answer, the manner of our
Kingdom is not as was that of the Jews: If it be not yet, what hinders but our
Devotion ought to be as true and fervent, if not more than theirs?

St. Jude Prophesied, that in the latter days there should come Scoffers, and
behold they are come; for how do some flout and ridicule the Parliament, barely
because they so earnestly desite that their meeting might be made Auspicious by
the Prayers of the Nation; this some have the face to represent as a mere piece
of Pageantry, others deride it as frivilous and unnecessary. As to the first,
how they should so well know the minds of others, I see not, except it be by
judging them by the model of their own; as to the other, that would supersede
their request herein, as being needless.

I would prefer this to consider on; is it not proper and expedient for
Religious, Wise and Conscientious Persons having the cares, fears and hopes of
Three Kingdoms depending on their debates to desire the help of Public
Prayers! What though Praying has been sometime the Preface to bad Purposes,
does it therefore follow that it must not be to good? This were all one as to
tell us, some wicked Persons have been known to Pray when they went about their
mischievous Designs, and therefore an Honorable Assembly of Christians, who
have the Glory of Almighty God, the Preservation of a Great and Noble King, the
Good and Peace of Church and State; the Safety and Welfare of many Thousands,
together with their Posterity and Country before them, should not desire and
beg the Divine Assistance to their Consultations: In short, whoever is against
our Praying this day, and upon this Occasion, are no well wishers to Prosperity
any day.

We are this day called together to pray for Gods Blessing upon the
Consultations of the present Parliament, and I know not the minds of others,
but according to the best of my judgment from this action, these following
thoughts must necessarily offer themselves to your minds.

First, The Prevalency and Advantage of a good and Pious Example is herein very
apparent.

Theodorick King of the Goths informed the Roman Senate, Facilius esse eerrare
naturam, quam dissimilem sui Principem Rem Publicam formare; that Subjects did
commonly comport themselves; suitably to the Copy their Sovereign set before
them; so that the Prince who desired successfully to commend Piety to his
People, must do it by virtue of his own practice:

In the Spring our King Solicited the Prayers of his People, as knowing that
God was the Lord of Hosts; and now in Fall the Parliament request your Prayers,
as knowing that bur God is the God and giver of Wisdom.

Secondly, From this days Fasting and Praying we may collect and be satisfied
in the Wisdom of the Parliament.

If Solomon's Rule be true, That the Fear of the Lord is the beginning of
Wisdom; How wise are they who will not begin their weighty Affairs till they
have Invocated his Blessing and Assistance: It were unreasonable to expect the
Blessing they fought not, and as weak to believe their Consultations should be
effectual if they were unblest.

They are not like the Jews for sending an Embassy to Egypt, but for sending
one to Heaven, and therefore have ordered the concurrence of your Prayers with
their own, that thus jointly wrestling with the God of Mercy, you may obtain a
blessing.

Our Savior while in the flesh, undertook no extraordinary work without
Prayer; and accordingly by Practice as well as Precept he commended this great
duty to his Followers, while others therefore question, let us gratefully
acknowledge their Wisdom, who in this act of Devotion, not only Imitate their
Lord and Master, but also look up unto him, as the Author and Finisher of their
Salvation, as well Temporal as Spiritual.

Thirdly, That we are this day met in the house of God by Prayer and Fasting,
to Supplicate a blessing upon the Consultations of the present Parliament (this
being the effett of their Address) demonstrates their Humility; no Impartial
person can think otherwise than that the flower of the nation for Learning,
Wisdom and Experience, are now in conjunction, yet are they persons of that
exemplary and admirable Modesty, as they will not tolerate Self-confidence, and
I may say, such is their Piety that they have learnt from the Spirit of God,
not to lean on their own understanding, Prove. 3. 5,6. They desire to
acknowledge God in all their ways, and therefore invocate him, and no doubt
will Prosper the better for it.

The greater submission the more Grace, God resists the Proud, he opposes
the strength, and infatuates the wit in which they confide, but ever gives
grace to the humble.

They neither presume nor Glory in their own Abilities nor do they defy their
Enemies upon the Imagination of what themselves can do, though their power be
truly great, but you see their intentions are to meet them, and their dark
designs in the Name of the God of Israel: they will like Hezekiah, Isa. 37.41,
15. First repair to God, and by Prayer and Humiliation endeavor the Appeasing
his Wrath, and then Provid against the threatenings of the Enemy; they will take
care to humble themselves before him who they believe will in due time exalt
them If they defy their Enemies, it is not because the Judgments of God are
far above out of their sight; but because in this act of Devotion, God is in
their sight, his Goodness and Love, his Wisdom and Power, his Truth and Mercy
are before their Eyes: The God of Truth has said it, That he dwells with him
that is of a Contrite and Humble Spirit, Isa. 57.15. To revive the Spirit of
the humble, and to revive the Heart of the Contrite one; if he therefore
dwells with one such, we may well hope he will not withdraw his comforting
and cherishing presence from a whole body of the same gracious temper.

Fourthly, That we are at this time called together to offer up our humble and
hearty Prayers, that God would be Gracious unto, and bless the great Assembly
of Parliament, argues likewise the Piety and sincerity of them that promoted
this days meeting.

It is on argument they are not gathered together against the Lord, nor against
his Anointed; for then had it been unpardonable Impudence to have Expected the
Benediction of the Righteous God, who is the great and best preserver of
Religious Kings and Princes.

Jeroboam who had been false with God, was driven more out of necessity than
love to seek unto God in behalf of his sick Son, but being Conscious of his own
Hypocrisy, observe his manner and way of seeking, 1 Kings 14.2. He dispatched
his Wife upon his Errand for privacy, and to be yet more private, she must go
in a disguise. And thanks be to God, we may well believe they who have this day
put us upon seeking unto God, have hearts right toward God, they love him,
they love his worship, they love the Government, they love the People; they
really affect and desire our good, or otherwise it had been no good policy to
call a good God to their Council.

Time has been that Persons have strove hard and spent much to be chosen for
the Service of their Country in Parliament, but what Hearts did many of them
come with? The same as the Romans of old went to their Governments, with,
Tanquam ad auream nussem, as ^o a golden and profitable, not a painful and
laborious Harvest.

Too many accounted the house no other, than Danae's Tower, for if sitting
there Jupiter did not dissolve himself and Kingdoms upon them in Golden
showers, his true service and interest seldom entered the^^ breasts.

They came its true upon their Summons, but wherefore, only in hopes to return
like so many Jasons, with every one a Golden Fleece, but now we hear other
things, now you are by them desired to pray that God would inspire them from
above, that they may wisely, unanimously and cordially consult what is best for
God and their Kings Honor, for their own and Countries good and safety:
Blessed are our Ears that hear ihese things; hard our hearts if we believe them
not, and dull our Souls if we pray not that they may in due time be fulfilled.

Tho I acknowledge the true Love of God to be the properest and sweerest
Inducement unto Prayer, yet I also observe, that many are Strangers to this
Love, and that the Spirit of their Devotion is barely Fear or Hope: So that
their Prayers, properly speaking, are owing to their Interest and Advantage;
they find that God is the God of their Mercies, and therefore they resolve that
he shall be the God of their Prayers as well as Praises. Were not God bountiful
and gracious, and were not we poor Mortals subject to Want and Necessities,
Heaven would not be stormed by so many Prayers as it is. I therefore undertook
to represent the Nation's hopes ^s reasonable from this Sessions of Parliament
as I possibly could, that the People might the more generally, frequently,
willingly and fervently mind it in their Supplications.

Having therefore dispatched this, and I hope both shown the occasion and
reason of praying, and likewise stirred up some Desire and Propensity in your
Mind to pray, I now proceed to direct you,

First, What to pray for.

Secondly, Why we should pray for these things.

Thirdly, To what end and purpose we should beg these things.

In the first place, in the subject Matter of your Prayer, I hold it necessary
that we,

1. Be instant and urgent with God now in the Church, and anon in our Closets,
to pity this sinful Nation with the Grace of Repentance; that we turning from
our Sins, he may let go his Displeasure.

Whosoever shall tell you this Advice is not seasonable and necessary, must speak
against his Knowledge; and he that persuades you to hope for God's Blessing
before you repent, encourages you to hope against your Belief.

Amsterdam is reported to be a Medley of Religion; and to speak without
Flattery, London may properly be termed a Sink of Sin. Have we not amongst us
the Sensuality of the old World, the Lust of Sodom, the Cruelty of Egypt, the
Carelessness and Security of Laish, the Drunkenness of Persia, the Stallions of
Jerusalem, the Idolatry of Babylon, the Infidelity of Bethsaida and Chorazin,
the Pride of Capernaum, the impertinent Curiosity of Athens, the Flattery of
Zidon, the Lying of Greece, and the Lukewarmness of Laodicea?

Is it not easy to find a bloody Cain, an oppressing Nimrod, a complying Aaron,
a revengeful Simeon, an over-indulgent Eli, a massacring Haman, a deceitful and
treacherous Joab, a blaspheming Rabshekah? Have we not David's Liars, who as
soon as they are born, go astray, speaking Lies? Have we not his Cursers, who
clothe themselves with Cursing as with a Garment? Have we not his false Hearts,
whose Flatteries are smoother than Oil, whose Calumniations are sharper than a
two-edged Sword? Have we not his Courtiers who eat at his Table, are free to
his Chapel, and yet lift up their heel against him? Have we not his Fools, who
say in their heart, there is no God? Nay, we have greater, who in Print declare
the Son of God was no Savior!

Have we not Ephraim's Drunkards, the Scribes false Witnesses, St. Paul's
Assassines? Have we not a Demetrius to roar out for Diana? a Demetrius to
obstruct the preaching of the Truth? Have we not a covetous Simon, and an
Apostatizing Demas? How many amongst us neither fear God, nor regard Man? These
and many more are the Sins of this Age and Place; I know many Graces but no Sin
that we want, and if we did, it would soon be brought on the Stage.

But when we look upon these Sins with respect to their Circumstances, O
wretched Nation, who shall deliver thee! Our Sins are aggrandiz'd in that they
are committed not for want of a Law, or a Law explained, for we sin against the
Law of Nature implanted in our Minds, against the Law of God and the wholesome
Laws of the Land; our Sins bid Defiance not only to the Light of Reason, but to
the glorious Light of the Gospel; we sin in Contempt of the Ministry of God's
Word which is so plentiful amongst us: We sin with an high hand, for we sin
against the Principles of our Religion, against our Baptismal Vow, against the
Stirrings of the Spirit of Grace, against the Reproofs of God's Word, and the
painful Gripes of our Consciences; our Sins have been committed against Mercies
and Judgments, against Warnings, Calls, Promises and Profession of Repentance
and Reformation.

Now is it not high time for God to be avenged on such a Nation as ours, to
ease himself of such grand Enemies and notorious Rebels? It would further
increase our Guilt, to believe that ever God would hear such Sinners before
they repent them of their Wickedness; thus to believe, were all one as to
suppose God to be such an one as our selves: Let us therefore implore God first
to bless us, in turning every one of us from our Sins, before ever we dare to
expect he should favor our Affairs: If we will continue in the way of the
Ungodly, we must believe nothing will prosper.

We must either believe that there is no Knowledge in God, that he neither knows
nor regards our Doings, or else that he is departed from Justice, if ever his
Blessings light upon us while we continue in our Sins. How is it possible God
should guide us with his Eye, when he cannot behold us? for he is of purer Eyes
than to behold Iniquity with Approbation. How vain is it to hope that God will
stretch forth his hand to work our Deliverance, when we still put forth our
hands unto Wickedness* We may cry when our Calamities overtake us, but God will
not regard their Prayers who entertain Wickedness in their hearts.

We are plainly told (I wish we had the Grace to believe it) that our Sins
withhold good things from us, Jer. 5.25. And if we are not speedy in our
Repentance, I fear, amongst the rest of good things, our Sins will withhold and
keep back God's Blessing from the great Assembly of the Nation.

God has said it, Psalm. 33.10. The Lord brings the Counsel of the Heathen to
naught: And what are wicked Christians better than Heathens! and he makes the
Devices of such People of none Effect.

We read a notable Instance how God blows upon the Counsel of his Enemies: He
leads, as Job says, such Counselors away spoiled, and their Counsel is
carried headlong, it is too rash and hasty. Isa. 8.10. God there speaks to the
wicked Assyrians coming against his People, Take Counsel together, and it shall
come naught; speak the word, and it shall not stand. He let them assemble, he
suffered them to consult, but all to no purpose: wanting his Blessing they were
as they that had neither Strength nor Understanding. God often turns the
Counsel as well as the Sword of wicked Men against themselves, Job 18.7. he
makes their own Counsel to cast them down: and this God does either when he
leaves Men to their own Counsels, suspending his Light, and then they fall into
thousands of Errors; then the more their Wit, the greater their Parts, the more
inevitable their Ruin: Or else he causes their Counsels to cast them down, by
turning the Hearts of the People against their Advice. A notorious Instance of
frustrating Human Counsel we had the last Reign; we may be so sensible of it as
to tell it to our Childrens Children, that it may be had in everlasting
Remembrance.

Thus having endeavored to remove the grand Obstruction of our Impenitence and
want of Reformation, give me leave to refresh your Mind with what I hope the
first Lesson for this Morning's Service has imprinted, Isa. 1. you find God
promised by his Spirit of Grace, v. 25. to purge them purely from their Dross
and their Tin; by sanctified Chastisements and Afflictions he would bring them
out of Love with their Corruptions and Vices, he would reform their Manners,
and enliven their Devotions, freeing the one from Hypocrisy, and the other from
Sin and Wickedness: And then, ver. 26. I will restore thy Judges as at the
first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning: afterward thou shall be called
the City of (Righteousness, the faithful City. Had we no farther Good to expect
than upright Judges and faithful Counselors, yet 'twere worth our Repentance
to obtain these. Now then, if the present Consultations succeed not, we know
where justly to lay the Blame, not on the great Council, but in the great Sins,
and greater Impenitence of the Nation: But I hope better things of you, that
you are persuaded, and that God will by his holy Spirit assist you in the great
Work of Repentance, so that you will cry and pray unto God heartily, that you
will wrestle with God for public and private Pardon. Thus you have seen the
first thing you ought to request of God, Grace to repent and reform; you have
also seen the Reason, because till then it is but Folly to expect a Blessing.

2. The second thing you are at this and other times to beg of God for the
great Council of our Nation, is Counsel.

We must pray that God would counsel our Counselors, and give our Senators
Wisdom: And that none may excuse the nonperformance of this Duty by pretending
Unskilfulness, I shall show them where they may collect an excellent form of
Prayer suitable for this occasion, it is short but comprehendsive, viz. Psalm.
32.8. Lord, instruct them in the way they should go, and guide them with thine
Eye, then will their Consultations be both sound for the Matter, right for the
Way, and justifiable by the End.

For this we should pray,

1. Because Counsel is expedient and proper for their present Occasions. The
Affairs that require their Inspection and Advice are many and great, weighty
and intricate, it is no such easy matter to persuade an untoward Generation to
better Manners. The purging away the Dregs of Popery and Socinianism is not so
soon accomplished, the Stain of Superstition, Idolatry and Error are not
lightly washed away; and if there be not that appearance of drowning in a Gulf
of Popery, yet the Floods of Socinianism come on apace and rise high: small
matters will not revive decayed Piety, nor subdue stubborn and daring Vice, it
is a difficult Province to keep fantastical Subjects in due Obedience. How hard
is it to stretch the Sinews of War farther when they are even now ready to
break? How wise ought they to be who would find out what thing with Wings
betrayed our Ships at Sea? A few bare Wishes will not recover our Peace,
compose our Divisions, nor unite Men's Affections: And when such extraordinary
Long-suffering and Clemency of the Government will not reclaim Men of perverse
Principles, it will deserve some Consultation by what Methods of Justice they
may be reduced, or at least prevented in their malicious Intentions. These and
many more Particulars that want Redress, may make you sensible what necessity
there is to pray for Counsel; it were not therefore amiss that we all prayed
this day, to morrow, and every day, that God would bless the Consultations of
the Parliament.

The wise Man assures us from his own Experience, that had we nothing else to
condole or dread, to look for or prepare against, yet the very War wherein we
are so much concerned requires more than ordinary Counsel, Prove. 11.14. Counsel
and Strength are necessary for the War: for in a War with ambitious and bloody,
with cruel and barbarous, with false and perfidious Enemies, whose Power is not
easily resisted, and whose Faith is not to be credited, we have need of able
Counselors.

Hear we him again, Prove. 15.22. Without Counsel Purposes are disappointed; but
in the multitude of Counselors they are established. So again, Prove. 20.18.
Every Purpose is established by Counsel. Wise and faithful Counselors sit at
the Helm like Pilots guiding the Ship, so that it may pass with Ease through
the roughest Waves, and with Safety by the threatening Rocks; the Pilots
therefore see the Quicksands, and prevent the Danger.

Romani sedendo vincunt, was the old Proverb; the ancient Romans defended
themselves from the Craft and Power of their Enemies; they also extended their
Dominion, and made their Name revered in remote places, more by the Prudence of
their Counsels, than by the Valor of their Armies.

And what mighty ancient and powerful States and Kingdoms have been broken and
overthrown either by neglect of Counsel, or by precipitate and immature Advice?

Counsel and Strength are the main Pillars that bear up a Government, yet the
former seems to have the Pre-eminence. A good Head surpasses a strong Arm,
yet in as much as Counsel does but chalk out the way to Action, it requires a
strong Arm; and when these two happily conjoin in the same Service, what
Wonders do they produce?

Understanding finds out the Matter to be done, Counsel, Reason and Debate
provide and fit Means proper thereunto; then Wisdom undertakes the managing of
those Means, and by the help of Strength in due time the desired End is
obtained.

In short, it was by the grave Advice of Parliament that our gracious King
first condescended to enter into this present War; and if it please God to
assist the Wisdom of this present Parliament, and to direct and bless their
Consultations, he may make an happy end thereof, sooner than they expect, who
presume to say it is not yet begun.

2. Another Reason prompting us to comply with this Day's Order, and to pray
for Counsel for this present Parliament is, Counsel is the Gift of God.

It must be confessed, that the Majesty of the Prince, the Fidelity and Wisdom of
his Counselors, the Prudence and Justice of his Judges, and the Valor of his
Soldiers, are great Supports to a Nation; yet unless God affords his Counsel
to every one of them in their respective places, these will totter and fall,
and come to a fearful end: Convenient is it therefore that we who must
otherwise suffer in the common Ruin, be zealous at the Throne of Grace suing
for Divine Wisdom and Counsel to aid them in time of need; for it is he that
gives Wisdom to the Head, Courage to the Heart, and Strength to the Hands.

Thus wise Solomon instructs us; Prove. 16.1. The Preparations of the Heart in
Man, and the Answer of the Tongue, is from the Lord: So that the wisest Man
has neither the Ability of devising what is fit and proper, nor yet of
uttering what he so finds devised, till he has received it from God; nor are
such precious Talents entrusted with all Persons indifferently; Eccles. 2.26.
God gives to a Man that is good in his sight, Wisdom and Knowledge.

We are taught, James 1.17. that every good and perfect Gift comes from above,
and comes down from the Father of Lights; who if he sees fit to suspend his
Light, the sharpest Wits, the most acute Judgments grope but in the dark.

That God should be the Fountain of Wisdom and Knowledge, is a Principle all
have assented to: for even the very Heathen in all their Distress did usually
apply unto their Gods for Direction and Help. Nor are we left without
sufficient Precedents of this nature, Judge. 18.5. five Persons of the Tribe of
Dan, Men of Valor, were sent out as Spies, they confided not in their own
Policy or Strength, but like wise Persons, desirous to discharge their Trust
effectually, they ask Counsel of the Lord, whether the way they had designed to
go should prosper? it was their Belief that God only knew, and it was their
Resolution to follow his Direction.

Again, Jugd. 20.18. Israel being to engage with the Tribe of Benjamin, relied
not upon their Numbers, for they had often seen that the Battle was not to the
Strong, but trusted in the Counsel they should receive from God, and therefore
before the Battle was begun, went up to the House of God, and asked Counsel of
God.

Let others therefore look to their Achitophel, Machiavel, Anaxagoras,
Panaetius or Polybius, or to the Conclave of Babylon; yet let your Eyes look up
unto the Lord, and beg hard for the Wisdom which is pure and peaceable, and
then shall your Enemies by their sitting hatch but a Cockatrice Egg, or spin a
Spiders Web; God will frustrate their Devices and make their craftiest Projects
of none effect, while your own Counselors shall be guided in the ways of Peace
and Happiness.

Pray to God; for he has assured you, Prove. 8.14. that Counsel, sound Wisdom,
Understanding and Strength are his; vain and fruitless Devices the Devil may
furnish his Instruments with, but sound Counsel and Wisdom is only from the
Lord.

3. Pray to God heartily that he would give the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, for God has promised
upon our praying to bestow this Blessing.

Hear how our Savior reasons with the Jews, Luke 11.11. they had been poisoned
by entertaining some false Notions of God, and were jealous of him in respect
of his Love and Bounty: to them our Savior faith, if you that are rash, fiery
and inconsiderate Creatures, subject to sundry Passions and Humors, have
notwithstanding that Affection for your Children that you gratify them in what
they ask, provided it be useful and good to them, why then should not your
heavenly Father, the God of Love and Mercy, who is not subject to those
Distractions and Changes which are incident to Flesh and Blood, most freely
give you the best things, even the Spirit of Wisdom, provided you ask as you
ought? if therefore we ask, they shall receive.

For our farther Encouragement, St. James from God has told us, James 1.17.
that if any Man lacks Wisdom, he should ask it of God, who gives to all Men
liberally, and upbraideth not. Fear no Reproach for asking, your Petition shall
not be thrown out, provided it be delivered with Faith, Humility and Fervency;
you shall not be browbeaten for thus addressing, but you may believe, that he
who has told us he loves a cheerful Giver, is himself a liberal Benefactor.

Solomon being called to the Throne, wisely considered the Weight of a Scepter,
and the Cares of a Crown, and therefore in his first Petition that he made to
God, 1 Kings 3.9. he begged an understanding Heart, Counsel and Direction from
God, to go in and out before so great a People, that he might exert his Power
to the right ends, viz. God's Glory, and his Subjects Good. And if you read 1
Kings 4.29, 30. God both heard and was well pleased with this Prayer; he denied
him not the Request of his Lips, but gave him such a measure of Knowledge, such
a Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, that he thereby surpassed even to a
wonder all his Contemporaries, whether Friends or Foes.

Daniel and his three Companions made their Supplication before God for Wisdom,
they were in a difficult Post, living in the midst of their Enemies, and
therefore needed Direction, lest unhappily they gave occasion that the Name of
God should be blasphemed; their Prayer was answered, Dan. 1.17. and
notwithstanding they were but as Children for Years, they became wiser than the
Aged.

Thirdly. To what ends we should thus Pray.

The great ends why we should pray for Counsel and Wisdom for these our
Representatives, we may find in the Prayer that the Church has set out upon
this particular occasion, namely, that by their Consultations Good may accrue
to the Church of God; Safety, Honor and Welfare may be Established to the King
and His Kingdoms; and that all things may be so ordered and settled by their
Endeavors upon the Best and Surest Foundations, that Peace and Happiness,
Truth and Justice, Religion and Piety may be Established among us for all
Generations. And what can any Man desire more than that the Church of God may
flourish by means of true Religion and Piety; that the King's Honor and
Safety, and His Kingdoms Welfare may be preserved by the upholding Truth, and
executing of Justice? and these things thus happily Achieved (by God's
Blessing upon their Counsels) How Peaceful, how Happy shall we and our
Posterity be?

1. One great end is for the good of the Church, that by means of their Godly
Wisdom, Religion and Piety may flourish among us: Religion and Piety, that is,
Soundness of Doctrine, and Holiness of Conversation.

As to the First, that of Doctrine, the un-erring Rule thereof is the
Scriptures, which, if duly observed, Heresies and Schisms would vanish from
among us: not but that either of these pretend Scripture in their
Justification, yet both are not sound in the Exposition of them: and the
distinction were easily made, if Men would depart from their Pride and
Conceitedness, and with Modesty compare Scripture with Scripture, and where
after such comparison, the Truth does not so fully appear as might be wishd,
they would then ask Judgment of those Reverend Fathers of the Church, whose
Piety and Learning have passed without just contradiction for many Ages.

Chrysippus doting on his own Learning and Subtilty in Dispute, boasted, that
he oftener wanted new Opinions, than Arguments to defend them: we have of late
days heard of some of his Scholars.

It was the Opinion of some exemplary for Knowledge as well as Piety, that
Religion had but Three Grand Enemies, Luke-warmness, Profaneness, and Novelty:
with the first we have been a long time pestered; by the second never so much
as of late, and that has made way for the other of Novelty: and it seems a just
consequence; for seeing True Religion is so much out of Fashion, some have
thought it the most opportune time to shut it quite out of the World, ours at
least, and have therefore boldly, by Novel Opinions, struck at Two of the
Fundamental Points thereof; the Sacrifice of Christ's death, denying it to be
Meritorious, and Confounding instead of Explaining the Mystery of the Glorious
Trinity, making too fair a way for Polytheisme; this so quietly hitherto
suffered, and connived at, (for if some had not Slept, others had not had
Opportunity to Sow these Tares) has encouraged another to attempt the Whole
Body of Christianity, denying any thing therein to be Mysterious.

Need we have to Pray, that God would Inspire with his Heavenly Wisdom them
that Sit at the Helm, least such Hurricanes arising, the Ship of the CHURCH be
Over-set, and Religion, as to the Doctrinal Part, be lost in the Storm.

As much need of help has the Practical part Religion and Piety, I mean
holiness of life; And how shall we be helped unless it shall please God to
direct those, to whom he has given the Power, to be careful that the Wholesome
Laws already made be put in due Execution, and to prepare others to Curb and
Restrain Wickedness and Vice.

We lie under a biting Sarcasme (I wish I could say Slander) that none are more
wise in devising Laws than the English, but every one exceeds them in the
Execution: Sin would not be so fearless, did some present Punishment remind the
Sinner of Eternal; time was that Men dare not but appear something towardly and
good, but now they are passed all Hypocrisy, and are come up to downright
Impudence: they declare their Sin as Sodom, they hide it not. The Constable,
the Churchwarden, the Justice, and who not sees it or hears it, and who sees
it, so safe they are, they care not: If I may speak, my fear it is this, that
unless they, for whom we this Day are to Pray, do, by the help of Gods Grace,
Suppress the Profaneness, Pride, Drunkenness, Lust, Swearing, Forswearing and
Sabbath breaking, so rife among us, there will in a short time be but a little,
if any true Church in these Three Nations.

2. We thus pray for Counsel for our Senators, for the good of the State,
that for the Kings Honor, and his Kingdoms Welfare, they would see to the
maintaining Truth, and executing Justice.

Words can have no greater ornament than truth, it is not so much Rethorick or
Elegancy of Language that does Beautify our discourse, as Verity and
plainness; and yet now this great beauty is out of Favor, not but that Men may
speak truth, for many say King William is our King, and that he ought to be
obeyed in all his lawful commands, yet diverse speak this truth, but as Judas
spoke of Charity, to serve their interest; not that they account it a truth,
for it is apparent, that some who say so with their Tongues, yet reserve
Rancour, Malice and Revenge in their Hearts, which at particular times and
places break forth at their lips. Others are Forgers of Lies, they calumniate
the Person and Majesty, or else misrepresent the Anions of onr Sovereign (who
were he not as Good, as Great, they long ere this had had no breath to speak
with) by this means seeking to rend the hearts of his Subjects from him: Now
what such false Tongues deserve, David who was sufficiently persecuted by them
declares, Psalm. 120.4. Sharp Arrows of the Mighty with Coals of Juniper.
Juniper burns extraordinary fierce, and extraordinary punishment such Persons
deserve, and if once David's Worthies would see good to command it, this would
not only conduce much to the Honor and Safety of David, but leave a Fragrant
smell arising thence, which would cherish the hearts of all that truly Serve
God and Honor the King.

Besides this public truth of unfeigned love and Loyalty that ought to be
personal for the honor and safety of his Majesty the head of the State, there
is also a private truth, for want whereof the body of the State suffers in its
Welfare.

How common is Lying, Perjury, Forswaring and Forgerys from common discourse,
Truth seems in a manner quite exploded, and nothing more frequent than Lying,
and Banter, and that for the sake of Merriment, and therefore as Solon once
told Thespis, so we now find it, Men have practiced lying so long for sport,
that at last they are become earnest at it; and therefore we find it in
Promises and Covenants, and in matters of Trade, Lying, Fraud and Deceit, which
are but other names for the same thing are so customary, that one would judge it
were a Proverb of Solomon's, That plain dealing should dye a Beggar: What Nation
can entertain a good opinion or seek a correspondence with a State thus
habituated?

As for Justice, we may with Jeremy, Jere. 5.7. Run to and fro through the streets
of Cities, and also into the Country Villages to find one that professes it:
One Just to God, Just to Caesar, Just to his Neighbor, and Just to Himself is
hard to find; how often have we heard that Justice has not only shunned the
common conversation, but has deserted the very persons and places of its usual
abode?

Let one great in Power, or mighty in Wealth, transgress a Law, provided it be
that of Swearing, that of Drunkenness, that of Sabath breaking, or, that of
Murder or Adultry; nay, all these and any other, yet where is the Wretch who
dare be so hardy as to testify the truth, or if such be to be found, it will
be long ere we can find a Magistrate will hear him, so as to execute his Office
and discharge his Conscience, Pollio cares for none of these things, Fiat
Justitia ruat caelum is gone hence. The fear of the Minister of Justice is
often times the security of the offender, or if he is not the Son of Fear, he
is the Child of Hope, and a Reward in expectation can mitigate the Severity of
the Law, or at least cool his Zeal, and by such means what shall become of
Justice?

Need have we therefore to pray that God would Counsel our Counselors to be
zealous in maintaining Truth and Justice, as well as Religion and Piety.

To Conclude;

Your Eyes are upon the Parliament, you watch the doors of their houses, you
gl^dly get into their Company, you consult their Votes, and all to be
acquainted with what they are doing or, intend to do for your good, this argues
you have a great dependence upon their Councels; lift up therefore your hearts
and voices to God, and assist them and your selves by your devout prayers; and
when God in his mercy shall hear these prayers, then shall Peace and happiness
dwell among us, then God will be at Peace with us, and he will either confound
or force our Enemies to a Peace, then shall we be happy every way, then shall
we be happy in our Country, in our King, in our Laws, in Mutual Love and
Concord, then shall we have such a Peace as though we may differ in Judgment,
yet we shall Assent in Affection; which happy and peaceful days God, vouchsafe
to bestow upon us, for the sake of his Son Jesus Christ, to whom with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost be all Honor and Glory, now and forever, Amen.

FINIS.

