A Treatise OF REPENTANCE AND OF FASTING, Especially of the LENT-FAST.

In III. Parts.

Poenitentia est male perpetrata plangere, and plangenda minime perpetrare.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty. M DC
LXXXVI.

IMPRIMATUR.

Jo. Battely, Rmo P. Dno Wilhelm. Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacris Domesticis.
Ex Aedib. Lamb. Oct. 31. 1685.


THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Author of this little Treatise, designed it as a Manual, not of
Controversy, but regular Piety, and for common Use. He did not, therefore,
think fit to add any thing by way of Disputation concerning those Doctrines and
Practices in the Roman Church, which respect Fasting and other Bodily
Austerities.

It had been very easy for him to have written a more Learned Book; but, all
things considered, he could not (it may be) have published, at this time, any
thing more seasonable, and generally useful.

We abound with Books upon other practical Subjects; though, by reason of the
several tempers and capacities of Readers, which in the same matter, require
variety of Form, we cannot complain of a superfluity.

But, upon This Argument, we meet not with great plenty of distinct Treatises,
unless we put such into the number as the Writers have transcribed, some from
Fancy, others from severity of Nature. For Epicures are not more humourous in
their Rules of Luxury, than Monasticks are in their Rules of Abstinence.

It is happy, therefore, for the People that they have gained this Tract
concerning Fasting, in which the Directions and Perswasives to a Mortified Life
are not embased, either with Capricious Affectation, or Superstitious Rigor.
We have need of such Directions, and of a strict and temperate Practice
suitable to them.

I intend not, by saying this, to accuse all the Christians of the Church of
England as Libertines; but to quicken those who live in a remisness, which is
not answerable to her Constitution. I know many in our Communion who lead lives
exceeding Regular, and who Exercise themselves in that which is truly Fasting.
One day at least in every Week they either Abstain till Night, or use a small
quantity of some ordinary thing, which, in this Northern Air, may keep the Body
from being unserviceable to the Mind. Whereas often amongst others, their
Fasts, if they continue all day, are concluded with a Luxurious Supper, or
(which is the common use) are but the using of another kind of Diet, and then
they may Eat a plentiful Dinner: Though this change of Diet (especially among
the Rich) is no more Fasting, than change of Apparel is going naked. An Evening
Collation also, is even then allowed; and to Drink at all times of the day
(according to their Casuists) does not dissolve a Fast. Filliutius, in
particular, says, that drinking Water, or Wine, or Beer, whether before or
after Dinner, whether for nourishment or not, does not break a man's Fast Tract.
xxvii. Pars 11. c. 2. Q. 10.
.

There is the like mistake in a Thing near a kin to this, which it may not be
amiss, in this place, to Correct, because some good People (I see) are apt to
fall into it. There is a complaint amongst us of want of Cells and Cloisters,
in which the Exercises of Mortification might be (as they think) more
advantageously performed. But as we do not enviously lessen the true
Privileges of other Places, or scornfully forbear to wish among our selves any
good which is in others; so we really believe it is much better to be without
such Religious Houses, than to have them so Constituted and Governed as they
generally are in other Countries, and as they sometime were amongst our selves,
where they have too much served either to seed Sloth, or to heat Melancholy by
mystical Arts of musing into Distraction; in which things, Humane Nature, as it
is in imperfect Man, needs no Assistances.

Blessed be God, we have at this day, in this Judicious and Pious Church, very
great conveniences for the promoting of a Holy and Mortified, and, if need be,
a very retired Life. The Members of it may be Recluses in both Senses of the
word, which signifies, truly, Persons at Liberty, and, abusively, Persons shut
up. For there is not (that I know of) any City, or scarce a great Town, where
there are not Religious Guides of good ability, public Prayers Morning and
Evening, frequent Sacraments, pious furniture for the Closet, together with
good numbers of Persons devoutly disposed: And especially in and by London
these happy conveniences are abundantly afforded, and (I thank God) by very
many, heartily embraced. Now if any are inclined to live more privately, and
(the state of the World, and the affairs of their Families, well allowing it)
to Dedicate a great part of their time to Heavenly Contemplation, and to the
more immediate worship of God; they may serve the Holy purposes of Devotion, by
retired Lodgings in such Cities, and nigh such Churches, generally much better
(in my opinion) than by taking a Habit, and making a Vow, and committing
themselves, as it were, to a Religious Prison.

They may be as Devout, and as Abstemious as they please: They may choose their
Conversation, which is not such if it be not agreeable. They may go into the
World as often as they see they can be useful to it; And they may shut it out
when they judge its company to be inconvenient: And as soon as their love of
Solitude is known, and the Loose and Impertinent find their Discourse not
relished, and their Visits not returned, they will not uncivilly obtrude upon
them. All this the Pious amongst us may do upon choice; which is the true Salt
of every Sacrifice we offer to God. They may do it without confinement to one
Air, and one Place; to a Society, in which generally there is a Faction which
makes it uneasy to persons of quiet Tempers; to the temptation of coveting
forbidden Liberty; to Offices which, in their Nature, are Superstitious, and,
by their length and perpetual repetition, tedious and burthensom.

They may retire without being loosed from the Bonds of their Duty to their
Natural Parents, which, that great pretender to Mortification, the Abbe de
l'Atrappe Des devoirs de la vie Monastique, Tom. 2. Chap. 16. Quest. 12, 13,
etc. p. 55, etc. Ed. 2. p 57. -- Si les enfans en se retirant -- out perdu les
parens qu'ils y avoient selon la chair; la Religion leur en a rendu d'autres
selon l'Esprit, etc.
will have to be cancelled by the new Monastic alliance, and, as they call it,
the moral Death and Burial of the Religious in a Cloister. They may be orderly
without confinement to such Rules as are either absurd, unprofitable, or unfit
for their temper, strength, or present circumstance. For example sake, They
need not be stinted, in the three hot months, to just so many draughts without
the especial License of the Superior; They need not be obliged to have all
their Sallets dressed with Cheese and Oil; They need not be forbidden to sleep
in any Afternoon which comes not betwixt the Ides of May and September; or be
enjoined, as soon as they are risen from their Tables, to betake themselves to
their Prayers: Which Rules, with many others, where discretion has had a less
share in the forming of them than Imagination, we find in a Body of them
collected by Menardus Menard. Conc. Reg. p. 713, 715, 815. etc.
. And yet you are not to esteem of such Rules Des devoirs, etc. Tom. 1. Chap.
2. Q. 3. p. 6. -- Comme les loix ecrites du doigt de Dieu.
as Humane Inventions, but as Laws written by the very finger of God, and
received (as they say the Rule of S. Pachomius was) by the ministry of an
Angel. And you are to believe the Superior is the Vicar of Christ Ib. p. 147.
.

Doubtless a mixed Life is the most profitable for the state of the World; and
S. Austin himself esteemed it to be so; and Monsieur Godeau La vie de S. A* p.
560, 561.
, though a Bishop of the Roman Church, agrees with him in that opinion. So that
the words of David, [Thou have broken my Bonds in sunder] which (they say)
determined the thoughts of the Count de Bouchage L'Hist. du Card. de Joyeuse,
p. 19.
to a Monastic retreat, should (one would think) both by the sound, and by the
Moral sense of them, have rather released him from the narrow limits of his
pensive inclination.

But I forget that I am not to make this Entrance too large; and I ought not
any longer to detain the Reader from the Book it self. I will therefore say no
more, but that I wish this Pious Treatise may come into many hands before that
Solemn time of Mortification, which is approaching; and that it may be a means,
by promoting true Christian Sobriety, to counterbalance that Sensuality amongst
us, which needs such a real and exemplary reprehension.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
CHAP. I. OF Repentance in General. Page 1. CHAP. II. Of Sorrow for Sin, in
Particular. page 6. CHAP. III. Concerning outward Acts of Sorrow. page 8. CHAP.
IV. Of the Christian Practice in this matter. page 19. CHAP. V. The use of
Bodily Exercises. page 28. CHAP. VI. The Abuse of these Exercises ought not to
hinder the Use: wherein a further account is given of them. page 35. CHAP. VII.
Some Cautions to prevent misunderstanding in this matter. page 49. CHAP. VIII.
The Use which Wicked men ought to make of this Doctrine. page 57. CHAP. IX.
What Use the Better sort ought to make of it. page 67.
PART II. Concerning FASTING.
CHAP. X. WHat is meant by Fasting. page 85. CHAP. XI. Of the Obligation we
have to Fast. page 93. CHAP. XII. The Ends and Uses of Religious Fasting. page
100. CHAP. XIII. Of Fasting-days; particularly Wednesdays and Fridays. page
112. CHAP. XIV. Satisfaction to some Exceptions. page 128.
PART III. OF THE LENT FAST.
CHAP. XV. OF the Antiquity of the Lent, or Spring Fast. page 137. CHAP. XVI.
Of the Variety in its Observation. page 142. CHAP. XVII. Of the Manner of its
Observation. page 154. CHAP. XVIII. The great Usefulness thereof. page 161
CHAP. XIX. A further Satisfaction to sone Objections. page 179 CHAP. XX. The
Conclusion of the Whole. page 196
Mary of Bethany washing the feet of Jesus with her hair while he is seated at
a table with nine others; Martha in background descending stairs toward the
table Marie washing CHRIST'S feet.
IOH. 12. 7Then said Jesus let her alone: Against the day of my burying has
she kept this. 8 For the poor always ye have with you, but me ye have not
always.

PART I.
CHAP. I. Of Repentance in General.
THE nature of Repentance may be understood, by the use of the word Repent, the
very first time we meet with it in the Book of God, vi. Genesis 6, 7. where it is
said, It repented the Lord that he had made man on the Earth, and it grieved
him at the heart. And the LORD said, I will destroy man, whom I have Created,
from the face of the Earth, both Man and Beast, etc. for it repents me that I
have made them.

I find no words wherein the affections of penitent minds, are better and more
fully expressed, than these: In which Moses, speaking concerning the Divine
Mind and Will, in the Language of men, has given us a lively description of
the temper of our own hearts, if we truly repent, that we have offended God.

For, first, when a man repents of any thing, that thing displeases him very
much. Which is the very foundation of all that is here said by Moses,
concerning Gods repenting that he had made mankind: With whom he was highly
displeased, for their most wicked behavior toward their Almighty Creator, and
bountiful Benefactor.

Then follows, in the next place, sadness, grief and sorrow of mind: Which as
naturally flows from the displeasure that any thing gives us, as joy does from
complacency and good liking. And proportionable to the dislike we have of any
thing, will be our sadness that we meddled with it: So that if we greatly
dislike any action we have done, it will grieve us (as the phrase is in Moses)
at the very heart.

Upon which follows a ceasing to do that action; which gives us such
displeasure, that it creates us inexpressible grief and sorrow.

Nor is this all, but condemning in himself what he has done, such a penitent
wishes, and, as far as he has power, endeavors, to have it undone: And
therefore, we may be sure, would not upon any account do it, if it were to be
done again.

In testimony whereof, because the thing cannot be undone, he takes care and
uses caution for the time to come, that it be done no more; and thereby labors
to destroy the whole body of Sin (as God destroyed man from the face of the
Earth) because he heartily Repents that ever he committed it, and would gladly
obliterate, if it were possible, even the memory of it.

We ought not to think that we have true Repentance toward God, as S. Paul
calls it, xx. Acts 21. unless we feel our hearts thus affected.

For it is confessed by every one that has any sense of God, that all things
which we do are not alike pleasing unto Him; but with some things he is highly
offended: And that if we be not of his mind, but so cross, as to please our
selves in those things which are displeasing unto him; we run our selves
thereby into a state of opposition and enmity to his Majesty.

Upon which when we reflect, we cannot be well satisfied with our selves, but
much displeased at what we have done: because we have been so bold as to
contradict God; and by that means are become guilty before him; and obnoxious
to such punishments, as he shall think fit to inflict upon us.

And if we believe the holy Scriptures, the punishments due to this contempt of
God, are so frightful, that no guilty man can think of them without some
horror: And not only be touched with a sense of his folly and of his danger;
but be very much troubled and afflicted (whether he respect God or himself)
that he has, as the Scripture speaks, walked contrary to Him; and thereby made
himself liable to his heavy displeasure.

And therefore condemning what he has done (which he cannot look upon without
shame and confusion of face, as well as with grief and sorrow) he resolves to
do so no more: But to betake himself hereafter unto a new life; conformable to
Gods holy will and pleasure in all things. In the former of which, that which
we call Repentance begins; and in the latter it ends. An unfeigned sorrow and
grief that we have offended God, is the beginning of it: And a serious purpose
of amendment of life compleats it.

All this is agreed by those that write upon this Subject. And therefore my
business is only to show that the first part of Repentance, does not consist
merely in that inward Compunction, and grief, and shame, and heaviness of
heart, which are the necessary effects of a true sense of what a sinner has
done, and of what he deserves to suffer: But likewise in such outward
expressions of this inward sense, as are suitable to the dismal condition, into
which he has thrown himself; and naturally flows from a heart deeply affected
with its guilt, and duly afflicted and grieved for it.

CHAP. II. Of Sorrow for Sin, in Particular.
THAT we ought to be inwardly troubled in our mind, and exceedingly grieved,
afflicted and pained at the very heart, to think we have offended so good and
gracious a Father, as has called us into the state of Salvation by Christ
Jesus, and thereby lost his grace and favor; is a thing, as I have said
already, confessed, without any the least dispute about it. And it is as much
acknowledged, I hope, that it ought not to end, till it has wrought in us a
sincere resolution to do so no more. It is senseless to think of recovering his
favor; unless we be thus piously disposed.

But I shall prove as plainly, that it becomes true Penitents, to make such
outward expressions of those inward affections, as may not only show to all the
world that they are heartily sorry, and ashamed of their folly, their
falseness, their ingratitude, and all the disorders they have committed, to the
dishonor of God, and the disturbance of the peace and good estate of the
World; but also satisfy themselves, that their affliction is more than a
transient passion; and be a security likewise to them, from relapsing into that
wickedness, which, if they be sincere Penitents, they resolve to forsake.

The Soul and the Body are so near Neighbors, or rather Friends; that one of
them cannot be concerned in any thing, but the other must bear its part therein
also. And therefore as they accompany one another in all other actions; so it is
fit and just and necessary, that they should do in Repentance. They have done
evil together; and therefore it is but reasonable, that they join in their
humiliations and sorrow for it, and in their abhorrence of it. When the heart
is heavy and sad, the body also should put on the habit of a mourner: Who
laments the greatest mischief that could befall him.

In treating of which, I shall First show, what these outward expressions of
sorrow and grief are; and whence they arise. And then,

2. Briefly demonstrate, that they have been the practice of Christian people:
Who ever thought the condition of a great sinner so doleful, that it called for
the bitterest lamentations. And

3. Lay before you, as briefly, the uses for which they serve; and the profit
we may receive by them.

4. And lastly, give some cautions, to prevent the abuse of them; that we may
not receive damage by those things, which are intended for our advantage.

CHAP. III. Concerning outward Acts of Sorrow.
WHAT the outward Acts of Sorrow are, which the sense of their guilt extorts
from true Penitents, we may learn from the Prophet Joel; if we read seriously
the 12. and 13. Verses of the second Chapter: Where God calls upon them to turn
unto him, with all their heart; and with fasting, and with weeping, and with
mourning, etc. The main thing here required, was to turn from their evil ways
sincerely, and without any reserve: But an observant Reader cannot but take
notice, that this was also to be performed, with fasting, and with weeping, and
with mourning. Their hearts were to be rent in the first place, and not their
garments (as it there follows) for otherways there was no hope they would turn
unto the Lord: But their garments were to be rent also (it being a part of
mourning) as the effect, and the declaration of the renting of the heart; and
as a token they meant not to continue any longer in their sins, but to part
with them, and be entirely separated from them.

But to prevent all fancies which may possibly start up in any man's mind, that
the duty I am about to recommend to them, is proper only to the Old Testament
Spirit and times (as some have been taught to speak) I shall desire the Reader
only to study two other Verses in the Epistle of S. James: Which comprehend, I
think, all that belongs to this matter. They are ver. 9, 10. of the iv.
Chapter; Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: Let your laughter be turned to
mourning, and your joy to heaviness. Humble your selves in the sight of the
Lord, and he shall lift you up.

He had exhorted them in the foregoing words, Ver. 8. to draw nigh to God, in a
deep sense that they were great sinners, to acknowledge their guilt, to
deprecate his displeasure, and to resolve to be better men; both by cleansing
their hands, and by purifying their hearts: And that with all sincerity and
singleness of Spirit; being no longer double-minded, (sometimes resolving to do
well, and then revolting to their beloved sins again) but thoroughly and
entirely returning to him in New Obedience. And then, just as the Prophet Joel
required the Israelites to turn unto the Lord with all their heart; and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning: So the Apostle requires the
Christians to whom he writes, to draw nigh to God after the same manner; with
upright hearts, and with no less, but rather greater tokens of their inward
trouble that they had offended him. For he bids them not only be afflicted, and
mourn, and weep: But to refrain from all mirth and joy, and to be in heaviness:
Without which humiliations it was not fit for great sinners to present
themselves before an offended Majesty, or to hope for mercy from Him.

Which words if we examine by the phrases of the Old Testament, which are our
best guides for the interpreting of the New; we shall find there is not one of
them, but signifies some outward expression of great grief and sorrow: Which
was used by devout people, in token of hearty Repentance.

When they kept their great Fast, enjoined by the Law on the day of Expiation,
it was called a day of afflicting their Souls, xvi. Lev. 29, 31. lviii. Isa. 5.
which explains the first word in S. James, and shows it to be the very same
with that in Joel, turn unto him with Fasting.

And if we search farther, wherein this afflicting themselves consisted, we
shall find an Explication of the rest that follow. For it did not consist
barely in abstinence from food; but in putting on also the habit of mourners
(sackcloth and ashes) and in the action of renting the garments, in bewailing
and lamenting their conditition: which are the next phrases in S. James, mourn
and weep.

And if we still proceed further in our enquiry, we shall find that on such
days of afflicting themselves they also abstained from all sorts of pleasure;
they would not so much as wash their faces, much less anoint their heads; no,
nor look up, but hanged down their heads, in confusion of face. Music and
Songs were perfect strangers to them; nor would they take any rest; but they
punished their bodies with watchings, and lying on the bare ground: To testify
their sorrow and grief for what evil they had done, or for the evils they felt
or feared. And accordingly here it follows in the Apostle, in perfect
conformity to those customs, let your laughter be turned into mourning, and
your joy into heaviness, or into hanging down of the head, with shame and grief.

And if we go on to search into the ground of all this, it will further
illustrate the thing in hand. For it is visible, that upon occasion of any
sorrowful accidents, they were wont in those Eastern Countries, to express
their sense of it, by putting on sackcloth, lying on the ground, strowing
ashes on their heads, and such like things. Which is notorious, more
especially, in case of the loss of their Friends, and near Relations. Thus
Jacob bewailed the supposed death of his Son Joseph, xxxvii. Genesis 34, 35. And
thus Rispah the Concubine of Saul lamented her Children, whom the Gibeonites
hanged on a Gibbet, 2 Samuel xxi. 10. and thus Job, when he heard of the calamity
befaln his Family, rent his mantle, shaved his head, fell down upon the ground,
and remained in silence, without speaking a word for seven days, i. Job 20. and
thus his Friends also, hearing of all this evil, and beholding, when they came
to visit him, in what a lamentable condition he lay himself, lift up their
voice and wept, and rent every man his mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their
heads, and sat down with him upon the ground in silence, ii. Job 12, 13. Nor
are there wanting numerous examples (which I shall omit) of the very same
customs among other Nations, as well as among the Jews and these Arabians.

No wonder then if pious men, who were touched with a sense of their sin, and
of the Divine displeasure: used the very same signs and testimony of their
grief, which were customary in other cases, of far less consequence. For what
greater mischief can befall us, than the loss of Gods favor? or rather, what
calamity is equal, or nearly approaching to it? And therefore there is more
reason to bewail our offenses against him (which put us out of his favor) most
heavily, and with the most doleful tokens of our sorrow for them; than there is
to bewail the loss of the dearest Friend we have in this World, or the greatest
misfortune, as we term it, that can possibly befall us.

And accordingly we read that when holy Job humbled himself before God, for his
too peremptory vindication of his own innocence, he does it in the same manner,
that he had bewailed his Afflictions, saying, I abhor my self, and repent in
dust and ashes, xlii. 6. And the Prophets often call upon the Israelites, to
put on sackcloth, and to bewail themselves in ashes; when they would have them
mourn for their sins, and (as it is in 1 Samuel vii. 2.) lament after the Lord:
that is, seek the recovery of his favor by an hearty Repentance.

For they did not think it fit, for grievous offenders to look up to him, whose
authority they had affronted, without Tears in their Eyes; and a sad and
sorrowful countenance; in the most mournful posture and habit; and the
bitterest expressions of their grief and inward anguish: As knowing that they
deserved to be unprofitably bewailing their sins in a more dismal place, where
there is Nothing, but weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

Why? will some say; does God delight to hear our shrieks and groans? or would
you have us be our own Tormentors? Is it reasonable a man should be cruel to
his own flesh; and make it his business, to put himself to pain? There is
Nothing from which humane Nature more abhors, than sorrow and grief; and
Nothing is more Friendly to it, than Pleasure and Joy.

(...). Every thing that saddens and afflicts us, is a real Disease and
Sickness: To which we cannot but be averse, and by all means study to avoid.

Unto which I answer, as Solon did to one who told him when he wept for his
Son, that he troubled himself, but profited Nothing by it, (...): That Is the
very reason, said he, why I cannot but weep. So when men say, that Nature is
hurt by Sorrow, the reply may justly be; that is one of the things which should
make you sorrowful: To see how you have spoiled the Beauty and Goodliness of
Humane Nature; how you have sullied it by your sins, and darkened the brightness
and cheerfulness of it; by Eclipsing the light of Gods countenance, which we
were made to enjoy and to rejoice therein; and causing this World to become
Nothing but a Scene of Misery, a place of mourning and lamentation; either for
our sins, or for our sufferings.

It is a sad fight indeed to behold a Creature made for great Happiness, to be
now so altered, that in all the Creation there is not one so full of complaints
as Man: But it will be a sadder, if his first complaint be not of the cause of
all this, which is our Sins. These, if they be not sorrowfully bewailed, are
the most grievous and lamentable of all things else; in the account of those
who rightly weigh them.

But besides this, we must consider; that this is the way to make men leave
their sins; and so be restored to true Joy and Gladness. If they can take
pleasure in evil courses, as well as in good, they will never be at the trouble
of an exchange: Nor scarce think of it, till they be mourning there, where
Tears will never cease to flow, and drown them in Eternal Sorrows.

Nay, more than this, to think of our sins without due sorrow and grief for
them, is in truth to repeat them. So far are they from leaving them, who are
not grieved for them; that whenever they call them to mind without such
grief, it is in effect again to commit them. Their minds are pleased with them;
and there they do that over again, which was done before in outward actions.
Upon this score therefore we are to be afflicted for them; and if we be,
Mourning and Tears and sad Lamentations will not be wanting, proportionable to
the Affliction which they give our Spirits. According to that saying of
Philemon,

-- (...) Grief, like a Tree, has Tears for its Fruit. Which spring out of
Sorrow, as a natural expression thereof: And are a means, as I shall show more
hereafter, to remove the cause. And what greater cause, as I have said, is
there for our grief and heaviness, and all their mournful attendants, than
this; that we have offended him by our sins, who is able to punish them in
endless Sorrows? When lesser things produce sometime a flood of Tears; we
cannot but conclude, without any other reason for it, that they are justly
expected, in a very great measure, here.

CHAP. IV. Of the Christian Practice in this matter.
AND thus the constant practice of the Christian Church, has expounded these
words of S. James: By requiring such Humiliations, Affliction, and Doleful
bemoaning of themselves, from those who had so grievously offended God, as to
be thrown out of their Communion, before they would receive them again into it.
Which is a thing so notorious, that by the word Repentance, among the ancient
Writers of Religion, nothing else is commonly meant, but open Confession of
their Sins, with sad lamentations of them, and of the woeful condition into
which they had brought them.

There are many remarkable things to this purpose in the Records of the Church,
more than enough to fill a much bigger Book than this; if I would give my self
liberty to relate with what humble prostrations, with what tears and doleful
lamentations, conciliciati and concinerati (as Tertullians words are) covered
with Haircloth, and buried, as it were, in Ashes, with Fastings and Watchings,
with Sighs and Groans and mournful Voices, looking dismally lean, pale and
meagre, by long grief and neglect of their Bodies, Penitents were wont to cast
themselves down upon the Earth, and not only supplicate Gods mercy, but beg and
beseech in the most miserable manner, the pardon and the prayers of their
Christian Brethren.

But my design is only to show that all this, which was the unquestionable
practice of the early Ages of the Church, had its foundation in the very
beginning of our Religion, and was directed by the Apostles themselves. Who
when any sinner was so senseless that he was not at all afflicted for the Crimes
he had committed, so impudent that he was not ashamed of the foulest wickedness
(and therefore was to be excommunicated and cut off from the body of Christ)
required the whole Church, to bewail his Sin and his Misery, in the most sad
and mournful manner: And therefore we may be confident this was expected from
the sinner himself, when by this means he was awakned out of his Lethargy, to
see into what a woeful condition he had brought himself by his offenses.

For this is the thing which S. Paul blames in the Corinthian Church, that when
an eminent person among them had committed such Fornication, as was not so much
as named among the Gentiles, they were so far from being concerned about it,
that they were puffed up, with a vain opinion of their dearness to God, because
of their Spiritual Gifts wherein they abounded. Whereas they should have rather
mourned, that he who had done this deed, might be taken away from among them, 1 Corinthians. v. 1, 2. That is, they should have met together in the Church, to
separate such a person from their society, with wailings and lamentations over
him: In token of their own sorrow for, and detestation of, so foul a fact; and
that they looked upon him as a lost man, till he recovered himself by
Repentance, and mourned, as they had done, for his Sins.

The Jews, it is well known, when any man was to be punished with death for
Blasphemy, and such like Crimes, proclaimed a Fast (as we read in the story of
Naboth, 1 Kings xxi.) that is, they mourned, and wept, they put on Sackcloth,
and humbled themselves; they did all other things of this nature, which might
testify their Sorrow that God should be so dishonored, and the offender
should bring himself to such a miserable end. Which the Church thought it
reasonable to imitate, when they cut off any person from their Body (as a
number of Ecclesiastical Writers inform us, and this passage in S. Paul
instructed them) they Fasted, they Wept, they put themselves into the habit of
Mourners, and stripped themselves of their Ornaments; to declare their abhorrence
of the sins which were thus punished, and to express their Grief for the
scandal they had given; which hereby they wiped off.

Nay, the Apostles themselves (which is still more) did not refrain from these
Lamentations; but, when they in person executed this Sentence against any
Sinner, humbled themselves, and gave the most sensible tokens of their inward
Grief and Sorrow. This we may learn from the same S. Paul in his next Epistle
to the Corinthians, Chapter xii. Ver. 20, 21.

Where, after he had mentioned several sins which they had not reformed, he
concludes in these words, I fear lest when I come again, my God will humble me
among you, and that I shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have not
repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness which they
have committed. To bewail these men, was to punish them with Excommunication;
which was accompanied with wailings and lamentations over them, as men in a sad
and most dangerous condition; and very much humbled, that is, Afflicted and
Grieved the Apostles themselves when they considered it: Who thought God
himself expected it from them; for whose sake, and to preserve a due regard to
his Sacred Majesty, S. Paul foresaw he must, in all likelihood, be forced to
appear in the habit of a Mourner, when he came again among the Corinthians.

In short, just as men mourn for their Friends who are dead corporally; so did
they bewail those who were dead Spiritually. Which they ought sure much more to
have done themselves; if there had been any sense remaining in them, and they
had not been dead in Trespasses and Sins: And did bewail, no doubt, as soon as
by this severity they were awakened out of their sleep, and arose from the dead
(as S. Paul speaks, v. Ephesians. 14.) that is, had any motion of Spiritual life
appeared again in them, and were brought to a feeling of their lamentable
condition.

Which lamentations of themselves sometimes continued so long, even by the
inclination of the Penitents themselves, that they did not think fit, when they
had highly offended God, to leave them off, as long as they lived. The Deacons
wife in Asia, is a famous instance of it: Who having been seduced and corrupted
in her body by Marcus, whom she followed a long time, but at last by the
diligence of the Brethren converted; spent all her days in Penance, bewailing
and lamenting the corruption she had suffered by that Magician: As Epiphanius
Haeres. 34. n. 3. (...).
relates out of Irenaeus.

Many such observations might be heaped up, and more added out of the Holy
Scriptures; but this is sufficient, I think, to reform the Error, which is
crept in among us, that outward humiliations and bodily afflicting our selves,
signify nothing in the Christian Religion; but inward grief and sorrow does
all. This is not Apostolical Doctrine; and the Church of God has always
thought otherways. S. Paul himself teaches us, in another Epistle, that though
Godliness (all the actions of Christian Piety) be the chief thing; yet bodily
exercise is not to be looked upon as altogether unprofitable, 1 Timothy iv. 8.
Bodily exercise profits little: but Godliness is profitable unto all things,
etc. So we now read in our Printed Bibles [profiteth little] but I have reason
to think the Translation at first was, profits a little: Because in the
Margent, referring it to time, it is Translated thus, or, for a little time As
S. Austin (Cap. 33. de moribus Eccl. Cath.) and most of the Ancients expound it.
Which shows they thought there was some profit in Bodily exercise, though but
little in comparison with the profit of Godliness it self. And so it is
expressed in the Greek more clearly and fully, Bodily exercise is profitable,
(...), a little way (as it may be rendered) serves to some purpose, and is
useful in its kind. And therefore the Apostle does not speak slightingly of it
(as men are apt to understand his words in our Translation) but rather commends
it; though with diminution, in respect of something else, which was far better
and more to the purpose.

Now by Bodily exercise I suppose no man is so weak as to imagine the Apostle
meant such Exercise as is necessary for the health, or the pleasure and
recreation of the Body (there being no occasion to speak of such matters) but
rather intended such Exercises as did afflict and impair the Body, and may help
a little way to conserve or restore the health of the Soul. Such as fastings,
watchings, lying on the ground, eating the bread of affliction (as the
Scripture calls it) that is course Food, abstaining from conjugal pleasures,
and in general, all ill treatments of the Body; which served to humble it, and
bring down the pride and wantonness of it. Epiphanius thus reckons them up;
when he speaks of the Exercises that accompanied their Prayers, in the week
before Easter Haeres. lxxv. (...), etc.
.

CHAP. V. The use of Bodily Exercises.
THAT these Exercises are something profitable, is the next thing I propounded
to be treated of in this Discourse. I am sure they are very becoming a great
offender, though they be the least that God expects from him: And therefore
they ought not to be utterly decried and disgraced; while we teach there is
something much beyond them, without which they will do us but little good.

1. For first, they are natural expressions of the sense a man has of his own
vileness and baseness; and may very much conduce to promote it, and make him
more apprehensive of it.

2. And they are as natural expressions of the sense he has, of his abuse of
the good things which God allowed him to enjoy; and of his Grief and Sorrow,
which that sad reflection works in him.

3. They declare also a sense of his unworthiness to enjoy those good things
any longer: He acknowledging by his Fasting and Abstinence (for instance) that
his daily Bread, yea the least morsel of it, is too good for him; and by his
throwing off all his Ornaments, that he deserves to be stripped of all other
Blessings, which God has adorned him withal.

4. They are a just acknowledgment likewise of his offenses, which have made
him thus unworthy: And plainly declare also that he looks with detestation upon
those evil courses, which have made him not to look like himself.

5. Further, they are a sign of a man's intention and purpose to alter the whole
course of his life; and to become quite another man.

6. Nay, more than this, they are a beginning of Self-denial; and some small
Exercise of it, in things which fleshly nature very much desire: As we all
know, it does good Meat and Drink, fine Clothes, Ease, and all manner of
Pleasures.

7. And further, they may help also to mortify the evil that is in any of
those desires; and dispose a man to avoid those sins more carefully hereafter,
which have procured him so much Grief, Affliction, and Trouble. That is, they
are not merely testifications of our grief for Sins past, and our detestation
of what we have done amiss; which is the first part of Repentance: But, if they
be rightly used, may prove a means to secure our resolution of amendment (which
they also naturally testify) and help to preserve us from revolting to those
sins, of which we express so great detestation, and feel to be very afflictive;
which is the other and best part of Repentance.

8. They may serve also to dispose a man to seriousness in Meditation and
Prayer; by taking his thoughts off from all worldly things, as little or
nothing worth.

9. More particularly, they may serve to raise in our mind, a due valuation of
the happiness of the other World; when we despise all the enjoyments of this.
Which was a Doctrine S. Matthias was wont to press (as Clemens Alexandrinus
reports his words L. iii. Strom. p. 436.
(...), etc. to oppose the Flesh, and to treat it ill; not suffering it to have
its desires; (...), but to nourish the Soul by Faith and by Knowledge: For by
substracting from the Body, we make provision for the Souls increase in Wisdom
and Goodness. Which end of Abstinence we are taught in the Collect for the
first Sunday in Lent; wherein we pray, that our Flesh being subdued to the
Spirit, we may ever obey his Godly motions in Righteousness and true Holiness,
etc.

10. And, to omit other things, I see no reason why I should not add, in the
last place, that these severities are acts of a just revenge, which a sinner
takes upon himself, for his former excesses; by Intemperance, Luxury, Impurity,
Pride and Vainglory.

They are but just expressions of a due indignation against his past follies;
and a becoming chastisement, which he inflicts upon himself for his licentious
way of living.

S. Paul himself mentions this Revenge, as the last effect of the Corinthians
sorrowing after a Godly sort, 2 Corinthians. vii. 11. For behold, this self-same
thing that ye sorrowed after a Godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you
(to satisfy the Apostle) yea, what clearing of your selves (of approving what
he condemned) yea, what indignation (against the offender) yea, what fear (of
the Apostolical Censures) yea, what vehement desire (to recover, I suppose, the
Apostles good opinion) yea, what zeal (for the Apostles authority, which some
slighted) yea, what revenge; in inflicting punishments suitable to the offense.

By which word [Revenge] it is true (and I will not in the least prevaricate in
this Argument) the best Interpreters, and I believe rightly, understand the
punishment lately inflicted, by the sentence of Excommunication pronounced
against the Incestuous person, according to the Apostles order. Yet it is
manifest, I think, that this Revenge was taken by the Church, because the man
did not take it on himself. If he had been sadly afflicted, if he had humbled
himself by Fasting and Weeping and Mourning, by confessing his Sin, by
confusion of face, and all other signs of a true Penitent; the Church had not
proceeded to such a degree of severity against him, as to deliver him up to
Satan. And such a Revenge, whether enjoined by the Church, or inflicted by a
man's self, the Apostle makes the fruit of a pious Sorrow.

That sharp Grief wherewith the Heart is wounded, when it reflects upon its
disobedience to a most Gracious Father, those Stings, which a mind conscious of
such foul ingratitude, feels in it self; that shame, that self-displicency, and
loathing, which arises out of a serious sense of a man's offenses, work in him
such a detestation of his former course of life; that it will incline him by
afflicting and punishing himself, after such a manner as I have described, to
prevent the like again.

CHAP. VI. The Abuse of these Exercises ought not to hinder the Use: wherein a
further account is given of them.
AND this course ought not to be laid aside, because some have turned this just
Revenge, by inflicting punishments upon themselves, for such ends as I have
named, into a proper satisfaction of the justice of God. Which is the fault of
the Church of Rome; who by abusing many profitable things, have made others
throw them quite away.

To fancy any such satisfaction, as they speak of (which is variously
explained by them, and by some very injuriously unto our Lord Christ) is to
stretch the virtue of these things too far: But if we therefore shall wholly
reject them, that will be to start aside as much the other way. The Church of
God, in the purest times, before the birth of those Errors, which are
comprehended under the Name of Popery, most earnestly recommended and enjoined
such Afflictions of the Body, without any design of satisfying the Divine
Justice for their Sins; and yet with an intention to punish themselves for
them: in hope that God would graciously spare them, and accept of their
unfeigned Repentance; of which these were the signs and tokens; and also the
beginnings of a new Life, and the means to bring it to greater perfection.

The very Fast of Lent, was anciently prolonged to that number of days of which
it now consists, for the benefit of the public Penitents, that were in the
Church: Who by such Humiliations, as I have mentioned, gave satisfaction to the
Church (which was another end of their Afflicting themselves) and humbly
begging their pardon, promised hereafter to be better Christians: and so
prepared themselves to be reconciled, and admitted to the Holy Communion at
Easter.

It would be endless to recite all the passages we meet with in Ecclesiastical
Writers, concerning this matter; that Penitents should by such Bodily
Afflictions, as have been often named, take Revenge upon themselves for their
former wickedness; and undo what they had done before, by doing just the
contrary.

S. Chrysostom mentioning those words of John Baptist, Bring forth therefore
fruits meet for Repentance, puts this question, How may we thus fructify? And
resolves it in this manner; If we do directly contrary to our former Sins. Have
thou stolen another man's Goods? begin now to give away thine own. Have thou been
a Fornicator, abstain even from thy lawful Bed. Have thou wronged any one in
words, as well as deeds? bless hereafter even those that curse thee; do good to
those who reproachfully use thee. Such Revenge as this is very necessary; for a
wounded man, as he adds, must not only pull the Dart out of his Body, but apply
also suitable remedies to his Wound. Have thou therefore flowed in Luxury and
in Drunkenness? make a compensation for it by Fasting and Abstinence. Have thou
cast impure Eyes upon another Beauty? cover thy Eyes, and hang down thy head;
being touched with a greater caution, by the harm thou have received.

And thus Tertullian, long before him, gives L. de Poenit. C. xi.
this brief admonition; If thy Neighbor ask thee, why thou defraudest thy self
of thy Food, and art so Afflicted, etc. tell him, Deliqui in Deum, etc. I have
offended God, I am in danger to perish Eternally: And therefore now I hang down
my head for shame, I macerate and excruciate my self; that God, whom I have
injured by my sins, may be reconciled to me, etc.

Gregory the Great, though much later than either of them, has left this
excellent Gloss upon the words beforementioned. You must observe that the
Friend of the Bridegroom (he means John Baptist) calls not only for fruits of
Repentance, but for fruits meet, or worthy and becoming Repentance. It being
one thing to bring forth fruit; another to bring forth meet or worthy fruit.
For you must know, that he who has not committed unlawful things, may justly
use those which are lawful: But he that has done unlawful things, for instance
has fallen into the guilt of Fornication, or which is worse, of Adultery, he
ought to deny himself even those that are lawful; in proportion to the
unlawful, which he remembers he has given himself the liberty to enjoy. For
there ought not to be equal fruits of Repentance from those who have offended
little, and from those who have offended much (from those who since they have
been devoted to God have led a regular life, and from those who have been very
extravagant) but every one, according as he has broken his vow to God, less or
more; with more or less expressions of Grief and Sorrow he ought to address
himself to God for Mercy.

I will add only the words of S. Ambrose to a corrupted Virgin. According to
the weight of the guilt, must be the greatness of the Repentance: And therefore
thou must not Repent in word only, but in deeds. Which may be thus done: If
thou set before thine Eyes from what a great dignity thou art fallen, from
what a Book of Life thy name is blotted out: And so believe thy self to be
just next door to utter darkness, where there is endless weeping and wailing
and gnashing of teeth. When thou have represented this to thy self by Faith,
then (since the Soul that sins is liable to be cast into Hell fire, and there
is no remedy, after Baptism, but only the comfort of Repentance) be content to
endure any Affliction, any Labor, any sordid usage of thy self; if thou may
but be delivered from Eternal pains: And, if thou will be guided by me, be thou
thy self the more cruel Judge of thy own fact. If the sinner (as it follows a
little after) would not spare himself, God would spare him. If he would put
himself to short pain here in this Life, he might escape Eternal pain in the
future. A great wound must be searched into carefully, and have a long Cure. A
great sin must necessarily have a great satisfaction.

So he calls those acts of faithful Penitents, Confession, Weeping, Mourning,
neglect of their Bodily culture, Prayers, Fastings, Alms, lying on the Ground,
wearing Sackcloth, and such like things as were then in use; by the name of
Satisfaction. Not because he thought they could properly make a compensation to
God for their past crimes, and merit his pardon: but because they were pleasing
and acceptable to him, when they were true significations of the inward
compunction of their Hearts; as well as gave satisfaction to the Church, which
enjoined these Penances, to take off the scandal that had been cast upon
Religion by their Sins. For he satisfies another, that does what he requires of
him. Now God himself requires this of a Sinner, that he be afflicted and mourn,
and weep, and have his laughter turned into mourning, and his joy into
heaviness, etc.

And if he had not required it; yet Nature it self presses us to it, when we
are rightly affected toward him. For it is scarce possible, as Mr. Calvin well
observes, That a Soul struck with the dread of the divine Judgment, should L.
iii. Instit. Cap. 3. Sect. 15.
not exact this of it self: and teach a man to prevent the vengeance of God, by
being himself the avenger of his own Sins. And the severer, says he, we are to
our selves, and the sharper censure we pass upon our Sins; the more propitious
and merciful we may hope God will be unto us.

Which he seems to have borrowed from Tertullian, in his Book of Repentance;
Cap. ix. and x.
where he has these known words. When Repentance throws a man on the ground,
it supports and relieves him. When it makes him all squalid, it renders him the
more pure and clean. It excuses, when it accuses him. It absolves, when it
condemns. And the less thou sparest thy self, believe me, the more will God
spare thee.

Which is agreeable to the Doctrine of S. Paul, in the 1 Corinthians. xi. 31. That,
if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. It is
certain, that the judgment, which he would have had the Corinthians prevent, by
judging themselves; was the sharp Chastisements which God inflicted upon that
Church, by Sickness, Weakness, and Death; as we read in the Verse foregoing. In
few words, it was his inflicting punishments upon them for their sins: and
therefore it is most reasonable to think that this is the judgment he would
have them pass upon themselves; which might, as I said, have prevented that
judgment of God, and still might remove it. They should have afflicted and
chastised themselves in a contrite manner, with Fastings and Mournings, and
bewailing of their Sins, and other Humiliations: that so there might have been
no need of Gods inflicting punishments upon them for their reformation, which
they had already begun to inflict on themselves. For if by being judged in the
latter part of the Verse, be meant being punished (which is unquestioned) it
seems the most agreeable interpretation of judging our selves in the former
part, if we understand thereby punishing our selves by that severe discipline,
which I am treating of.

It is true indeed (for I will dissemble nothing that I know, nor strain any
passage of Scripture to justify this Doctrine) that the word we render judge
in the beginning of the Verse, is not the very same with that which is in like
manner so rendered by us in the conclusion: But in the Greek there is some
difference, when he says, if we would judge our selves (which is (...)) from
the other, we should not be judged, which is (...). And it is further true,
that S. Chrysostom and Oecumenius there expressly note, that the Apostle does
not say (...), if we would punish our selves, but only if we would sentence and
condemn our selves as Sinners: which they take to be the import of the word
(...).

But this notwithstanding, I cannot think the infliction of such punishments
upon themselves, as are the subject of this Discourse (which are of a different
kind from those inflicted by God, and so expressed by a different word) are
here excluded. For to what do men sentence and condemn themselves (which S.
Chrysostom makes the meaning of the word) but to suffer all that a just Judge
shall inflict; if he deal with them according to their deserts? And how could
they think of inflicting less chastisements upon themselves, than such
Humiliations, as were then in use; whereby they acknowledged themselves to be
unworthy to live?

In which, says the Apostle, if they had not favored themselves, but
pronounced and executed that sentence which their sins justly deserved; they
might have been spared by God: and not punished, as some were, by those
Sicknesses and Infirmities, nay, Death, which he sent among them.

So that the full import of that word judge our selves, I conceive to be this.
If you had strictly examined your selves, and made an exact difference (so the
word is expounded Ver. 29.) between your selves, and those who had no sense of
their irreverent behavior toward our Lord; if you had acknowledged your
Errors, and condemned your selves for them, and deprecated his displeasure by
due Humiliations, and studied amendment; he would not have handled you in this
manner, by sending a terrible Plague upon you. For it cannot reasonably be
denied, that in this judging or condemning themselves (Translate it how you
please) all things are contained, which were or ought to have been, the effects
and fruits thereof: As in confession of Sin, the Scripture includes Repentance,
and the fruits of Repentance, or amendment of Life: And in the Exomologesis of
the ancient Christians, the whole business of Penance was contained; as appears
sufficiently, by the story I related of the Deacons Wife in Asia. Now such
Humiliations as I have treated of, were the effects of their condemning
themselves; when they were deeply guilty, and as deeply sensible of their
guilt. Which the Corinthians were not; and so did not sue out their pardon, in
such a humble and afflicted manner, as became such gross offenders: For if they
had, they should not have fallen under such a severe discipline of Heaven, as to
have been cut off (which the Jews say was always by the hand of Heaven) from
the Land of the living.

In plainer terms (which I take to be the truest Interpretation of all) if the
Church had judged, condemned and exercised its Censures, as it ought to have
done upon such offenders, and punished them for their faults: those punishments
from the hand of God might have been spared.

And that is the cause still perhaps, why many public judgments of God fall
upon us in these days; because the Church is negligent in calling offenders to
an account: And they will not judge, that is Afflict, themselves for their
Offenses. There are great numbers, I doubt not, who condemn their Sins in their
own Consciences; and condemn themselves also for them, to deserve punishment
from God: And this they imagine to be sufficient, to make them capable of his
Mercy and Forgiveness. Whereas they ought to humble themselves with Fasting,
and Weeping, and Mourning; with neglect of their Bodies, confession of their
Guilt, confusion of Face, lamentable deprecations of Gods displeasure, Prayers,
and Supplications, with works of Merry: which ought always to accompany Fasting
and Prayer; as most becoming those who ask mercy of God, and as a Revenge upon
themselves for their Covetousness and too great love of this present World. And
because grievous sinners do not thus Afflict themselves, with an unfeigned
resolution of amendment, God himself is pleased to afflict them; by sending his
Plagues upon them, in one sort or other to punish them.

CHAP. VII. Some Cautions to prevent misunderstanding in this matter.
THUS having proved what I undertook, that we ought not to content our selves
with inward Sorrow alone, without all outward Humiliations; and shown the use
they have in Religion: I proceed now, according to the method laid down in the
beginning, to give some Cautions, to prevent the misunderstanding, or abuse of
this Doctrine.

1. And first of all I would not be understood, as if I thought they were of
such an indispensable necessity that it is impossible for any sinner to obtain
Remission and Absolution without them. No, the very History of the Gospel shows
the contrary: In which we find our Savior, who came to call sinners to
Repentance, forgave several persons; who did not, like that woman in the vii.
of S. Luke, Kiss his very feet, wash them with her tears, and wipe them with
the hair of her head. All which were acts of great Humiliation; especially the
last: wherein she employed that to the meanest use, which had been before her
principal Ornament and her pride.

My meaning therefore is, that these things are very useful (as has been
shown) and in some cases necessary: when Penitents have been very licentious
livers; and it is not likely they will otherwise be sufficiently sensible of
what they have done, and of what they have deserved; nor be so humbled, as to
be reclaimed and brought off from their evil courses.

2. They therefore who have constantly led a regular life, and are guilty only
of the smaller sort of Offenses, must not take these things as spoken to them
(unless it be on some occasions, which shall be presently mentioned) which are
intended for gross and scandalous Sinners. Such as that woman now named, who
was a known Harlot: unto whom our Lord forgave a great deal; when little was
forgiven unto Simon, who did none of these things, vii. Luke 46, 47.

3. Yet it may be very necessary even for those to take this course, who are
not such heinous Offenders; in case of frequent relapses into the same sin:
which must be cured by using themselves something severely. For though seldom
slips (of the Tongue suppose) may be easily corrected: yet frequent returns to
folly, and that after solemn resolutions to the contrary, will require more
pains and great Humiliations; as a means not only to give a stop to them, but
to extirpate such roots of bitterness.

4. The best also ought to Afflict themselves, in times of public calamity;
and upon days of solemn Humiliation: when men are naturally disposed to that
which may signify their seriousness, sobriety, sorrow, and unworthiness of the
Blessings they come to beg of the Father of Mercies.

5. By which every one may understand that these Humiliations are not always in
season; as inward grief and sorrow is: But upon such occasions as I have
mentioned; and also at certain appointed times, which the Church has fixed,
either Weekly, or Yearly; for Humiliation in general for our own and other men's
Sins; or for the bewailing those in particular who have deserved the Censures
of the Church, when they are executed on them. Of which more hereafter.

6. At all which times care must be taken, that these Humiliations be true
significations of our inward grief, and proceed from thence: And not merely
external shows, used for fashions sake, and to comply with the season. For
without inward grief and resolutions to be better, they are so far from
procuring any favor from God, that we may justly fear they further incense
him; as being but a kind of mockery of him. Which made the Prophet Joel, in the
place above named, bid the Israelites rend their hearts, and not their
Garments: Not intending hereby to forbid the rending their Garments (which he
had in effect called for, in the preceding words) but requiring them not to
content themselves with that alone. Because that was but a signification and
token; and a sign, where there was nothing really signified thereby, could be
nothing worth: But rather an abomination in the sight of God. Who counts it a
vile piece of Hypocrisy, when we present him with significations, which in
truth signify nothing; there being nothing within, like to that which appears
without.

7. And further, this caution must be used, that by these Exercises, we neither
destroy the health of our Bodies, nor suffer any ill affection to be bred in
our Minds. We ought not to make our selves sick with Fasting; nor so weaken our
selves by hard usage, as to become unfit for our employments. And greater care
ought to be taken, that we do not grow morose and sour, peevish and untoward
unto others; while we are severe unto our selves. And that the keeping our
selves under a strict discipline, do not beget a secret pride in us; which
makes us to think very highly of our selves, and to contemn and despise others:
Just as the conceited Pharisee, did the poor Publican; in the xviii. S. Luke
11, 12.

But above all, we must be watchful that such pride to not creep herewith into
our hearts; as tempts men to fancy they have by this discipline, highly
merited at the hands of God, whom they had grievously offended.

Let such Rocks as these be avoided; and then these bodily Exercises, in their
season and due measure, may prove very profitable: being designed for such
other ends and uses as I have named; particularly, as a means to prevent our
relapsing into such sins, as have cost us much affliction and trouble.

8. But lastly, I desire it may be noted, that I do not pretend any obligation
or fitness either, for the use of all and every, the very same tokens of inward
grief, and of the sense we have of our vileness, whereby it was expressed in
ancient days: But we are rather to declare the same things, by other signs
which are more suitable to our own times.

For the reason, I have shown, why they sat down in Sackcloth and Ashes when
they humbled themselves before God, in the days of old; was, because then it
was the custom of Mourners, in that manner to express the sense they had of the
loss, which they bewailed. But now that custom is quite antiquated; at least,
in these parts of the World there are no such things used by those that lament
any worldly loss: And therefore we are no more bound to wear Sackcloth on our
Bodies, and throw Ashes on our Heads, when we humble our selves, and mourn for
our Sins, than we are to rend our Garments; which is not used in those
Churches, where the other is still thought fit to be retained. But we are, as I
said, to express the same thing, by other signs and tokens: which are more
proper to the age and the place wherein we live.

Now they that Mourn (for a near Relation, or Friend suppose) in these
Countries, are still wont to forbear their meat, to abstain from all manner of
pleasures, to neglect the care and culture of their Bodies, to retire
themselves from company, to lay aside business, to shut up themselves in
private, to cover their faces, to keep silence, to bewail their loss, and to
refuse presently to be comforted. And thus it will become those who have highly
offended God, to bemoan and lament themselves after the self-same manner; when
they are in good earnest grieved for their Sins.

As for whipping and lacerating the Body, I do not find that it was ever used
in the Church anciently, either under the Old Testament or the New: But there
are plain indications rather, that they looked upon it as a Paganish custom,
which they were not to imitate. And indeed it represents God under a vile
Notion, as if he delighted in our blood, and was in love with cruelty: Nor is
there any thing like it to be found, in the Penances anciently enjoined in the
Christian Church; and therefore it is not to be approved. But such expressions
of grief and sorrow are only to be used, as Nature and the custom of the
Country direct us unto, in other cases of distress and sadness.

CHAP. VIII. The Use which Wicked men ought to make of this Doctrine.
BY what has been briefly said in this Argument, all Wicked men, who have
highly provoked God by their lewd way of living, may see (if they please to
open their Eyes) into what a woeful condition they have brought themselves:
being unworthy to Eat, or Drink, to lift up their Eyes unto Heaven, to enjoy
the light of the Sun, or any of the least of those common Blessings which God
bestows upon all Creatures; as sincere Penitents have been constrained to
acknowledge, by their deep Humiliations, Dejections and Abasement of
themselves, even to the Earth, before his offended Majesty.

So evil and bitter a thing it is to depart from God, and to cast his holy Laws
behind our backs (with neglect, if not contempt) in the opinion of all those,
who have been awakened to a lively sense of Him, and of the duty which is owing
to Him. And whenever they that now make a mock of Sin, shall become so
serious as to reflect upon their ways, and consider solemnly how they have
opposed God, and set themselves against his Authority, it will strike them with
the like consternation and amazement: And they will not think fit, so much as
to look up unto Him whom they have so insolently affronted, without Tears in
their Eyes, and with a most sad and sorrowful Countenance.

Nay, the most dejected looks are best becoming great Offenders; and the most
doleful lamentations ought to come out of their mouths; if silence, confusion,
astonishment, laying their hands on their mouths, or putting their mouths in
the dust, be not much more beseeming: When they remember, that they deserve to
be thrust down into utter darkness, there to bewail their mad contempt of God
in extreme horror and anguish of Spirit.

And this is but the first step neither to the recovery of Gods favor; unto
which they should be glad upon any terms to be restored: and have just reason
to look upon it as a bad sign, if they expect to recover it, upon easier
conditions than these. They have too slight thoughts of their misdoings, who
look upon this injunction as too harsh and severe: Be afflicted, and mourn, and
weep: Let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness.
Humble your selves, in the sight of the Lord, etc. For if men's hearts be
rightly affected, they will not only readily accord to this; but think they are
very kindly used, if they be after all received to Mercy.

Nay, every honest heart will judge it reasonable that his sorrowful
Humiliations should bear some proportion to the offenses, of which he stands
guilty. The more he has provoked Gods displeasure, the more he will be
displeased at himself: His affliction will be the heavier; his sorrow the
deeper and sadder; his loathing of himself the more vehement, as a very
abominable Creature; and consequently he will lay himself the lower, and be the
more abased, when he comes to sue for pardon.

There is nothing stranger than the carelessness of men about their Souls, in
this regard; as S. Chrysostom excellently discourses, in the beginning of his
Comments upon the Epistle to the Corinthians. You shall see many, says he,
bath themselves in Tears, and refuse to be comforted, for a great many days
(his phrase is (...), a thousand days) because they have lost some dear Friend,
a Child, or some other Relation, whom God has taken out of the World. But
though they lose their precious Souls every day, they scarce ever lay it to
heart: but slightly pass it over with a few sighs, at the best. Nay, where
shall we find the man, that is so much as sorry for what he has done? who is
there that groans, that smites his Breast, that is full of Solicitude, and
Care, and Fear, lest he be undone? (...) I think there is none: I am not
acquainted with them: they are not to be met withal, who are concerned about
their Souls; though they perish with a remedy just at hand.

But what a retchlesness is this? How do thou think to be reconciled to God,
when thou art not so much as sensible that thou have offended?

Thou will say; but I do confess my sins; I condemn my self for them. True,
thou say so with thy mouth; but let thy heart tell me so. Sigh deeply at that
word: Sigh so sadly, that thou may ever hereafter be of good cheer. For if we
did worthily grieve for our sins, if we sighed heartily for our offenses;
nothing else would make us sad: but this one trouble would drive away all other
sadness. Thus he.

And then we may be bold to think we have worthily lamented our sins, and
bewailed our wretched estate; when the affliction it has given us, makes us
more fearful to offend hereafter. If we can find in our hearts, so much as to
play with the occasions of those sins, which we have lamented; if we gaze with
some pleasure upon the bait which intices us to them; if we love our old wicked
company; or be so bold as to venture into it; if we draw as near a sin as we
dare: it is a sign we do not sufficiently abhor it, nor have been sorrowful
enough for it. For that would have made us more shy, more wary, more timorous
of relapsing into so dangerous an estate; and afraid to approach near to those
snares, wherein we had been entangled; and thereby suffered such affliction, as
can never be recompensed with any pleasures, but those of pleasing God in all
things.

Let us not deceive our selves then; no not with sorrow and affliction of
Spirit, and the greatest Humiliations before God; if they be not attended with
a change in the whole course of our life. Till sorrow has wrought this effect,
we have no reason to think that we have sorrowed after a Godly sort. We lay
aside the afflicting our selves too soon, and speak comfort to our Souls before
they be sit for it: If our grief has not made an absolute divorce between us
and our sins; never to come together again. For so the Apostle teaches us in
that known place, 2 Cor. vii. 10. Godly sorrow works repentance to Salvation,
not to be repented of. Sorrow is an unprofitable thing, unless it work
Repentance: and Repentance is unprofitable, if it be only a good fit, and we
return again to the sins which we renounced. Let us not conclude therefore too
hastily that we are Penitents. Sorrow alone does not make us so; no, nor a
present change in the course of our life: but that change must continue and
hold out when we come to be tried, and are placed again among our usual
temptations. Of which till we have had some experience, let us be modest, not
confident, in the opinion we have of our Godly sorrow: And judge rather we have
not sufficiently lamented our sins, than speedily pronounce our selves absolved
from them.

It was the custom in the Primitive Church, for those who were upon the point
of suffering Martyrdom for Christ, to write Letters before they died, in the
behalf of lapsed Christians, who were in the state of Penance: desiring the
Bishops that they might be reconciled and received to the peace of the Church.
But good Bishops would not easily consent to this, unless they saw real signs
of amendment in the Penitents: And they likewise earnestly desired the Martyrs
not to be too easy in granting these Letters, or in promising to sue for them;
but to consider how solicitous their Predecessors were to have such Sinners
truly humbled, and how cautious to observe the kind and quality of the sins,
which they lamented in the state of Penance. Nay, there were some Martyrs so
wise as to reprove this giving of the peace of the Church, before they were so
humbled as to be reformed, Ne dum volumus ruinis importune subvenire, alias
majores ruinas videamur parare (as I find Moses and Maximus and other
Confessors speak most judiciously, in S. Cyprian, who himself has an admirable
discourse to the same purpose) lest while we desire unseasonably to raise up
lapsed Christians out of their ruins; we make way for their greater fall, and
utterly undo them.

They took care so to heal one breach, as not to make another and more
dangerous: So to cure a wound, as not to make a new one, harder to be cured: So
to restore Penitents, that they did not relapse into a more deplorable
condition. For they saw clearly that by speaking peace to them too soon, before
they were so soundly humbled and grievously afflicted, as to be heartily
established in new resolutions, they became less fearful to offend; and looked
not so carefully to their ways, as they would have done, if they had suffered
more for their former offenses.

Let us take the same care about our own Souls; and not be too forward to
conclude we have made our peace with God, though we have been never so
sorrowful: when there are no credible signs that we are so afflicted for what
we have done, as never to venture to do the like again. No Prince will pardon
upon other terms: and it is directly against all reason to think, that the
Sovereign of the World will be content to lose all the Obedience, which is
owing from his Creatures; whom he has made with a sense of Duty to him. No
cries, though lamentable beyond all expression, can persuade him to this; and
therefore it is foolish and presumptuous to expect it: especially since he has
declared the contrary, and told us as plainly, as words can express it, that
the wrath of God is revealed against all unrighteousness and ungodliness of
men, i. Romans 18. and that except we be converted and become like little
Children (pliable to the Will of our Heavenly Father) we cannot enter into his
Kingdom, xviii. Matthew. 3. Which our Savior pronounces with such an earnest
asseveration, as is apt to awaken our attention to what he says there, and in
many other places: which is utterly inconsistent with the imagination; that it
is sufficient to dispose us for his favor, if we acknowledge our Errors, and
be sorry for them, and bewail them; without any further alteration.

CHAP. IX. What Use the Better sort ought to make of this.
AND as our Tears ought not to stop, till they have wrought a thorough
alteration in our hearts, and in the course of our life: So, after that is
wrought, there will be still occasion for them, and they must not be quite
dried up. My meaning is, that they who by the grace of God have reformed their
lives, and done away their former sins by an unfeigned sorrowful Repentance;
(or they who perhaps never highly offended God, but have been only guilty of
smaller faults) ought not to think themselves wholly unconcerned in this
Doctrine, and to have no cause for being afflicted; with such mourning,
weeping, and Humiliations, as I have mentioned. They have great reason indeed
to rejoice in the Lord always, and to praise him for his wonderful goodness
toward them: But this is so far from shutting out all sorrow, that it is a
part of that holy life unto which they are renewed by Repentance, to be full of
tender compassion toward others, and to bewail their miserable condition.

And therefore, beside some degree of sadness and sorrow, which is due for
lesser offenses, or for greater formerly committed, though now amended; there
are two things which are really very lamentable, and ought to be sadly laid to
heart by the best of us. First, the public Judgments which God at any time
sends upon the Place or Kingdom where we live. Secondly, the obstinate
wickedness of most offenders; who notwithstanding these Judgments, will not
turn unto him that smites them, nor seek the Lord, as the Prophets words are,
ix. Isa. 13.

I. When people will not judge themselves (as I have said before in the vi.
Chapter) and the offenders are so many, that the Church, perhaps, cannot judge,
that is punish, them: God takes the matter into his own hand, and some way or
other inflicts such punishments on them, as he did upon the Corinthians. In
which case, the few good that are among them, ought to lament them and weep
over them; as they should have done if the Censures of the Church had been
denounced and executed upon them. For which there is the greater reason,
because as they are members of the same Body, so they are in danger to suffer
with them in the same common calamity; especially, if they do not humble
themselves, to deprecate Gods heavy displeasure.

If we make a particular application of this to our selves, in this Nation; we
are very blind if we do not see that the hand of God, as the Prophet speaks,
has been diverse ways, stretched out against us; in a destroying Pestilence,
even then when the Sword of War was also drawn, between us and our Neighbors;
and afterward in a devouring Fire, whereby many fair Buildings, and Holy
Places were laid in Ashes: which are things that ought not to be forgotten,
though, alas! they little now affect men's Minds. And therefore we have been
again terrified by the great hazard the Church and Kingdom was lately in; when
their old Enemies strugled once more to get the upper-hand, and had brought us
even to the brink of the Precipice: where we stood for some time trembling to
think what would become of us. And though we were then mercifully delivered;
yet when we consider how restless the Spirit of Sedition and Rebellion has
been since among us, and brought us again so near the very same dreadful
danger, that we were just upon the point of beholding all Order and Government
over-turned: All serious Christians cannot but think that this is a
lamentation, as the Prophets words are, and ought to be for a lamentation.

The prevention indeed of that utter Confusion, by a wonderful Providence,
ought to fill our hearts with joy: But the thoughts of such frequent Calamities
which have threatened us, ought to put us in Fear also, lest in conclusion they
should fall upon us; if neither Gods mercies, nor his Judgments can amend us.
The only way to keep them off is, for all good men and women to humble
themselves, and weep in secret for these things. On which they cannot cast
their Eyes seriously, to take a view of them; but they will find them
soliciting their Tears and their Sighs; and hear them call upon them to be
afflicted and mourn, and to let their joy (sometimes at least) be turned into
heaviness. This alone is a sad and melancholy sight, to behold the Spirit of
Blindness and Giddiness, of Faction and Rebellion, that has seized on a great
part of the Nation: Our senseless Contentions and Oppositions; the wide
Breaches and Divisions, for which we can see no Healing, may justly challenge,
(if there were nothing else to trouble us) great thoughts, and searchings of
heart.

II. Especially if we consider the other thing; not only how insensible most
people are of all such matters, (which in bodily distempers is counted the
worse symptom in the world) but how few have been amended by the public
Judgments which have either threatened us, or fallen upon us. The complaint which
God makes by the Prophet (ii. Jer. 30.) may still be continued, In vain have I
smitten your Children, they received no correction: And which the Prophet makes
to God (Ver. 3.) O Lord, are not thine Eyes upon the truth? Thou have stricken
them, but they have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused
to receive correction: They have made their faces harder than a Rock, they have
refused to return. For which stubborn impiety, and impudent wickedness (which
has every where too much abounded among us) every good man ought to be very
much afflicted: and not only content himself with this, that he does not follow
them in their ungodly practices; but bewail also as many as have sinned, and
have not Repented (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. xii. ult.) of the Uncleanness,
and Fornication, and Lasciviousness (and other abominable sins) which they have
committed.

For this is really the saddest spectacle of all other, to behold such numbers
as have not been at all touched with any remorse for their own Sins; nor any
grief for public Calamities; nor any Fear of future danger. But have taken
their pleasures to the full, in the most sorrowful times, that this Nation has
seen; and would not abate of their mirth and laughter in the least, when all
things looked cloudily about them; but encouraged one another to think only of
eating and drinking, and rising up to play: which all sober men cannot but look
upon, to be as unseemly a sight; as if men should go and dance about their
Parents, or nearest Relations, when they saw them a dying.

The ancient Pythagoraeans were wont when any person forsook their School, to
set a Coffin in the place, where he used to sit: And then to make a solemn
Funeral for him; bewailing him with their Tears, as one that was really dead.
And we have not well learned Christ, as the Apostle speaks, if we do not think
we have greater reason to bewail those, who have so far forsaken God, and their
Holy Religion, that nothing he can say or do, will move them to a sober
sadness: But they go on with a stiff neck and an hard heart to laugh at all
goodness. They are in so deplorable a condition, that we may give them up for
dead; and take up a lamentation over them, as lost men, who will never have any
feeling: and therefore are the greatest objects of all good men's pity. Who have
reason to mourn for them, and follow them with their Tears; as they would a
Friend that is carried to his Grave: Or rather, they are more to be lamented,
because they are dead even while they live. According to that of the Son of
Sirach, xxii. Ecclus. 12. Seven days do men mourn for the dead: but for a Fool,
and for an ungodly Man, all the days of his life.

And if we take into our consideration the causes of that bold confidence,
which has made them mock at all seriousness, even when we have been in the
greatest dangers; we shall see still the greater reason for our Humiliations.
They may be resolved into these two: First, their obstinate unbelief; which
makes them contemn all that is told them of future danger. And secondly, their
pride and scornfulness, which makes them despise even Gods present
chastisements.

As for the first of these, it is too notorious, that many men have hardened
their hearts against the belief of the Judgment to come, in the other World.
Which dull Infidelity leads them into all manner of licentious living; and lets
their furious desires loose, to run without any check or bridle into the
foulest profaneness. And when they are deeply drencht in the pleasures of
Sense, they scarce believe any thing they do not see: But give as little credit
to other Histories, as they do to the Records in the Book of God. Or at best,
they pish at them; and persuade themselves that their case is so much different
from those Nations, who have been ruined by such sins as they commit; that they
need not affright themselves with their sad examples.

There is a strange relation, commonly observed in the Roman story, of the
Equus Sejanus; a famous Horse which belonged to a Gentleman of Rome called
Sejus. Which was highly admired by every body for his goodly shape, fine
color, and delicate pace: But so unfortunate, that he never had any Master,
who was not undone. His first owner, Sejus, lost his Head: The next, Dolabella,
perished in a Battle: Cassius, the next, made away himself at Philippi: And
Anthony, his last Master, died after a most infamous manner. There was none of
these, who had seen the fall of his Predecessor, but mounted his back with a
persuasion, that he should have better luck, than the person that went before
him. The beautiful shape of the Beast more tempted them, than the ill fortune
of his Masters (which in those days was wont to be superstitiously observed)
could deter them. And thus truly it is now; though there be a great many
instances of particular persons, and whole Nations, that have been utterly
undone, by such riotous and profane courses as great numbers violently
prosecute; though they read of the fall of sundry flourishing Empires, by
reason of their luxury and excess, injustice and impiety, etc. Yet it moves
them not all to forsake their evil ways; in which they hope to be more
prosperous. Tell them of the Babylonians, of the Persians, of the Greeks and
Romans (not to say what the Holy Story relates of the Jews, and of many famous
Christian Churches) the pleasures of sin are more alluring, than all these
dismal examples affrighting to their Hearts.

And though they have seen several breaches made upon their worldly happiness;
though sundry Calamities have invaded the Nation wherein they live, enough to
strike terror into considering minds; yet the wicked by reason of the pride of
his countenance, will not seek after God. Which was the second thing I noted;
the evils which they see and feel do not much move them; because they think it
is a sign of a poor and mean Spirit to be daunted. They look upon it as a
sneaking thing to mourn, and to be afflicted, to humble themselves (though only
with the external signs of it) and imagine that nothing becomes men of quality,
but to be merry and joyful.

We read in the History of the East Indies, that among other Pagans in those
parts, there are some called Rasboutes Mandelso's Trav. p. 73.
: who have such perverse opinions concerning Honor, that they think it a
baseness in them (who never shun any danger) so much as to stir out of an
House, when it is on Fire. Nay, that some of them if they come to a Pit or a
Precipice, which the Beast under them would avoid, are wont to spur him on, and
leap down into their certain destruction: Imagining that by such inconsiderate,
and more than brutish actions, they acquire the reputation of an Heroical
courage. And such senseless resolution many seem to be possessed withal among
our selves. For none of Gods Judgments which encounter them, can make them turn
out of their way, or alter a jot the course of their life. But they think it a
generous thing not to be startled at them: They esteem it unmanly to humble
themselves; though it be before the Almighty. They have the courage to march
on, not to say into Hell fire, in the bottomless Pit (for those they take for
Fables, which signify nothing to them) but into that which of all other things
one would think they should most tenderly avoid; the ruin of their Honor, and
their Credit, and their Estates, nay, and of their Health, and their dear Life
it self.

For these men we ought to mourn; because we know not what else to do for them.
They are too stubborn to be counseled. They are like men in a Frenzy; that are
angry with those who would take the Knife from them, wherewith they are going
to cut their own Throats. They will not endure a check, or reproof; no, nor so
much as good advice. And therefore are the more to be bewailed by all good men;
who ought to be afflicted, and mourn, and weep on their behalf, seeing they
have no compassion on themselves.

And if these senseless sinners could by any means be so far awakened out of
their Lethargy, as to think seriously: though they regarded nothing the example
of former times, or any thing of that nature: Yet these two things might a
little startle them; could they be persuaded to reflect now and then upon them.

First, that they are Mortal; and it will not be long perhaps before they be
summoned to their Graves: And then it is not likely they will have the very
same thoughts about them, which they now have. The sight of Death will bring
down their proud stomachs, and humble them a little; when they see they are
dust and ashes. It may make them think also, what a comfort it would then be to
believe that something in them shall still live; if they could but hope withal
to have the Eternal God for their Friend: whom though now they forget, yet it
is possible they may then remember.

Would to God they could be prevailed withal to place themselves now in the
same posture, wherein they shall be upon their Deathbed: and see what effect
it would have upon their Heart. It becomes men that pretend unto Wit, to look
before them: and to take care not to be surprised with passions, they never
thought of; and such also as will mightily daunt them, unless their Spirits be
quite benumbed.

But if they will not be at this pains, let them at least cast their Eyes upon
those, whom they themselves have known sadly to bemoan and bewail their
miserable condition, when they came to die. That Is the other thing, which it is
possible may do them some good; for then it is frequent with them, to condemn
all their wicked courses; and to wish for a little time to reconcile themselves
to Him, whom they have highly offended. Then they find Solomon a wiser man than
they imagined; who thus forewarns one of these lewd livers, to take up in time
(as we speak) lest thou mourn at the last, when thy Flesh and thy Body is
consumed; And say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof?
And have not obeyed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine Ear to them
that instructed me? I was almost in all evil, in the midst of the Congregation
and Assembly, v. Prove. 11, 12, etc.

Now how much better, how much more becoming men of parts, is it thus to bewail
themselves in good time; before they have wasted themselves in wickedness? And
so, to love instruction; to thank those that reprove them; to obey their
Teachers; to incline their Ears to their godly Admonitions; to endeavor to do
as much Good, as they have done Evil: And that in the midst of the People;
openly giving glory to God by their public Repentance, whom they have boldly
dishonored by their scandalous wickedness.

This might avail them, and prove acceptable unto his offended Majesty; but to
bewail themselves thus, only at the last gasp, or when they can no longer act
their wickedness, no body can tell how it will be taken: But they have just
reason to fear, lest the same measure be dealt to them, with which Solomon
says some shall be served. Whose dreadful doom is Recorded, in the first
Chapter of his Wise Instructions, in these remarkable words, Ver. 24, 25, etc.
Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man
regarded; But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes;
When your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a
whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you.

Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me:

For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord.

They would none of my counsel; they despised all my reproof.

Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with
their own devices.

From which terrible sentence, God, of his infinite mercy, deliver us. And let
all that read these things, endeavor to deliver themselves, by hearkening to
such good counsel, as has been here given: That is, by turning to the Lord,
with all their Heart, and with Fasting, and with Weeping, and with Mourning.

PART II. Concerning FASTING.
CHAP. X. What is meant by Fasting.
AMONG those Humiliations, wherewith Penitent Sinners ought to prostrate
themselves before God to sue for mercy, the Reader cannot but observe that
Fasting has been frequently mentioned, as holding a principal place. And
therefore I think it useful to treat a little of it by it self: The Church
having set apart certain times for it; wherein if those wicked men I now spoke
of, will not humble themselves and Repent of their Evil doings, whereby they
are pulling down Judgments upon themselves and upon others; yet all good men
should embrace the opportunities of casting down themselves frequently before
God, to join with Gods Ministers in those supplications (like them prescribed
in the Prophet Joel, upon their solemn Fast, 2. 17.) Spare us, good Lord, spare
thy people whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood, and be not angry
with us for ever: Beseeching him to deliver us, as from all blindness of heart,
etc. so more especially, from all Sedition, privy Conspiracy and Rebellion;
from all false Doctrine, Heresy and Schism; from hardness of Heart, and
contempt of his Word and Commandment. Which solemn Prayers were never more
necessary than in these days; and for that reason Fasting ought not to be
neglected, but attend upon them, as an help unto them, and a means to make them
more effectual. This shall be proved, when I have first shown, what Fasting is.

And in proper speaking, Fasting is an abstinence from all manner of Food;
whether it be Meat, or Drink. As we may be satisfied (if it need any proof)
from that question which was asked our Savior, in v. Luke 33. Why do the
Disciples of John Fast often and make Prayers, and likewise the Pharisees, but
thine Eat and Drink? Which place is remarkable for two things; for it shows
both that Prayers were a concomitant of Fasting, as I said just now; and that
Fasting is so opposite to Eating and Drinking, that he who Eats and Drinks does
not Fast. Which is still more confirmed by the words wherein the other
Evangelists put this Question, which are these; Why do the Disciples of John
and of the Pharisees Fast, but thy Disciples Fast not? ii. Mark 18. ix. Matthew.
14. Here they call that not Fasting, which S. Luke calls Eating and Drinking:
It being one and the same thing, to Eat and Drink, and not to Fast. Nor is any
other notion to be found of Fasting in the holy Scriptures, or in any ancient
Writer, Jewish or Christian, but this: Forbearance of all manner of Meat and
Drink, while the Fast lasts.

Some think indeed, that, speaking improperly, there are examples in Scripture
of Fasts, which consisted only in abstinence from the better sort of Food, and
contenting themselves with harder fare. Thus Josephus says, that the Fast
which Esther and her Maidens observed together with the Jews in Shushan, when
they neither did Eat nor Drink three days, night nor day; was forbearing all
delicate Meat and Drink for that time; as Grotius observes out of him upon iv.
Esth. 16. Which may receive some confirmation from what Daniel says of
himself, x. 2, 3. In those days I Daniel was mourning three full Weeks, I ate
no pleasant Bread, neither came Flesh nor Wine in my mouth, neither did I
anoint my self, at all, till three whole Weeks were fulfilled. His Mourning
(which comprehends Fasting) was nothing else, it should seem, but abstinence
from all things pleasant and desirable (as the word is in the Hebrew Language)
while he allowed himself a courser sort of diet, which nothing but mere
necessity commended to his appetite.

And if we let this pass for truth, it does not prejudice what I said of
Fasting; that usually, and speaking exactly, it signifies, Eating and Drinking
nothing at all: And if the Holy Writers speak otherwise, it is upon some
extraordinary occasion, when the Humiliation continued so long, that it was
impossible to Fast strictly, without any refection at all: as it was in these
Fasts, of three days, and three weeks. But I am not satisfied that Daniel's
Mourning was such as has been now supposed; for his words may signify no
more, but that when he did Eat and Drink, nothing that was pleasant came into
his mouth: And then his meaning is, that for three weeks he kept a Fast, Eating
and Drinking nothing at all till the Evening (as the manner was on Fasting
days) and then abstaining from Flesh and Wine, and using only a courser sort of
Bread. For thus Ezra Fasted, eating no Bread at all, nor drinking Water: For he
Mourned because of the transgression of them that had been carried away, x. 6.
just as Daniel did. The Fast of Esther indeed does not so easily admit this
Interpretation; because they did in that neither Eat nor Drink three days,
night or day: But if we take the words rigidly, they will not admit of
Josephus's Interpretation, no more than of this; for they that fare hardly, do
notwithstanding Eat and Drink. And therefore I am apt to think the true meaning
is, that they made no set Meal at all, neither night nor day: But if any of
them was forced to taste any thing, for the support of Nature (which might
otherwise have failed in some Constitutions) it was privately, and of the
meanest sort of Food. Or, according to the usual manner of Fasts, they ate and
drank nothing at all, neither in the day, nor in the night, for three whole
days and nights together; save only in the Evening: and then also they forbear
all manner of delicate Food.

The sum of what need be said in this matter is, that a complete and perfect
Fast consists in total abstinence from all Meat and Drink until the Evening:
and then also in Eating and Drinking sparingly, and that of the meaner sort of
Food. An imperfect and partial Fast, consists in abstinence from some kind of
Food, which we most love; or in feeding sparingly of any kind, and denying our
appetite that full satisfaction which it desires, at the usual times of repast.

They that cannot endure the first of these, may yet easily bear the last; and
therein perform something of this duty of Fasting: if their abstinence either
in the quality or quantity of Meat and Drink, do in some measure afflict them,
while in some measure it also refreshes them. For no abstinence can partake in
the least of the nature of Fasting; if there be not something in it that
afflicts us: which I shall show hereafter, is the very thing designed in
Fasting.

And thus perhaps we are to understand our Church, in that part of its Tables
and Rules, which are set down before the Common Prayers, concerning Days of
Fasting, or Abstinence. The particle or may either signify abstinence to be
another name For Fasting: or it may distinguish abstinence from Fasting, as a
lesser thing. If we follow the later sense, then the intention of the Church
is, that upon all those days there named, they that are able should Fast; that
is wholly forbear all Food till the Evening: and they who are not able to do
this, yet should abstain from all delicate Food, and feed abstemiously; so that
while they give Nature some support, they also afflict and humble it. In short,
they that cannot wholly abstain on those days; yet should abstain from set
Meals; and take privately some slender refreshment.

CHAP. XI. Of the Obligation we have to Fast.
THERE being no positive Precept left by our Blessed Savior about Fasting,
some have thence concluded it is a matter of liberty, and not of necessity:
That is, we may use it if we please, but are not tied to the practice of it.
But before they had made this conclusion, they should have considered, that
there is no such Precept neither, for Prayer to God: but only directions how to
Pray; as there are also how to order our selves when we Fast. And therefore the
proper Inference from that Observation (of there being no positive Precept for
Fasting) should have been this; that there was no need of any Precept to enjoin
this duty; it being no less known and practiced by all good men than Prayer to
God, and giving of Alms: with which it is joined in our Saviors famous Sermon
on the Mount, vi. S. Matthew. 1, 2, 3, etc. 16, 17. In which Sermon our Lord,
instructing his Disciples about the principal duties of a Christian life; it is
not to be thought that he would have mentioned this, unless he intended it
should be one part of our Christian duty. Which being not in downright terms
commanded, as some others are, but only supposed; it is so much the more to be
regarded: as a duty unto which there is an antedent obligation; so plain and so
commonly owned, that he needed to do no more but only teach them, to what they
should have respect in the performance of it. Adding moreover, that so
performed as he directed it would be accepted with God. and openly rewarded by
him. Which is a further confirmation that it is a Christian duty; because there
is the very same promise made to the regular practice of it, that there is to
giving Alms, and to Prayer.

Which as they are natural duties, which men learnt without any Institution; so
I take Fasting to be also: All mankind being inclined to abstain from Meat and
Drink, when they are in great Grief and Sorrow; and when they have any serious
business, to which they would apply their minds; such as Meditation,
especially, and solemn Prayer. And therefore all Nations, from ancient times,
have used Fasting, as a part of Repentance; and as a means to turn away Gods
anger: as we may gather from the Ninevites, who proclaimed a Fast, and put on
Sackcloth from the greatest of them even to the least; hoping God would turn
from his fierce anger denounced against them, if they turned every man from his
evil way; for which, by these Humiliations, they professed themselves heartily
sorry, iii. Jon. 5, 6, etc. Which was not a notion peculiar to them, but to all
the World, I could without much labor show; if this little Book were not
designed for other purposes. Those words of our Savior may suffice to show us
the inclinations of other Countries, as well as of the Jews, xi. Matthew. 22.
Where he says if Tire and Sidon had enjoyed such means of being good, as
Chorazin and Bethsaida had, they would have Repented long ago in Sackcloth and
Ashes: that is, humbled themselves with Fasting, after the example of the
Ninevites; for on such solemn occasions they put on Sackcloth and threw Ashes
on their heads; which usually accompanied Fasting, as Fasting did Prayer to God
for mercy.

And for this cause John Baptists Disciples we read in the Gospel Fasted often,
he Baptizing them (as S. Paul speaks, xix. Acts 4.) with the Baptism of
Repentance: that he might prepare them to receive our Lord. Who was so far from
reproving this practice either of theirs or of the Pharisees, as a superfluous
thing; that he says his Disciples hereafter should do the same. For the
present indeed he did not press it upon them; but the only reason was, that it
was not then in season. For Fasting is proper for Mourners; but while he was
with them it was a time of joy altogether, the great Jubilee (iv. Luke 18, 19.)
when it was as improper to Fast, as to forbear to Eat and Drink at a Wedding.
This is the sense of his Answer to those that questioned, why his Disciples
Fasted not at all, when those of John and of the Pharisees Fasted often? ix.
Matthew. 14. And he seems to me to mean no more, in those words which follow,
Ver. 16, 17. No man puts a piece of new Cloth unto an old Garment, etc.
neither do men put new Wine into old Bottles, etc. but this only: That
congruity is to be observed in all things. For that is the thing he had said
before; Mourning (of which Fasting was a part) did not suit with the
Bride-chamber: And the suitableness of one thing to another is always to be
attended; for if we mind not how they agree and sort together, we shall commit
such indecencies, as are expressed by those two following comparisons.

S. Chrysostom indeed understands these comparisons (and most now follow him
herein) as if our Lord had said, that his Disciples being yet raw and infirm,
were not able to bear the severe discipline of Fasting: but might receive hurt
by it, as an old Garment does by the sewing a new piece of Cloth to it, and old
Bottles by putting new Wine into them. But, besides other Objections that may
be made to this, which I cannot answer; it seems unaccountable, why Christ's
Disciples should not be as strong as John's: and very hard, to affirm that John
imposed such discipline upon his Disciples, as Christ judged would be
prejudicial and noxious unto his.

I rest therefore in the forenamed exposition, which agrees with the scope of
our Savior: who intended not to reject Fasting, or to say his Disciples were
not yet fit for it; but that it was not yet fit for them. For there being to
every thing a season, and a time to every purpose under Heaven; in which time
God had made every thing beautiful (as Solomon speaks in iii. Eccles. 1, 11.)
now was the time of gladness (while he was present in person with them, and
they were in the midst of the Marriage Feast mentioned, xxii. Matthew. 2, 3,
etc.) in which Fasting was unbeseeming: But the time of Mourning was coming
(when he was taken away from them, and they fell into great distresses) and in
those days they would Fast without any bidding.

And accordingly we find they were in Fastings often, as S. Paul speaks of
himself, 2 Corinthians. xi. 27. and herein, as well as all things else, approved
themselves as Ministers of God, vi. 4, 5. and taught others also the frequent
use hereof: which was observed so carefully in all following Ages, that S.
Basil boldly pronounces, Repentance Hom. 1. de Jejunio.
without Fasting to be an idle business.

But the practice of the Church shall be the subject of another Chapter, when I
have first shown in the next, of what use Fasting is in Religion. And I shall
end this Chapter with this plain proof of the truth of what has been said:
which will serve for an Introduction to what follows.

If it be a duty to call our selves to an account for our Sins, to humble our
selves before God, to Repent and to beg pardon for them; we may easily know
what obligation we have to Fasting: And it may safely be referred to the
judgment of any man of common sense, whether it become a Penitent to present
himself before God; Full, or Fasting: and in which of these ways he thinks
Sorrow and Grief is to be expressed; and the compassion of him whom we have
Offended, most likely to be moved.

CHAP. XII. The Ends and Uses of Religious Fasting.
FASTING serves as a help to so many Christian duties, with which it is
frequently joined, that I cannot mention them all in this little Treatise.
Wherein I consider it chiefly as an act of Humiliation, and a part of
Repentance: whereby we both abase our selves before God, and acknowledge our
unworthiness of the least of his Mercies; and also afflict and punish our
selves for our former excesses and other sins: which it helps us also to cure,
and is a remedy against.

That it is an act of abasement, and serves to humble and lay us low in our own
thoughts, the Psalmist in so many words tells us, when he says, xxiv. Psalm.
13. My clothing was Sackcloth: I humbled my Soul with Fasting. Nor had
Sackcloth, or any other part of the ancient discipline, a different meaning:
For by putting on such course clothing (as Mr. Mede observes) they ranked
themselves, with men of the meanest and lowest condition. Which was the
intention also of putting Ashes and sometimes Earth upon their Heads; as if
they were below the lowest of Gods Creatures: And of sitting or lying upon the
ground; with which, by that posture, they levelled themselves. And, it may be
added, of pouring out water before the Lord, which was a very ancient Ceremony
upon their Fasting-days, 1 Samuel vii. 6. in token of their Humiliation, says
Rabbi Solomon upon that place: As if they had said, Behold, O Lord, we are
before thee as these waters that are poured out; that is, nothing worth. The
same they confessed, by abstaining from all sort of Food; which was an
acknowledgment that they were not worthy to live upon Gods Earth any longer.
Thus when Ahab (in the 1 Kings xxi. 27.) rent his clothes (which was another
act of Humiliation, making them look like beggars) and put Sackcloth on his
flesh, and Fasted, and lay in Sackcloth, and went softly (as a man quite
dejected) God himself in the 29. Ver. calls this, Ahabs humbling himself before
him, and promises thereupon to remit something of the sentence pronounced
against him; in not executing it so soon as was intended.

And that it is a natural effect and expression of Sorrow, I need not trouble
my self to demonstrate. Daniel calls it by the name of Mourning, x. Dan. 2, 3.
And what he calls mourning and eating no pleasant Bread, in the beginning of
the Chapter, the Angel afterward, Ver. 12. taking special notice of it, calls
chastening himself before his God. And so we translate the Psalmists words,
lxix. Psalm. 10. When I wept, and chastened my Soul with Fasting, etc. For no
abstinence, or sorrow can deserve the name of Penitence; but such as is
afflictive: which is so much intended in Fasting, that they are words of the
same signification. According to that known rule among the Jews, Wheresoever
the Scripture speaks of afflicting the Soul, it means Fasting. Thus the great
Fast appointed by God to be yearly observed on the Seventh day of the Tenth
month, is described in the xvi. Lev. 29, 31. It shall be a Sabbath of rest unto
you, and ye shall afflict your Souls by a Statute for ever. And whatsoever Soul
it be (as it follows xxiii. 29.) that shall not be afflicted on that same day,
he shall be cut off from among his people. And this was the end of all other
Fasts, as appears by those words of Ezra, (which are the most express of any to
this purpose) viii. 21. Then I proclaimed a Fast, at the River Ahava, that we
might afflict our selves before our God. For hunger and thirst is in it self
troublesome and painful to the Body, as S. Austin very well observes; Nam fames
and sit is dolores sunt. Vrunt, Lib. x Confess. c. 31.
and sicut febris necant, nisi alimentorum medicina succurrunt: And should call
to our mind the true cause of all pain and anguish: that our Conscience feeling
the sharp stings of guilt, and we being pricked in the Heart (as the Apostle
speaks) may more thankfully embrace the remedy, and speedily also seek for
relief, by an unfeigned Repentance.

Fasting has also something of a penal chastisement in it: whereby we take
revenge upon our selves (as I showed in the fifth Chapter) and punish our
selves for the intemperance of our former life.

Which by this means we also begin to amend: It being an act of selfdenial; and
of no small consideration: for therein we deprive our selves of those
satisfactions, which we naturally much desire; and which we might also most
lawfully enjoy. Whereby likewise, it is manifest, we inure our selves to endure
hardship as good soldiers of Jesus Christ; and are in a preparation to suffer
for his Names sake: which was another notion the Ancients had of it.

It helps also to keep under, or beat down our Body, and to bring it into
subjection, as S. Paul speaks, 1 Corinthians. ix. 27. Where in these terms he
relates the discipline he exercised upon himself: which Peter Martyr allows to
be meant of his Fasting. Whereby the flesh being subdued to the Spirit (as it
is in the Collect for the first Sunday in Lent, which excellently explains the
words of S. Paul) we are disposed ever to obey his godly motions in
righteousness and true holiness. To which a pampered Body will not let us
listen, for it kicks against them and resists them: And therefore its food is
to be sometimes withdrawn (as Provender is from a wanton Beast) that being
tamed, it may become more pliable to our minds; and they may with less
opposition be brought to submit, Body and Soul, unto the holy instructions of
the Word of God. Which, by the way, S. Paul thought so necessary a piece of
Christian discipline, that he was afraid of being lost and rejected by God, if
it were neglected. For that was the reason why he treated his Body severely,
lest when I have preached to others, I my self should be a castaway. And
therefore they are strangely confident people, who fancy there is no need of
such mortifications; no danger from a Body full fed: for which it is their only
care to provide the best they can, but never to beat down. They, in effect,
make themselves more spiritual than S. Paul: for whom if they had a due
reverence, they would not be highminded but fear; and after his example, use
such abstinence, that their Body grow not unruly, and thereby endanger their
Salvation.

Unto which, Fasting, if rightly used, contributes so much, that it serves to
ends quite contrary to those of Humiliation, Abasement and Affliction: For by
bringing the Body into subjection, it helps to raise our minds to Heavenly
thoughts; for which all men find themselves most fit, not when they are full,
but when they are fasting.

And that it was anciently looked upon as a help to Prayer, this is a convincing
argument; that the Jews were wont upon their Sabbaths to Eat and Drink nothing,
till the Divine Service was over in the morning. By which S. Peter satisfies
them, that he and the rest of the Apostles could not be thought Drunk on the
day of Pentecost (as some mockers said they were, when they heard them speak
various Languages) since it was but the third hour of the day: that is, nine a
clock in the Morning, ii. Acts 15. As much as to say, Divine Service was not
yet begun: and therefore they must suppose them Fasting: unless, contrary to
their known behavior, they would judge them to have no sense of Religion. Upon
which score Christians have been wont to Fast, especially before the Holy
Communion: partly out of reverence to God, who they thought ought to be served
before themselves; and partly to fit them for Meditation and Prayer: wherein
they were more easily lifted up above, when their Bodies were empty, and their
Minds full. For they thought that Prayers were fed (as Tertullian's phrase is)
and nourished by Fasting: which offers unto God, as he also loves to speak, the
fattest Sacrifice.

And as it is an help to Prayer; so a means also to make it effectual: when
Fasting is an act of true Humiliation and Repentance. Which is the cause that
we seldom read of Fasting, but as a concomitant of Prayer. Among other places
read viii. Ezra 21, 23. iii. Jonah 5. 8. and v. Luke 33. which seems to be our
Saviors meaning, when he tells his Disciples, that some Devils could not be
cast out, but by Prayer and Fasting, xvii. Matthew. 20, 21. That is, it was a
work which required great intention of Mind, in Prayer to God, and a strong
Faith in him (in which they were defective:) unto which Fasting helps to raise
the Mind, by withdrawing it from care of the Body: unto which while we deny all
manner of support, we are made more sensible of our entire dependence on God
alone.

To whom it is most unseemly to sue for mercy, if we our selves show no mercy
unto others: Unto which Fasting both disposes, and inables us. For it makes us
sensible of the miseries of poor hungry wretches; and furnishes us with as much
to give them, as we spare from our selves. Which was one use that good people
heretofore made of Fasting; as we may gather from those places where Alms are
joined together with it and with Prayer. The story of Cornelius is well known,
x. Acts 30, 31. where he relates how an Angel appeared to him on a Fasting-day;
testifying how acceptable the Prayers and the Alms were, which he then offered
unto God. With which agrees the History of Tobias, who when he sent away his
Son into Media with many good instructions, inlarges most of all upon
Almsgiving, iv. Tob. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Which the Angel at his return teaches
them both, is to be joined with the two forenamed duties, xii. 7, 8. Prayer is
good with Fasting and Alms, and Righteousness (that is other works of mercy) a
little with Righteousness is better than much with Unrighteousness: It is
better to give Alms, than to lay up Gold. For Alms does deliver from Death, and
shall purge away all Sin, etc.

Nor were the Heathens utterly unacquainted with this practice of forbearing
food themselves, that they might be able to help their Neighbors. For when the
City of Tarentum was Aelian Var. Hist. L. v. cap. 20.
in great distress, and in danger to perish, or to be taken by Famine, they of
Rheginum made a Decree that they would Fast every Tenth day, and send that
Victuals to the relief of the Tarentines: who being hereby preserved,
gratefully commemorated their deliverance, by instituting a Festival called
FASTING.

And now who sees not, in conclusion, that Fasting is every way a means to
obtain favor with God, for the averting of his anger, from our selves, or from
the Nation where we live? For if Humiliation, if Repentance and amendment of
Life, if earnest Prayer, if acts of Mercy to others, be the way to prevail with
God for mercy to our selves; then Fasting, which contributes to all these, must
needs be of great efficacy for this purpose. And this, perhaps, may be the
reason, why we have not found relief, when we or others were afflicted; nor
have prevailed for the turning away those evils which at any time threatened us:
because we did not seek what we desired in this way; but contented our selves
with Prayers and some kind of Repentance, without such Humiliations, and
chastening of our selves, as our sins and our condition required.

CHAP. XIII. Of Fasting-days; particularly Wednesdays and Fridays.
THE Church of God therefore has always set some time a part for Fasting, as
well as Prayer: And thought it a duty of such continual use, that it is not
safe it should be long intermitted. For mankind being subject frequently to run
into sin, it is but reason they should be frequently put in mind of calling
themselves to an account, and returning to him with sorrowful Humiliations for
their faults. And therefore it is a most ancient, and no less wholesome,
Ordinance of the Church, that we should, from week to week, assemble our selves
for this end: To search and try our ways, and with Fasting and Prayer to turn
unto the Lord; that thereby we may turn away his wrath from us, which
otherways, either in general or particular, may fall upon us.

To except against this, because there is no Divine commandment upon Record for
it, is very unreasonable. For in the ancient Religion of the Jews there was no
Precept given by their Lawgiver, for more Fasts than one, throughout the whole
Year (which was, that I named before on the great day of expiation) and yet
notwithstanding they held themselves obliged to observe many other Fasts, upon
set days in several months: some of which are remembered in Scripture, and
approved by God; though not prescribed by his particular Commandment. Read vii.
Zach. 3, 5. viii. 19. where you will find that four Fasts, in several months,
having been upon good reason ordained, they durst not alter them (though the
reason seemed to be altered) without a Divine direction: which their Elders, by
whose authority they were first appointed, desired to receive from the Prophet.

But it is most to my purpose to observe, that there were also weekly (as well
as those monthly) Fasts among that people: which our Savior found in use when
he came; and did not reprove; no more than Prayer, and paying of Tithes, which
the Pharisee mentions together therewith, in xviii. Luke 11, 12. The Pharisee
stood and prayed thus with himself, God I thank thee that I am not as other
men, etc. I Fast twice in the week, I give Tithes of all that I possess. Which
were all commendable things, if his vanity had not made him glory in them, and
despise other people: And therefore the Pharisees frequent Fasting, is
mentioned (I observed before) in other places of the Gospel, together with that
of John's Disciples, (who also Fasted often) without the least reflection upon
them for it, as if they were superstitious, or did more than needed. No, our
blessed Savior rather approves of their strictness in this. For he says his
Disciples should not be behind with them in Fasting hereafter; though for the
present, there was a special reason why they did not practice it.

Of which speech of our Savior I shall make considerable use presently; when I
have noted that the two days on which they Fasted every week were the second
and the fifth; that is our Monday and Thursday. Which days, no doubt, were
chosen, because they had been of old days of Prayer: which the devouter sort
observed with Fasting also, for such reasons as I have already named. If we may
give credit to Maimonides, these days were appointed by Moses himself, for
solemn Assemblies: which he knew could not with safety, be long discontinued.
And therefore says he, Our Master Moses appointed Israel to read the Law at
Morning Prayer upon the Sabbath day, and upon the Second and the Fifth; that
they might not rest three days from hearing the Law. Upon which days even they
that dwelt in the Villages (as Mr. Thorndike Relig. Assemblies, chap. viii.
further observes out of him) were bound to assemble in the Synagogues; though
on the rest of the days in the week they did not tie them to it: no more than
they did to Fasting on those days; with which the stricter and devouter sort of
people observed them; as not only the Gospel, but their own Writers inform us.

Now these two days having been thus set apart from ancient time for Prayer and
Fasting; those pious Jews who became Christians, could not think of being less
Religious and devout under the Gospel, than they had been under the Law: and
therefore still continued to observe two such days every week, though not the
very same. For as instead of the Seventh (which was the Jewish Sabbath) they
now kept the First day of the week as the principal time for their Assemblies:
so instead of the Second and the Fifth they chose the Fourth and the Sixth
(which are our Wednesdays and Fridays) for the two other days on which they
weekly held solemn Assemblies: And for the very same reason, it is likely, for
which Moses or the Elders chose the other; because they were at the same
convenient distance from the Lords day, as Monday and Thursday were from the
Jewish Sabbath; and hereby it was provided, that (as Maimon. speaks) no three
days passed without the more solemn sort of Assemblies.

Certain it is, that there was no Church in Epiphanius his time, which did not
look upon these two days, as the stated days for Fasting and Prayer. Which he
avows so confidently against the Aerians, that he fears not to ask this
question, (...), etc. Haeres. lxxv. n 6.
Who is there that consents not in this, throughout all the Climates of the
world, that the Fourth day, and the day before the Sabbath (i. e. the Sixth
day) are Fasts determined, or appointed, in the Church? No body he knew durst
contradict this challenge, and undertake to show the contrary: which is the
more remarkable, because he represents them as set days, by a settled Decree or
Ordinance, and that, of the Apostles. For so it follows; that it was ordained
by an Apostolical constitution, all should Fast on those two days.

Which does not seem to me so unlikely, as it does to some; when I reflect upon
those words of our Lord, in answer to those that asked Why the Disciples of John
and of the Pharisees Fasted often, but his did not? Wherein as he no way condemns
what either the one or the other did (for that which was a virtue in John's
Disciples, could not be a crime in the Pharisees) so he does not go about to
excuse his Disciples from the like obligation. But plainly says, that though
it was not fit for the present; yet when he was gone from them, they also
should Fast in those days. And I see no cause why we should not think that he
means they should Fast as often (about which the question was) as the other did.
Which being twice every week (of which it is very reasonable to understand the
often Fasting both of John's Disciples and of the Pharisees) I cannot but
conclude the Apostles also, when our Savior had left the World, observed
weekly two such solemn days. And so by their practice and example, at least,
set apart and determined the times forementioned for Fasting and Prayer: For
why should we think of any other two days than those which the Church in future
times observed every where with such uniformity; that they could find no other
Original of it, but the Apostolical Ordinance. Thus Socrates writes in
particular of the Church of Alexandria, what Epiphanius says of the Church in
general; that L. v. Hist. Eccles. c. 22.
it was (...), an ancient Custom (or a custom from the beginning of our
Religion there) to meet on the Fourth and Sixth days of the week, for to hear
the Scriptures read and expounded by the Doctors; and to do all other things
belonging to an Assembly, excepting the celebration of the Eucharist (which it
seems was omitted there, though not in other places, on those days, as
unsuitable to a Fast) and that Origin taught upon those two days, a great part
of what he left written, in that Church. Clemens of Alexandria also mentions
these days long before him: and I do not see of what other days Caecilius can
be understood, when he objects (in Minutius Foelix) to the Christians their
solennia jejunia, as dangerous tokens of a conspiracy among them. For it is
plain by those words that they held solemn Assemblies on certain days, for
Fasting, as well as Prayer: and that they returned often, and great numbers met
together, or else they could not have been held dangerous to the Government.

These were the famous station days, so much spoken of by the ancient
Christians: on which they continued longer in the Church than ordinary, the
Divine Offices being prolonged beyond the ordinary time; and thence they had
the name of Stations.

To be short, if this be allowed (which seems to be a probable truth) that the
Apostles afterward, though not while our Savior lived, Fasted as often as John's
Disciples and the Pharisees had done before; which was no less than twice every
week: There can be no other days reasonably thought of for this purpose, than
those which the Church in following Ages observed. And there is the greater
reason to judge this a probable truth; because the Apostles observed other
pious customs of the Jews: of not Eating, for instance, before Morning Prayer
was over; as I before observed. Which may well incline a considering man to
think, they likewise conformed themselves to this of Fasting as often in a
week, as John's Disciples and other strict persons had done: which was no less
commendable than the usage of Fasting till the end of Divine Service, on the
Sabbath days, in the morning.

And then I can see no incongruity in it (but it rather accords with the
practice of Religious people heretofore) if we think these to have been the
times, on which the Apostle advises Husbands and Wives to forbear one another
company, that they might give themselves to Fasting and Prayer, 1 Cor. vii. 5.
Which Peter Martyr is of opinion In Cap. xx. Judic p. 172.
, the Apostle meant concerning public Fasting, and public Prayer. And as the
Widow Anna is said to have served God many years, with Fasting and Prayers
night and day, ii. Luke 37. which I think ought to be understood of the weekly
Fasts, which Religious people then observed: So the same Peter Martyr thinks it
reasonable thus to understand the Apostle, 1 Timothy v. 5. where he speaks of a
Widow indeed, whose description is, that she continues in supplications (with
Fastings says he) and Prayers night and day: Upon those days (as I take it)
which were then observed in the Christian Church, answerable to those in the
Jewish.

And why should we not think it was upon one of these days, that the Church met
together (as we read xiii. Acts 2, 3.) and ministered to the Lord, and Fasted
and Prayed: For the very distresses in which the Church was, required then as
frequent Fasting as ever? There is little doubt but the Fast here spoken of,
was upon a solemn day of Divine Service: which is sufficiently implied in those
words, as they ministered to the Lord; and in those that follow, when they had
Prayed. Now on the Sabbath it was utterly unlawful to Fast; and they abhorred
from it: as the Christians afterward did, from Fasting on the Lord's day. And
therefore I conclude it was upon one of the weekly solemn Prayer-days, then in
use in the Christian Church, as formerly in the Jewish. For what reason is
there to question, that when any extraordinary case called for a special Fast
(as now the separating Barnabas and Saul for a great work did; and as in
pressing dangers the Bishops of the Church appointed extraordinary Fasts) that
Fast was still held upon those very days: which then they commanded to be
observed with more than usual strictness?

For thus all Fasts appointed among the Jews upon special occasions, were in
order to fall (as Mr. Thorndike observes in the Chapter before named) upon the
usual days of Fasting; which were every week observed in a lower degree, but
upon those extraordinary occasions were observed with greater severity: and
therefore it is reasonable to think the Christian Fasts of the like kind, were
kept on the usual days, (either Wednesday or Friday, or rather both) only with
the greater solemnity. However, that place and another in the next Chapter,
xiv. Acts 23. are plain evidences of their Fasting before Ordinations, or
setting persons a part for a special Ministry: And upon them is justly founded
the Fasts of the four Seasons (called Ember-weeks) before Orders are given in
our Church; all solemn and great things being always undertaken by such
preparations. Insomuch that S. Hierom in his Prologus to S. Matthew's Gospel,
says that S. John being desired by the Churches to write his Gospel (against
Ebion and Cerinthus who denied Christ's Divine Nature) told them he would do
it, si Ecclesia tota public antea jejunasset, if the whole Church would first
keep a public Fast, before he went about it. Which is affirmed also by
Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History.

To conclude this Chapter; all Christians have so generally observed some set
times of Fasting (which was wholly rejected only by the Gnostics, who
condemned Epist. Haeres. xxvi n. 5.
demned all Fasting, nay, cursed it as disagreeable to their Beastly life) that
those odd people who (loving to be singular and cross to the customs of the
Church) would not observe the two usual Fasts on Wednesdays and Fridays, yet
Fasted on other days: as Marcion and his Disciples on Saturdays, and the
Aerians on the Lord's day: who also Fasted on Wednesday; but of their own
accord, not in obedience to the Churches Constitutions. So Epiphanius informs
us, out of whom I have all this Haeres. xlii. n. 3. and Haeres. lxxv. n. 3.


And now that I mention the Saturday Fast, it will be fit to take notice, that
the Church of Rome now has, and anciently had, a custom of Fasting on that
day. But as Epiphanius condemns this as one of Marcion's Errors, that (...), he
Fasted on the Sabbath, that is Saturday: So Petavius ingenuously acknowledges
(what his great Learning could not but know) that this was contrary to the
Custom of the Eastern Church; in which that day was a long time honored as a
Festival. And he should have added, that this custom of Fasting on Saturday,
was so far from being universal in the Western Church, that it did not, of a
long time, prevail in all the Churches of Italy. For it is commonly known that
in S. Ambrose's days they did not Fast at Milan upon that day: which the Mother
of S. Austin wondering at when she came thither, had this Answer returned to
the enquiry her Son made of the reason of it, from S. Ambrose: When I am at
Rome, I Fast on Saturdays, because they do so there; but when I return to Milan
I do not Fast on that day, because they do not so here. An admirable resolution
of doubts of this nature; importing that we should conform to the customs of
the Church where we live, without condemning the customs of other Churches. For
all were founded at first, it is likely, upon some great reason: (peculiar to
that Church, wherein it differs from others) and if S. Austin's information be
right, there was a weighty cause for what they did at Rome: For he says in his
Epistle to Cassulanus, the Original of the Saturday Fast there was, that when
S. Peter entered the Lists with Simon Magus, upon a Lord's day at Rome, the
Church appointed a Fast the day before, which was observed there ever after.
But when one Vrbicus contended vehemently for the necessity of this Saturdays
Fast, as if there were a Divine Law for it; S. Austin most resolutely opposed
him, and denied any such obligation; as may be seen in his LXXXVI. Epistle.

But my intention is not to engage in any controversies, but plainly to
instruct our People in their Christian duty; which is to observe the Ordinances
of the Church whereof they are members: Which make Wednesdays and Fridays, days
of solemn Supplication, as anciently they were; and all the Fridays in the
Year, except Christmas Day, to be also one of the days of Fasting or Abstinence.

CHAP. XIV. Satisfaction to some Exceptions.
IT is now a shame, or should be so, to mention the stale Objections of Mr.
Cartwright and others, against this Doctrine, which have been often baffled:
That God in the fourth Commandment gave men liberty to work six days, which
none can restrain; and that the Apostle condemns the Churches of Galatia for
observing Days, and Months, and Times, and Years, iv. Gal. 10. But since some
are still so weak, as to insist upon such trivial exceptions, I shall in a few
words tell the Reader what he is to answer, when he meets with them.

To the first it may be replied, That the Jews to whom that Precept was given,
did not understand it to give them such an unbounded liberty, that none could
appoint any of the six days to be employed otherwise, than in labor. For then
Esther did very ill, in commanding a three days Fast; when the exigence of
their affairs required it. Nay, they who make this Exception, have no such
sense of that Commandment (and therefore they do very ill to mention it) for
they themselves set apart any day, as they please, for Prayer and Humiliation,
or Thanksgiving: And when they had power, required others so to do. Which is
utterly unlawful, if the fourth Commandment, have any such meaning as they
imagine: which must lead them at last to affirm that labor is commanded on all
days but one; directly against their own frequent practice.

As for the other, there is nothing more certain, and more universally
acknowledged by all Christians, than that it belongs wholly to the keeping of
the Jewish solemnities: to which Christians were so far from having any
obligation; that they who thought they had, from an opinion that the Mosaical
Law was still in force, did, in that, overthrow Christianity, and go back to
Judaism. This is apparent from the scope of the Apostles discourse; as well as
from the account which the ancient Writers of Christianity Vid. Socratis
Histor. L. v. c. 22.
have given us of their sense about it; such S. Hierom and S. Austin. The
former of which in his Comments on this place, mentions the Fasts and
Assemblies on certain days among Christians, as wisely appointed for those, who
spend more time in the World, than with God, and either cannot, or will not
Assemble with the Church every day: That on those solemn days, at least, they
might sequester themselves a while from secular employments, and bestow some
time on the Service of God.

Their Exceptions are far more considerable, who say they cannot Fast; without
great prejudice to their health; or without indisposing them for God's Service.
But they may be easily and briefly answered: For, as to those who say their
health is hereby prejudiced; if they be certain of it, the Church never
intended to oblige them by its Laws about Fasting: which are designed, as all
its Ordinances are, for the good, not for the hurt of all its Children. But in
this let them use an upright judgment, and they need trouble themselves no
further: Only let them consider, it will not prejudice their health to come to
the Prayers on Wednesdays and Fridays (and therefore I hope they will make a
Conscience of that) and to use some Abstinence also on those days, will, in all
likelihood, contribute much unto their health.

As for the other, they may be soon satisfied also, that if Fasting do not
promote the Religious ends for which it was ordained; it must be let alone. And
one great end, is Prayer, as has been said: for which if it make men unfit, by
raising Vapors and Clouds, they must take some moderate refreshment. But this
supposes still, that they will frequent the Prayers; of which let them be
careful: and beg of God to accept of such Humiliations, as they are able to
make before him.

Some pretend that other Reformed Churches have no set days of Fasting (but
only Fast as occasion requires) nay, some of their Divines have spoken against
such days.

To which it may be replied, That Luther the very first Reformer, acknowledges
two kinds of Fasts to be laudable (in a Sermon of his on the Sunday next to
Christmas Day) one a Civil Fast appointed by the Magistrate at certain times;
which is a profitable and necessary Ordinance, that all things be not consumed
by Luxury and Riot: The other Spiritual to be observed by all Christians. And
it would be very well, Si aliquot diebus ante Festum Paschatis, and Pentecostis
and Nativitatis Domini communiter servaremus, etc. If we did all keep some such
days before the Feast of Easter, and Whitsuntide, and the Nativity of our Lord:
with this caution only, that we do not think we merit any thing of God by our
Fastings.

Melancthon's sense is so commonly known, that I shall not set down his words,
(which may be found in Mr. Thorndike Relig. Assem. p. 286.
) for not only Cassander, but Pererius also (in his Comment. upon xiv. of the
Romans) acknowledge his opinion to be, That Fasting and the observation of
things indifferent, may be profitable, and conduce to Gods worship; not
immediately indeed, but mediately; for by Fasting a man is made more fit to
pour out Prayers, in which consists the Worship of God.

Peter Martyr also resolves the question, whether men be bound to obey when
Princes or the Church appoint Fasts, in these peremptory words; In Lib. Judic.
c. xx. p. 173.
Astringuntur sane lege fidei atque obedientia; They are bound certainly, both
by the law of Faith, and by Obedience. For when Fasts are propounded consonant
to Gods Word, how can he who believes in God decline them? He cannot. Only it
is to be understood, that they are bound who are able: For if any body be
disabled by his Age, by Sickness, or by Labors, in these cases, that which the
Holy Scriptures say must take place, I WILL HAVE MERCY, NOT SACRIFICE. Which is
an excellent resolution, for those scruples I mentioned before to govern
themselves by: who being really infirm, are no more under this Law (while they
continue so) than little Children, Women with Child, and Aged persons, who need
frequent refreshment.

And thus whole Churches have resolved; as Cassander acknowledges out of the
Confession of Saxony, in which they declared their willingness to observe the
set Fasts, and other such like Traditions; provided no opinion of merit were
placed in such observances, etc. And the Bohemian Confession expressly consents,
That such Rites and Ceremonies ought to be retained, which do advantage Faith,
the worship of God, Peace and Order: whosoever they had for their Author,
whether Synod, Pope, Bishop, or any other.

And if any particular Doctor has decried such things, it has been in
opposition to the superstitious observance of them, the opinion of merit,
satisfaction, and such like conceits, with which too many minds were infected:
And so the Divines of the Roman Church have not been sparing of such kind of
Censures. Pererius in particular, a Learned Jesuit, in his Comments on the
first of Daniel, takes notice of a sort of Fasting in these days, which many
affect upon a perverse account (as his words are:) They either thinking the
sum of Christian perfection to consist in the service of Abstinence alone; or
thereby hunting after the praise of men, etc. or having so little prudence,
that they extend their Fastings beyond measure: to the great hindrance, that
is, and damage of far better and more profitable things.

I will end this Part of my Discourse with the Declaration which Zanchy makes
in his own and his Brethrens Name, to satisfy those who objected to them the
laying aside of the Fast of Lent. They cannot justly accuse us, says he, that
we condemn the Quadragesima, (i. e. the Fast of Lent) which is so ancient in
the Church, and by the Holy Fathers received and approved. We do not condemn
that Lent Fast, which the ancient Fathers observed without Superstition, but --
and so he goes on to show it is only Novel, Superstitious, and dangerous
conceits (of Satisfaction, and Merit, and the worship of God) unto which it was
abused, that they rejected.

Thus he concludes his Discourse which he intitles, De peculiari
quadragesimalis Tome iv. p. 694. in quartum praeceptum.
temporis sanctificatione: Which in the beginning also he states after this
manner, (that Preachers might rightly instruct their People) Our judgment is,
that a difference ought to be made, between the first Institution of this
Season, and that which followed after.

PART III. OF THE LENT FAST.
CHAP. XV. Of the Antiquity of the Lent, or Spring Fast.
IT is the Confession of that Learned Divine now mentioned, That there is no
man, unless he be altogether unskilful in Histories, and never saw the ancient
Fathers, who does not acknowledge the observation of this time of Lent, to be
most Ancient. For Telesphorus, who was the Seventh Bishop of the Roman Church,
and Martyr (about the Year of our Lord 139.) makes mention of it, as observed
in the Church before his time.

And indeed it is so ancient, that there is no beginning to be found of it:
which has moved many to run it up to the very Apostolical times; nay, to the
Apostles themselves. For which there is more reason, perhaps, than now is
commonly acknowledged. For if we consider that the first Converts to
Christianity, were from among the pious Jews; by whom it was propagated to the
rest of the World (which is so clear in the Holy Story, that it cannot be
denied) and that those devout people had been accustomed by the discipline of
John Baptist, who came to prepare men for Christ, to Fast often (that is, twice
a week, it is most likely, upon the days of their more solemn Assemblies,
according to the ancient practice of the stricter sort of that Nation) we may
very well suppose, as has been already said, that when they became Christians
they did not become less devout: but still continued, only upon other days, to
keep such solemn times of Prayer with Fasting every Week.

And why we should exempt the Apostles, when they were in any settled place, out
of the number of those, whose practice this was, I cannot imagine; but rather
think they were exemplary to others herein: being in Fastings often (as I noted
above) and by this approving themselves the Ministers of God; who did not
pamper their Bodies, but bring them under, that their minds might be more fit
for Meditation, and Prayer, and the illuminations of the Holy Ghost.

Which being as likely as any thing that is not expressly Recorded; it is no
less likely that when those usual days of Fasting, came, in the course of the
Year, to be the very days on which our Lord was betrayed and suffered; the
Apostles themselves observed them, together with the day on which he lay in his
Grave (if not all that week, before the memory of his Resurrection from the
Dead) with a more than ordinary solemnity, both for Fasting and Prayer.

And this might be the meaning of those, who at first said, That the Lent Fast
(meaning the solemn Fast before Easter) was of Apostolical Institution: because
founded upon their practice and example. Among whom I have reason to reckon S.
Austin, who expressly Epist. 86. ad Cassulanum.
says in his Disputation, against Vrbicus before mentioned, that though he
found Precepts for Fasting, yet on what days men should not Fast, and on what
they ought, he did not find determined by any Precept of Christ or his
Apostles: And therefore where he says this Fast was ordained by them, he can
mean, by their example only. Which Bellarmin himself saw to be so apparent,
that he acknowledges; when L. 2. de bonis oper. c. 14.
not only he, but S. Ambrose and S. Hierom say the Lenten Fast was ordained by
our Lord, they mean, not by his Precept but by his Example.

Now this example of the Apostles was so prevalent, that there needed not so
much as an Ecclesiastical Constitution for this Fast (from whence others derive
it) but all for a long time easily followed such great patterns of devotion. I
say all, for no Church can be found, wherein a solemn Fast before Easter was
not observed; which is a strong argument to prove it derived it self from such
a beginning as I have mentioned: for otherwise it cannot be conceived how it
should prevail universally in all Countries, where the Name of Christ was
preached. As it is plain it did, by the eldest Records we have of the Church:
which I shall not here set down at large, because it is besides my purpose, and
as many as are sufficient I shall have occasion to mention in what follows.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Variety in its Observation.
THE Reader may take notice that I have hitherto mentioned only a solemn Fast
before Easter, (which S. Clement calls (...), the Paschal Fast) not yet
determining the length of it; but affirming that it was observed more or less
from the very beginning. I say more or less; because it cannot be denied, that
there was great variety in the length of it. For Irenaeus, as it is commonly
known, writing to Victor Bishop of Rome about the difference there was in the
time of observing Easter, says there was also a difference in the observation
of the Fast before it: Some supposing they ought to Fast one day, some two,
others more; for some (he says) extended it to forty: and Eusebius. L. v. c. 24.
reckoned their day by the hours of day and night; that is, Fasted from Evening
to Evening. Which words some contend relate only to the Fast in the week before
Easter; as the first part of them do, but the whole cannot; unless we
understand forty not of days, but only of hours. Which is against the foregoing
words, in which he speaks of days; and against the ancient reading which
Ruffinus followed; who Translates the words to the same sense that I have done.
And his Translation is from more ancient Greek Copies, than any of those, which
some are pleased now to follow: and is confirmed by Jo. Christophorson, and Sir
Henry Savil, who read and distinguish the words in the same manner.

Which things I have briefly touched to show, that whatsoever variety there
was, it is still a confession of a Fast before Easter, distinct from all other:
In that there was no variety; but all observed the Fast, as much as they did
Easter; that is, the memory of our Lord's Resurrection. And Irenaeus says that
this variety did no begin in his Age, but, as his words are, long before us,
with our Ancestors: So it is evident from thence, that the Fast was not a new
thing, but come down to them from times long before them, that is, from the
Apostles.

This, if fairly considered, might help to settle all the controversies which
are about this Fast of Lent. Which many have taken a great deal of pains to
prove is not an Apostolical Constitution, nor so ancient as their days: But
none of their arguments prove any more than this, that the Fast of forty days
length, does not derive it self from their Ordinance or Example. For they are
of no force at all to prove, that the Paschal Fast, that is a Solemn time for
Fasting and Prayer, and such holy duties before Easter, of more or fewer days,
as the devotion of Christians inclined them, does not proceed from Apostolical
Example. And if this were agreed; it would help to give us a right
understanding in all the rest.

For when the Fast came to be generally extended to the length of forty days,
and so received and observed in the Church (which the forenamed Zanchy says it
appeared to him was, non it a multo post Apostolorum tempora, not very long
after the Apostles times) that may be truly thought to be only by an
Ecclesiastical Constitution. And so S. Austin expressly resolves, that those
forty days before Easter should be observed, Ecclesiae consensio roboravit, the
consent of the Church has established. Which being thus settled and confirmed
so long ago, I cannot understand why any body should now go about to overthrow
it: but rather employ their pains and learning in showing how it was, and how
it ought now to be observed.

In which I cannot but commend the Wisdom and Piety of the forenamed Zanchius,
who looks upon these forty days before Easter, as, Tempus ex pia veteris
Ecclesiae Ordinatione continuatum, Ib. in quartum praecept. p. 696.
etc. a time continued (and extended to this length) by the pious Ordinance of
the ancient Church, in which the faithful are, more diligently than at any
other time, excited to Repentance; both by Fastings, and by Prayers, and by
hearing Gods Word; and by other pious exercises: (I suppose he means, giving
Alms more liberally, admonishing one another, and such like) whereby they are
prepared the more worthily to partake of the Holy Communion at Easter. And if
any one, says he, thus define the forty days Fast, who is there that can
justly dislike it?

None but those certainly who love to live licentiously, without any bridle; or
those whom prejudice makes inconsiderate, and will not let them understand the
meaning and intention of the Church in this Institution. Which was, not to tie
every one to Fast the whole forty days: but to employ themselves all that time,
in some or other of the forenamed holy Exercises, with more than ordinary
strictness; and as many of those days, as they could bear in Fasting.

For as there was variety before, so there was after, the Fast was determined
to forty days: in which some Fasted more, some fewer days, as may be clearly
proved. For if Dionysius of Alexandria Biblioth. Patrum Tom. 1. p. 308.
say true (about the year 255.) of the six days before Easter (which were the
severest part of the Fast; and S. Basil in his time calls the five days of
Fasting, desiring his Auditors to keep (...), a five days truce with their
mouth Orat. 1. de jejunio.
) that all did not Fast (...), equally and alike: But some continued to Fast
all the six days, others only fasted two days, others three, others four, and
some none at all: Then we may well suppose, the rest of the forty days
before-going, were not kept by all with the like strictness; but some fasted
more days, some fewer, and some were not able to bear any Fast at all.

But besides this inference, which may be drawn from his words, we have express
testimony, that they were observed variously, as men could bear. For S.
Chrysostom, I observe, Hom. xvi. ad Pop. Antiochen.
in a Sermon of his, in the third week in Lent, says that it was a general
custom among his people to ask one another, in Lent time, how many weeks every
one had Fasted. And that one might hear them answering, that some had fasted
two, others three, others all the weeks. Which difference he does not censure,
but only tells them, that none of them had fasted to purpose; if they had not
abstained from evil speaking and backbiting; and were not cured of their wicked
habit of Swearing and such like sins. And Petitus has evidently proved that in
S. Austin's time, and Leo the Great's, they fasted but three days in a week at
Rome, during the Lent season. And so Socrates represents their practice at Rome
in his time (which was near that of Leo's) that they fasted three continued
weeks before Easter, except upon the Saturdays and Lord's days.

And S. Ambrose says in one of his Sermons, that he heard complures Sermon. 34.
very many of the faithful, fasted interchangeably one week in Lent, and dined
in another. For which indeed he reproves them; but it was a thing practiced, or
some thing like it, in other places L. vii. cap. 19.
as Sozomen tells us: For having said how some Countries made Lent to consist
of Six weeks of days, others of Seven; he says some fasted three of these Six
or Seven weeks alternately, or scatteredly, as his word is (sometimes
forbearing all Food, and sometimes using it) and others continuedly fasted the
three weeks immediately preceding Easter, without any interruption.

Which variety, I suppose arose, from the various tempers, dispositions,
employments, and perhaps devotion, of diverse people; who not condemning nor
censuring one another, preserved still an uniformity in this variety: All being
more than ordinarily diligent, in some or other of the solemn Religious
Exercises of this Season, during the whole time. And thus Irenaeus says, that
in the variety that was in this Fast long before his time, there was a perfect
agreement among Christians: The difference of the Fast not dissolving the union
of Faith. No, nor the bond of Peace: For he says expressly they all lived
peaceably one with another; as they did also in his days. Nay, S. Austin makes
this diversity in Ecclesiastical customs, to be represented, by the diverse
colors wherewith the raiment of the Kings Daughter (Psalm. xlv.) was
embroidered. This variety, Epist. 86.
says he, consists well enough with one Faith; which is the inward glory of
the Church: For it is only in the Garment, that is in external observations;
nay, the Garment is thus varied by diverse celebrations, so that it is not torn
by contentions.

Which sense of things if we all had ingrafted in our minds, and both studied
and heartily loved this blessed temper; we might with singular profit keep this
Fast of Lent. Which was wisely prolonged by the Church to forty days (and in
some places to more, as I might plainly show, were it the business I design)
not to tie every one precisely to Fast so many days: but that all might have
scope, and room enough, in some part or other of this time, if not in the
whole, for such holy Exercises as these: to call themselves to the strictest
account; to examine their Consciences narrowly; to humble and afflict
themselves for all their sins; and particularly to amerce, as I may call it,
and punish themselves by frequent Fastings, for their frequent abuses of Gods
good Creatures; to form and settle holy resolutions of thorough amendment; to
pray to God with greater ardor, both in private and public, for his pardon and
for his holy Spirit; to meditate upon the wonderful love of God in our Savior
Christ, who will receive penitent sinners unto Mercy; and to fit themselves to
receive the Tokens and Pledges of the same, with the higher joy and gladness;
because with the fuller assurance of his being reconciled to us (being thus
disposed) through the Death and Passion of Christ Jesus.

And here it may be briefly noted, that the Paschal Fast was thus enlarged,
rather than any other time chosen for these holy Exercises; because then we
remember the bitter Agonies and Passion of Christ for our sins: which are the
most powerful motives to make us hate and forsake them; and the clearest
demonstration what the deserts of them were; and how stupendous the loving
kindness of God, which would accept and also find a ransom for us. Which
account of it S. Austin I observe gives, in his famous Epistle to Januarius; In
what part of Epist. 119.
the Year could the observation of it be appointed more congruously, nisi
confinis atque contigua Dominicae Passioni? But that which was bordering upon
and contiguous unto the Passion of our Lord?

As for the limitation of this solemn Season of Humiliation to the number of
forty days: therein, I suppose, the Church had a respect to Christ's Fasting
forty days, in the dedication of the New Covenant, as Moses and Elias had done
in the giving and restoring of the Old. Not that they thought themselves bound
precisely and absolutely by that example: but looking upon it only as a
convenient direction (as a learned Writer of our own Dr. Field of the Church,
L. 3. c. 20.
speaks) in determining the length of this Fast: wherein they might also be put
in mind, of that sore trial and temptation, which Christ then endured for our
sakes. This being a number likewise famous in Scripture upon many other
accounts; for the Rain which made the Flood continued forty days; and so many
days the Spies spent in searching out the good Land; and Ezekiel in the type he
was ordered to draw of the Siege of Jerusalem, lay on his right side, to bear
the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days (iv. 6.) after which number of
days also, Jonah threatened Nineveh should be destroyed; and so many our Savior
staid with his Disciples after his Resurrection, before he ascended unto
Heaven. Which might move the Church to think of this number rather than any
other: but without any opinion that it was strictly bound thereunto: for then
the Church would have precisely kept to it, which it has not done. For
deducting the Saturdays and Sundays, which were not anciently Fasted in the
Eastern Church, nor in some parts of the Western, no not at Rome it self; there
do not remain forty days. And if only the Sundays be deducted, as now in the
Western Churches, there will still want of that number of forty days. For
those, in the Caput as they call it, or beginning of the Fast, which being put
to the rest make up that number; it must be confessed were not observed at the
first, but added afterward.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Manner of its Observation.
NOW in the manner of Fasting, it must be acknowledged also there was a
variety, as well as in the number of days, which they Fasted. For in the Holy
week, as it was called, they that were strict would Eat nothing, but Bread, and
Water, and Salt; which was called dry diet, and was proper to those six days,
as we read in Epiphanius Haeres. lxxv. n. 6. In two of which days, just before
Easter, some Eat nothing at all.
. In the rest of the Lent, some would Eat only Fish; others allowed themselves
also Birds; because of the same Nature they thought with Fish, being made out
of the Water, as Moses testifies. But others forbore all Fish likewise, as well
as Flesh; which was the custom of the Greeks: Yet the famous Monks of Mount
Athos would Eat Oisters; because they had no blood in them. Some contented
themselves with Eggs and Fruit: others forbore both, and lived upon Bread and
Herbs and Roots. And S. Hierom says there were some, who would not so much, as
Eat a bit of Bread: which Socrates also testifies. But in this variety they all
agreed in one thing, which was to Eat nothing at all, until the Evening; and
then, such Food only as was least delicate: not confining themselves to any
particular thing, but as their Bodies would bear.

No man pretended to Fast if he Eat a Dinner; though it were of Fish only, or
any other less nourishing thing: And though on other Fasts, they broke them at
Three a Clock in the Afternoon, they did not take that liberty in the Lent
Fasts, but continued them, as I said, till night. At which time also they did
not indulge themselves the best fare, of any sort whatsoever: but contented
themselves with the meanest, which they used also with much moderation.
Socrates indeed says, that some fasted only till the Ninth hour (which is our
Three of the Clock) but they were very few, if we will believe all other
ancient Writers.

In short, they fasted all day, and used Abstinence at night.

Out of all the Records of the Church which speak of this, I shall select only
a passage out of S. Austin, which most lively describes the true sort of
Abstinence, and reproves the false. It is in his Books about the Manners of the
Catholic Church, compared with L. 2. cap. 13.
those of the Manichees. Where speaking of the great Abstinence to which the
Manichees pretended, he puts this Query to them. If there be a man to be found,
as there may, who is so moderate, that he does not Eat twice in one day; and at
Supper, with a little Bacon, has only a dish of Herbs ointed and seasoned with
the same Lard, served up to him, sufficient to suppress his hunger; quenching
his thirst also, for his health sake, with two or three draughts of diluted
Wine, and this is his daily diet: On the other side there is one who tastes no
Flesh, nor drinks a drop of Wine, but has exquisite and far-fetcht foreign
Fruits of the Earth, with Mushrooms and such like things set before him, in
variety of dishes, and sprinkled with good store of Spice, at Three of the
Clock in the Afternoon; and Eats also a good Supper of the same things at the
beginning of Night: drinking therewith, Mede, and Cider, and other good Liquors
(like enough to Wine, and excelling it in sweetness) and that not merely to
quench thirst, but as much as he list, for his pleasure: Which of these two, as
to Eating and Drinking, do you judge to be most Abstemious? I do not think you
so very blind, but you see that the latter is a Glutton in comparison with the
former. And what can be more mad, than to say, that he who fills his Belly even
to belching with all manner of pleasant things (save only Flesh-meat and Wine)
has kept the rule of Sanctity; but that the other, who Eats only so much of
the vilest food (seasoned with a little smoaky Lard) as will suffice for the
refection of his Body, with three cups of Wine, merely for the support of
health, is prepared for certain punishment?

Thus that great man (whose words I have endeavored to contract a little)
represents, as I take it, the practice of the Catholics in their Fastings. By
which we may make a just judgment of our own in these days: and not deceive our
selves with a dangerous opinion, that we have performed this duty; when we have
only changed our diet, not forborne our Dinners; or if we have, crambed our
selves with delightful Suppers. This is not only against all ancient practice,
and the repeated admonitions of the Holy Fathers: but is still condemned by
good men in all Churches. Particularly by Lindanus an Panopliae L. 3. C. xi.
excellent Writer in the Roman Church, in the last Age: whose words I shall not
translate at large, but only observe in short, that he sadly bewails the state
of the Catholic Church, in which the shadow only of Fasting is left.

As for those that cannot possibly Fast so long, it never was the intention of
the Church to oblige them: but they were anciently exhorted, as appears by S.
Chrysostom (whose discourse on this Subject I shall produce anon) to take some
refreshment. But then, it was only to support their Spirits from fainting; and
they all humbled themselves before God, with Supplications and Prayers;
especially upon the most solemn days of Prayer; and bewailed those sinners,
which now did open Penance; and beseeched God to give them true Repentance; and
endeavored to perfect their own; and gave Alms to the Poor; and spent more
time than ordinary in reading and hearing God's Holy Word: in which, and such
like holy Exercises both one and other passed this time of Lent; satisfying
themselves with these Spiritual pleasures, while they denied their appetites in
bodily delights.

That is, they that could not Fast, took care notwithstanding to perform all
those Christian duties, which it is the very design and end of Fasting to help
and promote.

CHAP. XVIII. The great Usefulness thereof.
AND now who sees not the reasonableness of this Observance, and the great
benefit we may receive thereby? If instead of contending about it (for which,
thus understood, I can see no ground) we would all set our selves to make the
best use we can, of what the Church has piously ordained, and for many Ages
profitably practiced.

I do not know how it appears to others, but it seems very strange to me; that
what the Church had strengthened and confirmed by an unanimous consent in S.
Austin's time, should find any dissenters from it in these days. And yet I fear
there are some, I wish they be not many, who scarce observe Good Friday, that
is, the day of our Savior's Passion, with any of that strictness, which I have
mentioned; but Eat and Drink, and do all other things, as upon the rest of the
days of the year. A thing never heard of in the Church of Christ, till these
later days: which, among other scandals, affords matter for the lamentations of
the best Men and Women among us, during the Lenten season; especially upon that
Great and Solemn day, when, by common consent, Christians anciently made a
Conscience of fasting strictly.

And they who now make no reckoning of it, would do well, nay, they are bound
in Conscience, to consider, if they meet with this little Book, what I have
therein represented: and I hope they will be convinced, that they ought to do a
great deal more, if they be able, than Fast and Pray, and Humble themselves
before God on that day. For if they be persuaded that Fasting is a Christian
duty; and that there is frequent occasion for it, both upon their own account,
and others; and so become sensible that the weekly Fasts were wisely ordained:
they will easily see, that there is great Use also of this yearly Fast of Lent;
that the defects of their weekly Humiliations and Devotions may hereby be
supplied.

If there were no other reason for it, this might be sufficient to satisfy
pious and humble minds; who being sensible of the slightness of their weekly
Humiliations and Repentance, cannot but be disposed to hearken to the voice of
the Church which calls them to Fast before Festivals; especially to a most
solemn Fast before the most solemn yearly Festival: that by taking a stricter
account of themselves, and perfecting their Humiliations and Repentance, they
may have a right (as Mr. Thorndike speaks) to the blessing, which we then
celebrate. For which very reason Peter Martyr In cap. xx. L. Judicum p. 171.
thinks the annual Fast was ordained among the Jews, by God himself; because
many sins had been committed by the people, in the whole year foregoing; and
the Ceremonies of the Law had not been diligently observed.

And that suggests another reason why this Fast of Lent, should be diligently
observed. For, besides what relates to our private concerns, there may have
been some public offense committed by the community (I mean by the whole body
of the People) which may justly require the public Humiliation of the whole
Church. We see, for instance, several wholesome Laws and Constitutions, both in
Church and State, generally disregarded, or at least not observed. There are
certain vices also, in some Ages, universally prevail, without any check;
whereby the people become less sensible of their guilt. There was a time when
the Holy Communion was not administered for several years together, in a great
many Parishes of England. It is still, perhaps, not so frequently administered,
much less attended, as it ought to be. The public Prayers (which are the
chief) are not so frequented, as the Service of God requires And if nothing of
this, or any thing like it, were known to be publicly done, or omitted,
contrary to our Christian duty; yet it would be very safe for us to suspect,
there may be much lurking wickedness, which is not espied: or, at least, that
several sins of ignorance have been committed; and that by mistake, and through
weakness, many Errors may have been, in the public management of affairs both
in Church and State: The best of men being apt sometimes to do amiss; even when
their intentions and designs are right and good. Upon which score, if there
were no other reason for it, the Fast of Lent is most necessary: that there may
be a public Humiliation, for public Errors; if not for public Sins.

Besides, every one knows that this anciently was the Season, for putting such
persons to open Penance, as stood convicted of notorious sins: and for sending
up Prayers to God, like public Ambassadors (as Tertullian L. de Poenit. c. ix.
and others speak) to sue in their behalf for Peace and Reconciliation; and to
beseech God to grant them true Repentance, and perfect Remission and
Forgiveness.

And if this Godly discipline be not now practiced; there is the greater reason
for all good Christians to bewail it: and, looking upon this as one public
neglect, join together in public Repentance. For which there must be some time
appointed; and what time so proper as this, which was the time anciently
appointed, for this, now neglected, discipline? And the time, wherein the whole
Christian Church, as one man, humbled themselves before God, both high and low,
rich and poor, to beg of God a general pardon of all offenses, with Fasting and
Alms, and with resolution of amendment of life.

Insomuch, that they who always live in a strict and circumspect care to please
God in every thing, may find also something to do at this Season, as well as
other men: if it be but in bewailing higher offenders; and putting up fervent
Prayers for them, which avail much from a righteous man. But if they be so
exact and circumspect as they ought; they may find likewise, that they have not
performed the duties of their particular places, and relations, with such
diligence: but there are many defects, many oversights and slips, for which
they have need to ask a pardon.

But if there were nothing of this, that could be supposed, yet there is a
benefit which the most perfect Christians may reap from the Observance of this
Lent Season: and that of an inestimable value in their account. Which is, that
it will be a time of retirement from the hurry of the World: which is very
desirable to all wise and good minds (that they may enjoy God and themselves
without disturbance) but hard to meet withal, especially in populous Cities;
unless by common consent, men forbear their visits, and keep at home (which is
most suitable to a time of Fasting) and decline their wonted meetings during
this Season (unless upon their necessary business) that they may have leisure
to be better acquainted with themselves, and with the affairs, and enjoyments
of another World.

Whence it is that S. Athanasius Lib. de Virgin. p. 1047, etc.
calls Fasting, the life of Angels: not only because, during the time we can
live without Meat and Drink, we imitate their happy life, and are, as he
speaks, of their order, and placed in their rank; but because it clarifies the
mind, and gives it both ability and leisure, to withdraw it self from the
company of things here below, and raise its thoughts to the Celestial company
above.

To which purpose, S. Chrysostom, as his manner is, discourses more copiously,
in a Sermon he made at the entrance of the Lent Fast Hom. 1. in Genesis
. Which Season he desires his Auditors to prepare themselves to entertain, with
the same joy; that a chaste and modest Virgin is brought withal to her Bridal
Chamber. Let none of you, says he, be sad; let no dejection appear in any
countenance, when he is invited to this Fast: but let all be exceeding glad,
and glorify God, the great Curator of Souls, who has provided for them this
Remedy. Whose Advent ought to be received with much pleasure, because the
ensuing days of Fasting, are the true Holy Days, and time of rest. Wherein is
the safety of Souls; wherein is Peace, wherein is Concord and happy Agreement;
wherein, all busy provision for this life being laid aside, there is no noise,
no tumult, no running about of Cooks, no slaying of Oxen and killing of Sheep:
but these being removed out of the way, there is all Quiet, and Tranquillity,
and Charity, and Joy, and Peace, and Gentleness, and innumerable other good
things in the stead thereof. In short, he represents this as an Heavenly time;
wherein the mind being made lighter, by Fasting or Abstinence, may the more
freely take its flight into its Celestial Country.

Which he repeats again in another place, after this manner De jejun. and de
Genescos lectione.
. The Spring time is pleasant to Mariners, and no less welcome to those that
Till the ground: but it is not so delightful to either of them, as
Fasting-days, the Spiritual Spring of Souls, and their safe Port and
Tranquillity, are to those who are desirous to lead a Christian life. For
therefore the Countryman rejoices at the sight of the Spring, because then the
Earth appears beauteously painted, with variety of Flowers; and the Mariners
are then glad also, because the Sea is more quiet, and they are in less danger
to be tossed by its Waves and Billows: but therefore Fasting is a pleasant
Springtime unto us, because then, not the tumult of Winds and Waves, but of
Thoughts and Passions, and fleshly Lusts, are appeased and laid: and the
Garland, not of Flowers but, of Spiritual Graces is then gathered.

Thus I have briefly shown how useful, nay, how necessary this Lent Fast is, by
which all sorts of men in the Church may reap very great benefits. Of which let
experience be witness, by making a serious trial: for where there remain no
more, than merely the faint remainders of the ancient strictness in this
discipline, they produce such considerable effects; that we may easily know
thereby, what profit might be expected from the complete and faithful
observance of it.

Hear what an accomplished Gentleman of our own Country, writes upon this
subject: whose words I shall the rather set down, because they notably
illustrate the usefulness of this Institution.

At one time of the year, says he (speaking Sir Edw. Sandys Europae Spec.
Sect. 9.
of a very loose Country) namely in LENT they are much reformed: No such
blaspheming, nor dirty speaking as before; their vanities of all sorts laid
reasonably aside; their pleasures abandoned; their Apparel, their Diet, and all
things else composed to austerity and state of Penitence: They have daily then
their Preaching, with Collections of Alms, whereto all men repair: and, to
judge of them by the outward show, they seem generally to have very great
remorse for their wickedness. Insomuch that I seemed here to have best learned
the right use of LENT; in this Country first to have discerned the great fruit
of it; and the reason for which those SAGES at first did institute it.

Neither can I easily accord to the fancies of such, as because we ought at all
times to lead a life worthy of our profession, think it therefore Superstitious
to have one time wherein to exact or expect it more than other: but rather do
thus conceive, that seeing the corruption of times and wickedness of men's
Nature is now so exorbitant, that it is an hard matter to hold the ordinary
sort of men within the lists of Piety, Justice and Sobriety; it is fit
therefore there should be one time at the least in the year, and that of
reasonable continuance, wherein the Season it self, the use of the World, the
practice of all men (for even the Jews and Turks have their Lents although
different) the Commandment of Superiors, the provision of fit means to assist
them therein; and in sum, the very outward face and expectation as it were of
all things, should constrain men how wicked and wretchless soever, for that
time, at least, to recall themselves to some more severe cogitations and courses.

For which there is very great reason (as he proceeds to show) lest Sin having
no such bridle to check it at any time, should at length wax headstrong and
unconquerable in them: and that, on the other side, being thus necessarily
immured for a while, though but to make a bare show of walking in the paths of
Virtue, they might afterward more sincerely and willingly persist (as custom
makes hard things pleasant) or at leastwise return more readily again unto them
some other time. Thus that excellent person.

Which puts me in mind of a Discourse of S. Chrysostom upon this Subject: in
Hom. 2. in Genes.
which, upon the first day of Lent, he represents how this Season prepares the
mind to be a fit soil to receive the Divine Doctrine, just as a Field when the
Weeds are killed, is disposed for the Seed. For Fasting, says he, is the
tranquillity of the Soul, etc. there is no tumult to day, no noise, no chopping
of Meat, no running about of Cooks: but all these being gone, this City is
become like to a grave, sober and chaste Matron, or Mistress of a Family. Upon
which when I cast mine Eyes, and observe what a sudden change there is in it,
from what it was yesterday, I am amazed at the force of Fasting. Which having
made an entrance into every man's Conscience, has transformed the thoughts, and
purified the mind, not only of the Magistrates, but of private persons: Not
only of the freeborn Citizens, but of Servants; both of Men and of Women; of
Rich as well as Poor; and not only of those who are Greeks, but even of
Barbarians also. But what do I speak of the Magistrates and private persons?
Even he who wears the Diadem, the Crowned head, like all the rest, has bowed
his Conscience to this Obedience. And to day there is no difference between the
Table of the Rich and of the Poor: but every where a spare Diet, free from
Luxury, and Vanity. And every one comes to day with more pleasure to a slender
Table, than yesterday he came to one furnished with all delicacies; where the
most generous Wines also were not wanting. You see, my beloved, from the very
Proeme, what the power of Fasting is.

Whereby he hoped they would be cured of all their diseases; and that it would
prove as good Physic to their Souls, as it is, in many cases, to the Body. For
by Fasting, says he, in a following Sermon, I mean Abstinence from all Sin;
which is the end of Hom. viii. in Genesis
Abstinence from Food. Therefore we Fast from Meat and Drink that we may bridle
and curb the lusts of the Flesh: and make the Horse more easily obey his Rider.
He that Fasts ought above all things to refrain from anger; to learn meekness
and gentleness; to have a contrite heart; to repel all absurd desires; to have
before his Eyes continually the Eye of the Eternal Judge, the Tribunal which
cannot be corrupted; to be as much better than others as he is richer; to have
the command of his Wealth; to be liberal in giving Alms; and to admit not so
much as an evil Thought against his Neighbor. This is the true Fast as Isaiah
teaches. And therefore let this be our care; and let us not fancy, as many do,
that Fasting consists only in Eating nothing till the Evening. This is not the
business; but that together with Abstinence from Meat, we abstain from all
things that may hurt us; and have more leisure for Spiritual employments. A
Faster ought to be humble, mild, lowly, a contemner of the glory of this Life:
For as he has despised the care of his Appetite; so it becomes him as little
to mind Vain glory, and look to him alone that searches the Heart and the
Reins; to make Prayers and Confessions to God with great diligence, and to do
himself good by doing good and giving Alms to others, etc.

Thus let us spend every week, nay, every day, of this Lent (says he, in
another Hom. xv. in Genesis
Sermon, going over the same things again in little different Language) and
then there was reason, he thought, to hope that they might get a habit of these
Virtues before the conclusion.

And to the same purpose S. Athanasius, in his Book of Virginity before
mentioned. It is not simply Fasting, which we magnify: for if thou Fastest,
and do not keep thy mouth that it speak no evil; if thou do not guard it
from venting passionate and angry words, from telling lies, from perjury, from
backbiting and slandering thy Neighbor; if any of these go out of thy Fasting
mouth, thy Fasting will profit thee nothing: all thy pains in this, is but lost
labor.

And who can think that if such Lessons as these did all the Lent long still
sound in men's Ears, and were continually pressed on their Hearts, they would be
without any effect for the reforming of their lives? No, the very face of all
things then looking so solemn (as the ingenious Gentleman now named observes)
would naturally constrain them in some measure to be serious: and that, in all
probability, would occasion just reflections upon themselves and their evil
courses; which would produce, in some or other, new resolutions and purposes of
amendment.

And if a thorough reformation should be wrought in none; yet this restraint
upon men's evil inclinations, for such a considerable time, would put such a
stop to the progress of Vice; that it would make men, if not better, yet less
wicked, than otherwise they would have been. Of which that Gentleman was so
sensible, that he looks upon it as the special great Mercy and Grace of God,
which has preserved the severity of Lent, in those Countries, where looseness
of life it so great; that were it not for this, the floods of ungodliness
growing so strong and outrageous, and having no where either bounds or banks to
restrain them, might plunge whole Nations into such a gulf of wickedness, as
should leave no hope of their recovery.

CHAP. XIX. A further Satisfaction to some Objections.
BUT there are some who imagine there is no need of a set public Fast, of such
long continuance as the Fast of Lent is, for these good purposes: because every
man may humble himself before God for his offenses, and Repent himself of them
in private, at such times as he thinks best, or can best spare, to be set apart
for such Holy Uses.

Unto which exception I think sufficient Satisfaction has been given, in what
was last said, if men would considerately weigh it. But because it is very
useful to have a distinct knowledge of things, I shall give a particular Answer
to it. And to the first part of it, I shall return the same Answer that our
excellent Hooker has already made. That no doubt Penitency is in this like
Prayer; that it will be acceptable to God whether performed in public or in
secret. Howbeit, as in Prayer, if men were left wholly to their own choice of
such times as they thought fit, for their voluntary Meditations in their
Closets, and not drawn by Law and public Orders unto the open Assemblies of
the Church at certain times and hours, it may be easily conjectured what
Christian devotion would that way come unto, in a short time: Even so in this
of Penitency we are taught by sufficient experience, without any further trial,
how little it avails to tell men of washing away their sins by tears of
Repentance; and so to leave them altogether to themselves. For alas! they
little think of this, but pass over their numerous sins, without taking any
considerable time to bewail them and repent of them: And therefore the Church
had reason to set a time apart for this discipline; wherein the public example
of all may be unto every particular person, a most effectual means, to put them
in mind, and even draw them to that, which they all quite and clean forget; as
if Penitency were no part of a Christian man's duty.

As for the other part of the Exception, which is the long continuance of this
set time; I gave the reason of it before; that men might shake off the habits
of Intemperance and Impurity; of Evil-speaking, Lying, and such like Sins. Unto
which having been long accustomed, they cannot presently get rid of them: but
by making it their business for so many weeks, to refrain them, may possibly
quite forsake them, and never return unto them.

And if they that are not able to Fast totally from Meat and Drink, would use
their utmost endeavor to abstain from those sins to which they find themselves
most inclined, and to deny all manner of bad desires; they might without
Fasting attain the end for which Fasting is ordained: Which I repeat again for
the further satisfaction of those, who are troubled because they are not able
to Fast all day, at such times as the Church appoints.

For whose sake I shall enlarge a little more upon this Subject. And as I have
shown before, that there are many people that cannot bear the discipline of
Fasting (particularly, they that are of a weak Constitution, and can Eat but
little at a time; who therefore require frequent reparations of the decays of
Nature) so now I shall add to that number, such as out of choice Eat always
sparingly; no more, as near as they can guess, than will just suffice to
support their strength, for the discharge of their duties in their several
employments. These men leading always such an Abstemious life, that it may be
called a perpetual Abstinence, S. Chrysostom also excuses from the obligation
of Fasting. Whose discourse I think fit to set down, for the full satisfaction
of such kind of scruples.

For the understanding of which the Reader must know, that his Church had been
thronged with company from the beginning of Lent, till about the ninth or tenth
day: when he observing there was but a very thin Congregation, he begins his
Sermon in this manner. What Is the matter that your Hom. x. in Genesin.
Assembly is so small to day, and we have not such a concourse, as has usually
been here? Perhaps some are ashamed after they have been at a carnal Table, to
come to this Spiritual; and therefore we have not their company. But let such
hearken to what the Wise man says, iv. Ecclus. 21. There is a shame that
brings sin: and there is a shame which is glory and grace. No man has reason
to blush, if he come from his Corporal repast, to partake of the Spiritual. A
sober hearer, though he have Dined, is not unfit for this Assembly: As on the
contrary, a listless and careless, though he remain Fasting, gets no good
thereby. I do not speak this to unloose you from the strictness of Fasting (God
forbid) for I much approve and praise those who are Fasting: but I would have
you to understand, that you should come after a sober manner, and not merely
out of Custom, unto Spiritual things: and that it is not Eating, but
negligence, disorderly passions and affections, and lusts uncurbed, that make
men unfit for our Sermons. For, beloved, if by reason of the weakness of thy
Body, thou can not continue all the day Fasting, no wise man will reprove
thee for it. For we serve a gentle and merciful Lord, who exacts nothing of us
beyond our strength: nor does he simply require Fasting and Abstinence of us,
and that we should remain Fasting till this hour: but that, throwing away all
cares for the things of this life, we should bestow all our leisure in
Spiritual employments. And if we order our life with a sober mind, and
whatsoever leisure we have be employed in Spiritual things, and we Eat merely
for necessity, and so much as needs and no more, bestowing all our life in some
good work or other; there is no need then that we are in, of that help which is
received from Fasting. Which was not ordained for such kind of men; but because
humane nature is negligent, and delights in pleasure, and seeks for ease and
liberty; therefore our most merciful Lord, like a tender hearted Father,
devised this medicine of Fasting: that delicacies and making much of our selves
might be cut off; and we might translate our thoughts about the things of this
life, unto Spiritual employments.

If therefore there be any here present, whom the infirmity of their body will
not permit to continue Fasting, without their Dinner, I exhort such both to
refresh their bodily infirmity, and not to deprive themselves of this Spiritual
instruction: but (having taken their bodily repast) to be so much the more
studious of it. (...), etc. For there are certainly, there are ways, by which
far wider doors of confidence toward God may be opened, than by mere
Abstinence from Food. He therefore that takes some Food, being unable to Fast,
let him give larger Alms; let him send up more fervent Prayers; let him be more
forward, and show greater alacrity in hearing God's Word. In those things, his
bodily infirmity can be no hindrance to him. Let him be reconciled to his
Enemies; let him drive all remembrance of injuries out of his heart: and if he
has done these things, he has kept the true Fast which the Lord requires of
us. For he commands us to abstain from Meat, for these things sake; that we
should check the wantonness of the Flesh; and make it obedient and tractable to
fulfill his Commandments.

Wherefore knowing these things, I beseech you, who can Fast, that you intend
and increase, as much as is possible, this your good and laudable forwardness:
for the more the outward man decays, the more your inward man is renewed.
Fasting brings under the Body, and bridles its disorderly motions: It makes the
Soul also more clear and bright; giving it wings also, and making it light, and
ready to sore aloft. As for our Brethren who cannot Fast, do you exhort them,
that they would not for this cause refrain from their Spiritual Food: Tell them
what I now say; and let them know, that not he who Eats and Drinks moderately
is unworthy of this Auditory: but he that is lazy and dissolute. And tell them
also what the Apostle says in that Oracle of his; that both he that Eats,
Eats to the Lord; and he that Eats not, to the Lord he Eats not, and
gives God thanks. In like manner, let him that Fasteth, give thanks to God,
who gives him strength able to support the labor of Fasting: and he that
Fasteth not, let him also give thanks, that nothing of this nature can do him
hurt, nor hinder him from minding the Salvation of his Soul; if he be pleased
to attend it. For it cannot be told how many ways our most merciful God has
provided, by which, if we will, we may attain the highest confidence in him.

These things I have said for the sake of the absent, that occasion of shame
might be taken from them; and they might know there is no reason to be ashamed
on this score. For to have Eaten does not bring confusion upon us, but to have
done an ill thing. Sin is a great shame; which if we have admitted, we ought
not only to blush, but to hide our selves for shame, and like condemned
persons, bewail our selves as miserable wretches: and yet not then to despond,
but to make the more haste to Penitence and Pardon. For he is such a gracious
Lord, that he requires no more, when by negligence we fall into sin; but that
we acknowledge our Errors, and proceed no further, nor return again to the same
offenses.

I omit the rest, for he repeats the same thing often over, in that Sermon. In
the conclusion of which, after he had expounded a portion of Holy Scripture, he
excuses himself for holding them so long: which yet, he tells them, was not
without reason; but that they who were present might be able to teach those who
were absent the forenamed Lesson; which he desires them to carry home with
them, and instruct their absent Neighbors in it. And the next day but one, he
begins his Sermon, with the very same Lesson again: having also in his Sermon,
upon the day between these two, told them; that two days Hom. xi.
in a week were allowed unto all, wherein to intermit their Fasting. Which he
compares to the resting places, and Inns which are upon the Rode, that weary
Travelers may turn in, and refresh themselves a while; to enable them to go on
their journey the more cheerfully: and to the Ports and Havens on the
Seashore, into which the Mariners may run their Vessel, when they have been
tossed with the Waves, and there wait for the opportunity of a fair Wind to
carry them forward. Such Shores and Havens, says he, such Rests and stays has
God granted us, for two days in the week, in this course of the Lent Fast: that
the labor of it being a little remitted, and they that travel in it refreshed,
may afterward go on with the greater alacrity.

Of the same Opinion was his great Friend, S. Basil in his Book of true
Virginity Tome 1. p. 717.
Where he says, we may apply to Fasting, those words of the Holy Scripture,
Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left. For as it is dangerous to incline
to Gluttony: so by too much Abstinence to weaken the Body, and make it
unserviceable, is altogether as absurd and most irrational. For Abstinence from
the pleasures of the Belly is not good in it self; but only as it contributes
to the attainment of Virtue. Now if we regard not that, by an immoderate
Abstinence, for which we choose to abstain from Meat: we pervert the end of its
Institution; and by our folly, make it produce the quite contrary effect, to
what was designed in it. For the Organ being broken and spoiled, our Souls
cannot converse with God, by Reading and by Prayers: nor can it comply with our
desires, when we have a mind to do any good office to our Brethren. We ought
therefore to have a due care of the Body: not for the Bodies sake, but for the
sake of its ministry and service, in the acquisition of Virtue. For it is
impossible, either to attend to Reading, or bend our mind to Prayer, or indeed
to be fit for any other profitable employment, if the Body be not well treated,
that it may be an obedient minister to us. And therefore the Apostle says he
brought under his Body; but it was that it might be his servant.

I might add the words of another great man, Greg. Nazianzen: who showing Orat.
xl. p. 659.
that we are ill advised, if we think to imitate all Christ's actions,
instances, among other things, in his Fasting. Christ, says he, Fasted before
he was Tempted; we before Easter: The Fasts are the same; but there is not a
small difference in their Times. For he Fasted, to arm himself against the
assaults of Temptations: we to testify our being dead with Christ, and for a
(...), preparatory purgation before the Feast. And he Fasted forty days; for he
was God: but we proportion it to our strength. Although there be some whose
zeal persuades them to extend their Fasting above their strength. And in
another place Orat. 36 page 583.
he asks this question, (...); What need they Fast Corporally, whose minds are
purified by the Word? Alluding, as Elias Cretensis thinks, to that passage of
our Savior's, Now ye are clean, through the Word which I have spoken to you,
xv. John 3. For such pure Souls, says he, do not stand in need of that
Iustration which is made by Fasting. In the Latin Church S. Austin discourses
admirably on this Subject, in his Book Cap. xxxiii.
of the Manners of the Catholic Church. Where he relates what incredible Fasts
were kept in some Monasteries, both by Men and by Women: yet so that no body
was urged to such severities as they could not bear. Nothing was imposed upon
them that refused, nor were they therefore condemned by the rest, because they
were unable, they said, to imitate what they did. For they remembered with what
pains the Scripture commands Charity to us all: and were not unmindful of the
words of S. Paul in the xiv. to the Romans, which I mentioned before out of S.
Chrysostom. And, in fine, he says, that when they were not well, they Eat
those things without scruple, from which they abstained when they were in
health. Nay, to such as were weakly, and indeed to all, who could not (for
instance) have a good health without the use of Wine (from which many
abstained) they caused it to be given them with great humanity and modesty. And
some, who foolishly refused what was offered, they brotherly admonished, Ne
vana superstitione debiliores citius, quam sanctiores fiant, lest by vain
superstition, they sooner made themselves more unhealthy, than more holy. They
read also to them the command of the Apostle to Timothy, that he should drink a
little Wine, because of his often infirmities. And in this manner they
exercised Piety diligently: but bodily Exercise (as the same Apostle speaks)
they knew was pertinent ad exiguum tempus, for a little time.

But I need not take any further pains in this matter: for if we had none of
these Authorities to rely upon, we might be instructed by common Reason, that
we ought to break the Fast before the appointed time of the day, if we find our
selves thereby indisposed and unfit, for the necessary duties, which are to be
performed on that day. This Erasmus tells us was the resolution of a Franciscan
of his acquaintance L. xv. Epist. 14.
(one of the best men that he ever knew) who, when his companion thought they
must begin all their Prayers again, because he had seen him Eat before the
time, said, No such matter; there is no fault committed, but rather God is a
gainer by what I have done: for before our Prayers were languid, flat and dull;
but now we can sing the Hymns with a cheerful mind; and with such sacrifices
God is pleased. Erasmus himself also on a Fasting-day having been hard at
study, which made it necessary, he thought, to comfort his stomach before
Diningtime with a mess of Broth, advised with the same Franciscan about it: who
answered, so that the Lay Brother might take notice of it, Thou have not
offended: nay, thou had done ill, if thou had not taken that refreshment,
but for little Foods sake had omitted thy Sacred studies; and thereby done
injury also to thy spare body.

I end this with the Observation of the same great Person in another place;
that there are certain sorts of Food, which so nourish the Body, ut vivat, non
Lib. xxxi. Epist. 43.
ut lasciviat, as merely to preserve life, not to make it wanton. And such kind
of Food if we choose, when necessity requires, merely for support, not for
pleasure; it cannot be thought that God or any wise and good man will condemn
us for it: when we are thereby only made more serviceable both to God and Man.

CHAP. XX. The Conclusion of the Whole.
AND now, having shown what great benefits we may all receive by this pious
discipline, what remains but that I press a little the practice thereof: which
thus explained and understood, as has been said, I cannot see what any body,
who has a sense of Religion, can object against it; nor why it should not be
universally embraced by such persons, and gladly revived, after too long a
disuse of so profitable an Institution.

The foundations of which, if they were not laid originally by the Apostles
themselves, yet they that began it, had great reason to think, it was so
agreeable to their mind, that they would have thus Enacted, if they had been
then alive. For as Philo some where says, That the Laws of Moses, were nothing
but the Monuments of the Lives of the holy Patriarchs; who following the
guidance of sincere Understanding, without the prescription of Laws,
Religiously observed all those Commandments which were afterward established
by legal Sanctions: So we may truly say, on the other side, that the Polity and
Conversation of the Primitive Church, was a certain Monument and representation
of the Evangelical discipline, and an uncorrupted rule of life. For, though
there were at the first some Tares scattered by the Enemy, which grew up among
the good Corn, yet it cannot be denied that there was never greater Sanctity,
nor more perfect Innocence, than was among the generality of the Faithful: who,
as far as we can find, always observed some such solemn Fast, as I have treated
of, before the Memory of Christ's Resurrection.

And therefore let not us now in these days refuse, much less reject, the
service of that; which they found very helpful to them, for the preserving and
perfecting of the Church, in Purity and Holiness: and which good men, in later
times, have been so far from thinking superfluous; that they have rather
inclined to like the custom of the Greek Church, who beside the great Lent,
have other three Lents (of shorter continuance, and less strict observance) at
other solemn times of the Year. Let us not lay aside the use of Fasting; the
example of which flowed from the Prophets, John Baptist, our Lord Christ, and
his Apostles: Nor of this great Fast; which is commended to us by most ancient
Custom (if not by greater Authority) by the Doctrine of the Fathers of the
Church in the best Ages, and by the practice of all the Faithful; and which is
of very great moment, to dispose the mind for the Reading and Hearing of God's
holy Word, for Prayer, for Hymns, and all other Christian duties: whereby we
may also draw upon our selves and our Families; nay, and upon the Church and
Kingdom whereof we are members, all manner of Blessings; both by appeasing his
Divine displeasure and averting public Judgments, and, on the contrary,
procuring great prosperity.

What if one part of Lent be now neglected? that is, the public discipline of
the Church against notorious Offenders, is not in these later Ages exercised;
shall all the rest therefore be laid aside with it? A serious Believer, who
has any love to himself and the public safety, would rather conclude, that
there is so much the greater reason, to be more diligent in that part of it,
from the practice of which, nothing but our own Wills can hinder us: since
notorious Offenders, it seems, are grown so numerous, that it is impossible to
bring them to do open Penance for their scandalous sins and wickedness.

That is, every man who has as yet a sense of God and Goodness remaining in
him, ought to look upon the ensuing Lent, as a time set apart, for the calling
himself to a strict and severe account: And accordingly, if any man find that
he has been a Fornicator, though never so close and secret, a Drunkard, or
constant Tipler, an Extortioner, an hard-hearted Worldling, a Calumniator or
Backbiter, a Blasphemer of God, an hinderer or slanderer of his Holy Word, or
any other great Sinner, he ought to apply himself conscientiously to Fasting
and Prayer, and giving Alms, and all other duties, which have been ever
accounted proper for this Season. And let him not spare himself, but spend this
time, as much as he can, in all manner of Humiliations, which have been often
mentioned in this Treatise: retiring himself from company, and from business,
to the utmost of his power, that he may lament his sins, and acknowledge his
wretchedness, and most earnestly sue to be reconciled to God, whom he has
offended.

Lamentations indeed, and wailings, and such like things are not the whole
business of Repentance; yet I have demonstrated they are a part of it. And let
me now add, they are such a part (though but small in comparison) that they
alone may obtain great Blessings from God upon us. If well disposed people
would, in every Parish of this Nation, leave off their business upon the first
day of Lent; that they might go to Church, in a mournful habit; with Fasting,
and Tears, and dejection of face, and prostrations, and all other such
acknowledgments of their wretchedness, imploring the Divine Mercy, it might
prolong our tranquillity: and prevail for an adjournment, at least, of those
Judgments, which, if we consider our sinful life, we cannot but think we have
justly deserved; and had reason long ago to expect, should have been inflicted
on us. Especially if we continued all the Lent long to frequent the holy
Assemblies, (as often as necessary business would permit) to beseech God, in
the most mournful manner, to take pity upon us: For then this outward part of
Penitence, with Sorrow and Grief and affliction of Spirit (though no great
Reformation should follow) we might be confident, would obtain from God, those
Temporal benefits, which we call the outward parts of his favor. For so it did
in the case of Ahab, concerning whom God says to the Prophet, See thou, how
Ahab humbles himself before me? Because he humbles himself before me, I will
not bring the evil in his days, etc. The vengeance, though already denounced,
was put off till a further day, because he took that revenge upon himself which
is mentioned in the foregoing Verse; He rent his Clothes, and put Sackcloth
upon his Flesh, and Fasted, and lay in Sackcloth, and went softly, 1 Kings xxi.
27, 28, 29.

And therefore what may we not expect from this means, when it is but the
outward part of Repentance; and the best part is not wanting? But we truly
humble our selves in the sight of God, so as to submit our selves unto him; to
do whatsoever he would have us: faithfully resolving to become new men, and
endeavoring so to be. Or, as our Church excellently exhorts us on the first
day of Lent, If we would, remembering the dreadful Judgments hanging over our
heads, and always ready to fall upon us, return unto our Lord God, with all
contrition and meekness of heart: bewailing and lamenting our sinful life,
acknowledging and confessing our offenses, and seeking to bring forth worthy
fruits of Penance: Then our afflicting our selves, our mourning, our weeping,
our heaviness, and all the bodily Exercises before named, would profit not a
little; but be so acceptable unto God, that he would give us the greatest
Blessings; even perfect remission and forgiveness, as we pray in the Collect
for this Season. When these bodily Exercises are the effects of true Contrition
of Spirit, and when they are earnests of a new life, and a means we use to
accustom our selves to Sobriety, to Self-denial, to Retirement, to shake off
bad Company, to Devotion, to Self-examination, to Meditation, to Pity and
Commiseration of the wants of others, to Charity and works of Mercy: then will
the Lord have mercy upon us, as the Prophet speaks, and he will multiply to
pardon, lv. Isa. 7.

But let all those especially, who truly fear God among us, apply themselves
with all seriousness to this much neglected duty: For others, I doubt* unless
they be forced to it, will not regard these Admonitions. Let it not content
them that they do not follow the bad in their ungodly practices: but let them
also lament the scandal which they give; and bewail the deplorable estate of
such wretched Souls; and deprecate the Divine displeasure; beseeching him to
turn his anger from us, and to spare us for the sake of those pious Souls, that
with Fasting, Mourning and Weeping, humbly supplicate his Mercy. If the Church
did now exercise that ancient Discipline, so much spoken of, it would be the
duty of the very best among us to be present at the Censures passed upon
notorious Offenders; and (I showed out of S. Paul) to bewail them, and lament
over them, in the most doleful manner. And why should we not do that
voluntarily in our private retirements on Fasting-days, which the Church does
not call for to be done in public? Nay, we should the rather do it, as I have
often said: and bewail this, among other things, that men are impatient of such
discipline or any thing like it; that they will not submit to the government of
their Spiritual Pastors (which is so great a sin, that it is next to Rebellion
against their Sovereign) and that Offenders are so multiplied, as beyond all
measure to exceed the number of the Good, who are not able to curb and restrain
them. This is a lamentable state of things; and ought to affect the hearts of
those who fear God, with Grief and Sorrow: especially when they consider the
obstinate hardness of men's hearts in these evil courses; their great
insensibleness either of their sin, or danger; and the cause of all this, their
gross Infidelity. Which it should be part of every good man's business to bewail
in secret; beseeching God, all the Lent long, to put a stop to the floods of
ungodliness, that they may not, like a deluge, overwhelm us.

It is not the custom of these parts of the World, to mourn in Sackcloth and
Ashes; and therefore I have not pressed the very same significations of Sorrow,
Grief, and Humiliation, which were anciently used in the Eastern Countries: but
something like them, and equivalent to them, if we be not willing to use; it is
because we think it a slight matter to offend the Divine Majesty, and are not
afraid of his Almighty displeasure. For let us but awaken in our Souls a sense
of the heinous nature of those sins, which we and others have committed against
God; and of the danger we have incurred by our undutifulness to him: and we
shall not think it unreasonable, to submit to some such discipline, as this,
which is here proposed, instead of that which was practiced of old in other
Nations.

Let every one of us lay aside, all this Lent, our fine Clothes, and the usual
attire of our Bodies; for that is still the custom of Mourners in all places:
and let us retire our selves, as much as is possible (for so Mourners also do)
making no visits, nor willingly receiving any, if nothing but civility oblige
us to it.

Let the time be spent in this retirement, in Reading, and Prayer; in examining
our Consciences, and bewailing our Offenses; in taking a view of the miserable
estate of mankind, and imploring the Divine Mercy toward them; in laying to
heart the sufferings of any of our Christian Brethren; and such like Spiritual
Exercises; which we are too apt to neglect, in a crowd of business, and of
company.

Let the consideration of it, move us to afflict our selves with Fasting; or,
if that cannot be, with a spare Diet.

Let the rich especially and those that live deliciously, deny their appetites;
keep a slender Table; and punish their excesses with harder fare.

Drink no Wine, nor strong Liquors, without necessity; make no Feasts, nor
accept of invitations to them.

Give Alms liberally; and frequent the public Prayers: and there let us humble
our selves before God, and blush to lift up our Eyes unto Heaven.

Yea, let us Pray, with all Prayer and Supplication, in the Spirit (as the
Apostle enjoins, vi. Ephesians. 18.) that is, address our selves to him in all
sorts of holy thoughts and devout affections; and that with great fervor and
ardent desires; with Tears and knocking our Breasts, and bended knees (as
Theophylact expounds the words) beseeching him, by the Mystery of his holy
Incarnation; by his holy Nativity, and Circumcision; by his Baptism, Fasting
and Temptation; by his Agony and Bloody Sweat, by his Cross and Passion, etc.
graciously to deliver us.

Tremble to think that you have so often prayed in the Litany, that God would
PITIFVLLY BEHOLD THE SORROWS OF YOUR HEARTS, when, perhaps, you had no SORROW
at all there: and now, if you have any, let it be testified in all the
sorrowful actions, that I have named.

And forbear Music, and Dancing, and all such like pleasures.

Let those that have been slothful, content themselves with less sleep; that
they may have more time for Prayer and Heavenly thoughts.

They that have been too Voluptuous, will do well also to lie hard; though not
upon the ground.

Finally, let there be a general Abstinence from all manner of Recreations;
unless the preservation of Health make them necessary, and then use them
privately.

Leave the Play Houses quite empty; and make the Churches full: Go to no
public shows, nor meetings; but spend the time, when you come from Church, in
setting all things right at home.

For S. Chrysostom, I remember, having heard that some of his Auditors, since
his last Sermon, had been at an Horse-race; bewails it, in his next, as the
loss of all the pains he had bestowed upon them, from the beginning of Lent.
And, among other things, tells them, it gave great scandal to Jews and to
Gentiles: who seeing those that were at Church daily, mingle themselves at
those meetings, with such as came not thither, think, says he, that all we do
is a delusion; and that we are all alike, no better than themselves. A great
deal more he says on this subject, in his Sixth and Seventh Sermon upon
Genesis; and begins his Forty first Sermon with the very same matter. In like
manner S. Basil Hom. viii. in Hexaem. p. 110.
chides those, who as soon as Sermon was done, went and played at Dice and
Tables: It being to no purpose to afflict the Body with Fasting, if the Mind
continue vain, and full of vicious Affections. And therefore S. Chrysostom
frequently beseeches his hearers, that when they came home, they would spend
their time in ruminating upon what they had been taught, and conferring one
with another about it: and thereby free themselves from all bad desires, and
flee the snares of the Devil. For when the Devil, says he, sees our Minds
solicitous about these Divine matters, and perpetually conversant in them, he
dares not approach us; but flees away before the face of a more powerful Spirit
working in us.

Now all this that has been said, does not come up to the Primitive
strictness; but it approaches something near unto it: and is a great
mortification of sensual Nature; which delights in company and merry meetings,
in Feasts and Jollity, in Sport and Plays, in Laughter and all manner of Mirth
and Pleasure. Which we ought to lay aside and deny our selves at this Season;
that we may fulfill the Apostolical Precept, iv. Jam. 9. 10. Be afflicted, and
mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy to
heaviness.

Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up.

Let the Reader cast his Eyes back to the latter end of the Seventh Chapter of
this Book: and when he has perused it again, consider with himself what he
has to do. Especially in the Great Week of Lent (as they anciently called the
Week just before Easter) which had that Name given it, says the great Man
before mentioned, because S. Chrysostom. Hom. xxx. in Genes.
in it certain great, and unspeakable benefits were bestowed upon us. There was
an end put in this Week, to the long continued War; Death was extinguished; the
Curse was taken away; the tyranny of the Devil dissolved, and he himself
disarmed; God reconciled to mankind; Heaven made enterable; Men associated with
Angels; things distant conjoined; the Partition Wall taken down; the enclosure
laid open; the God of Peace pacified all things, both in Heaven and in Earth.
And therefore we call it the Great Week; because the Lord graciously conferred
on us such a multitude of Gifts therein. For which reason many both enlarge
their Easting, and are remarkable for Watchings, and holy Pernoctations, and
Alms: Showing by their deeds the honor they have for this Week. For if our
Lord freely bestowed such great benefits upon us therein; how can we think it
decent in us, not then to make a show of all possible reverence and honor? For
even Kings themselves declare, in what admiration they have those venerable
Days; by commanding a vacation to all those who manage Civil affairs; by
shutting up the doors of the Courts of Judgment; and requiring a cessation of
all strife and contention: that men may have nothing to do, but to apply
themselves to the right performance of Spiritual offices; with the greatest
quietness, and tranquillity. And more than this, they honor these Days with
another liberality: loosing the bonds of Prisoners, and letting them go free;
that, as far as Humane power reaches, they may imitate their Lord. For as he
set us at liberty, when we were fast tied and bound with the Chains of our
Sins, and gave us the enjoyment also of innumerable good things: so we in like
manner, ought, the best we can, to be imitators of this loving kindness of the
Lord.

You see, how every one of us should show in all things, the reverence and the
honor, which is becoming those Days, which were the procurers of so many and
such good things. And therefore now, if ever, let me entreat you to expel all
Worldly thoughts; and to keep the Eye of your Mind clear, and vigilant. Now is
the time, to Fast more strictly; to make more earnest Prayers; to be more exact
and large in confession of Sins; to be diligent in all the actions of Piety; to
give Alms more liberally; to exercise the strictest Patience, Forbearance,
Meekness, and all other Virtue: That coming with these accomplishments unto
Easter Day, we may partake of the bounty of the Lord.

THE END.

