A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN At WHITEHALL, March 1. 1688/9.

BY SIMON PATRICK, D. D. Dean of Peterburgh.

Published by her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1689.

COLOSS. iii. 15. And let the Peace of God rule in your Hearts, to the which
also ye are called in one Body, and be ye thankful.
IN these words three things offer themselves to our Consideration.

First, A Duty; which is, to let the Peace of God rule in our Hearts.

Secondly, The Reason of it; which is double: 1st, We are called to it. 2die, We
are called to it in one Body.

Thirdly, A Means or Help hereunto; and be ye thankful.

I.
In the first of these also, there are three things to be considered.

1. The Grace it self here commended to us, which is Peace.

2. The Excellency of this Grace; it is the Peace of God.

3. The Authority it ought to exercise over us; let it rule in your Hearts.

For the first of these; Peace does not here signify I.
that Quiet and Satisfaction, which we have in our Minds and Consciences from a
Sense of well-doing, and of God's gracious Promise thereunto: But one part of
well-doing; from which that inward Peace and Comfort flows, viz. the Grace of
Peaceableness. Wherein we consult the Quiet of other Men, as well as our own;
and live in an undisturbed Union with them.

Which is a Grace compounded of several other Graces; principally, Humility and
Kindness, Meekness and Patience. The two first of which [ Humility and
Kindness] dispose us to avoid the giving any Offense to others: and the two
last [Meekness and Patience] dispose us to pass by the Offenses that others
give to us: By which means Peace is both made and maintained, both in private
and public, in Civil and Christian Society.

For Peace being that Grace which preserves us from variance with our
Neighbors, and clashing one against another; to the great Prejudice of all
Society; it teaches us, as I said, to avoid all those things whereby we may
offend other Men; and to keep our selves in such good temper, as not to be too
much offended at those things, whereby they give disgust to us.

These are the things which cause all Variance, and make all the Breaches that
are among Neighbors: the Offenses which are either given or taken. Which Peace
instructs us equally to shun; and is it self instructed by Humility and
Kindness to shun the giving any, and by Meekness and Patience to shun the
taking any Offenses when they are given.

It is ill-natured Pride and Insolence, which makes Men give Trouble and
Disturbance unto those who would live quietly with them: and it is too much
Passion and Impatience, which makes others unable to bear with such Provocation.

Both must be amended, before we can come into the Way of Peace. The first by
humble Thoughts of our selves, and by being kindly affectioned one to another
in brotherly Love, (as the Apostle speaks). The second, by meek putting up
Injuries, by Forbearance, and patient suffering the insolent Folly of abusive
Persons.

These two put us into the way of Peace, and will keep us in it; either by
preventing Differences, or by* composing them. For Differences there will be
(and my Text supposes as much) as long as Men's Apprehensions of things are very
various; yet they may be* without the breach of Peace. Which does not hinder
all manner of Differences, but only compose them, by an overruling hand, as
you shall hear presently, when I have given a short account of the second thing
under this Head.

Which is, the Excellence of this Grace; here called II.
the Peace of God: that is, a Divine Quality; of which God is the Author; who
works it in the Hearts of true Christians; as a part of his own Image; which he
dearly loves, and wherein he exceedingly delights.

In all these regards, it is the Peace of God: because it springs from him: and
is a Communication of his own Divine Nature; which renders us very like him,
and makes us highly beloved of him: who is the most excellent Being; and
delights in this Name, the God of Peace and Love. For in his most blessed
Nature there is no discord, nor dissension: But all the three Persons perfectly
agree, and entirely accord; being externally united in the same Will, as well
as Essence.

Unto which Pattern, our Lord and Savior tells his Apostles, God intended to
form their Minds: that they all might be one, as he and the Father are one,
Joh. xvii. 21. And the Apostles endeavored to make* the same happy accord
among all Christians; that they might all speak the same thing, and that there
might be no divisions among them; but that they might be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, 1 Cor. i. 10.

And when we are thus joined together in Peace, and Love; then are we perfect
Men in Christ Jesus; and in a singular manner beloved of God: unto whom nothing
is so grateful as this; whereby we make the nearest approaches unto his Divine
Nature.

By this small touch, I have given upon this Subject, (which I have not room to
prosecute) you cannot but see there is the greatest reason, that we should not
only admit this Heavenly Guest into our Hearts; but let them be absolutely
governed by it. Which is the third thing.

The Authority it ought to have over us: Which III.
should be so great, that it command, and have the dominion of all other
Affections that stir in our Souls. For so the Apostle says, Let the Peace of
God rule in your Hearts.

The word, in the Greek, for Rule, relates to Contests and Controversies: in
which the Peace of God ought to interpose so powerfully, as to quiet them; that
they give no disturbance to the Christian Society. So the words may literally
be translated, Let the Peace of God be Umpire in you. That is, when any
Disputes arise, about which ye cannot agree, but are in danger to fall into
Parties, and break in pieces: then refer all unto Peace, as you do your
Differences to an Arbitrator. As much as to say, let that be concluded, which
will make most for Peace. Let it determine every Controversy; moderate in all
Differences; be instead of a Judge, to decide and settle all things in dispute:
which will soon be at an end, if you do but think with your selves, what will
make most for the Peace of the Church, or the Kingdom where you live; and
resolve to let that prevail.

In order unto which, we must let it quell all those unruly Passions; which
upon such Occasions, are wont to rise up in our Hearts. Anger may begin to
boil; Pride and Ambition to swell; Self-love and Interest to make a bustle, and
bestir themselves: but then the Love of Peace and Quietness ought to get
uppermost, and bear the greatest sway in our Hearts; so as to overruled and
keep down all other Affections, which would be troubling us and others.

This is the Apostle's meaning; and thus the Holy Men of God understood him:
who were content to sacrifice any thing, but the Christian Faith, to Peace and
Quietness. Concerning which there is an excellent Discourse in the Ppistle of
Clemens (one of the Apostles immediate Successors) to the Church of Corinth.
Where he shows, that those Contentions which began in St. Paul's days, and
could not it seems be suppressed by the Apostolical Authority alone; would have
immediately been subdued and quasht, by the Peace of God, if it had been
grafted and born Rule in their Hearts.

Who is there, says he, that is of a generous Spirit among you? Who is there
that has any Bowels of Compassion? Who, that is full of Charity? Let him say,
If this Sedition be for my sake; if this Contention, these Schisms, be upon my
Account, I am gone, I depart whither you please. There is nothing that shall be
enjoined me, but I will do it. Only let the Flock of Christ be in Peace, with
the Elders that are set over it. Thus they, who live that Life which is never
to be repented of, have done, and will do. For we have known many, who to be
the Authors of Liberty to others, have thrown themselves into Bonds: and many
have left their own Cities, that there might be no Strife and Contention about
them.

And what he says Godly Men would do hereafter, according as others had done
before them, for Peace-sake, was fulfilled, as we find in the Monuments of the
Church. Where there are Examples of such Self-denial, as made them desire (to
use the words of one of them) to be thrown into the Sea, like Jonas; rather
than have the Tempests which was raised upon their account, continue to disturb
the Church. Thus I could show some have done since, in later Ages. And if we
had the same humble, the same tenderhearted, charitable, and truly generous
Spirit, we should think it the greatest Glory to submit all our particular
Concerns to the Government of Peace; and not let them prevail to the making any
public Disturbance, no nor private Quarrels with our Neighbors.

Unto which we are now so prone, that we fall out, even about a trifling
Opinion: wherein we differ one from another. The reason is, because we are too
full of our selves, and too void of Charity and the Peace of God: Which if it
did possess our Hearts, we should not be so much wedded as we are to our own
Opinions; much less indulge our Passions; but resign them all to be ruled and
ordered by this Grace, which teaches us to be of a yielding Spirit, as far as
Piety will permit.

Nay, if our Passion, and our Pride were kept under, we should not be impatient
to be contradicted: nor think our selves bound to engage in the Defense of
every thing that we judge to be true; nor to rise up against every thing that we
judge to be false: But endure without disturbance, the contrary Opinions of
others, which may seem untrue to us; if they do no great hurt to the World.

Were we possessed with this desire alone, to make others better, we should not
trouble our selves about every Error and Mistake; if the Remedy will prove
worse than the Disease: that is, breed Quarrels, and break the Peace, by
endless Disputes and Jarrings about it. Our blessed Savior himself, the Prince
of Peace, did not undertake to free Men from every Error whatsoever: but those
only, which concerned the means of their Salvation.

And in such matters, when we are constrained to declare our Dissent from
others, who are, we apprehend, in dangerous Errors; the Peace of God teaches us
to do it in such sweet and gentle manner, that they may see we aim only at
their good: And they may not by our rough treating them, take occasion of
disgust, not only unto us, but to the Truth also which we defend. For we
oftentimes give distaste to others, and make them irreconcilable; not so much
by our contrary Opinion, as by a fierce, insolent, presumptious, and disdainful
way of proposing our own Opinion, and opposing theirs.

But it is far worse, when we come to terms of Contempt and Reproach: which are
commonly observed to make such Breaches, as are never to be repaired.

The Peace of God teaches us quite another Lesson; and constrains us to
compassionate the Weaknesses of our Brethren; to treat them with Tenderness, as
well as Humanity; and when they are peevish, and passionate, and prone to
quarrel, even then to bear with them, and meekly reduce them to a better Temper.

For the Weaknesses of our Brethren, make them Objects of our Pity, not of our
Anger. And they are never more to be pitied, than when they cannot be cured, by
our charitable Compassion, and Forbearance of them. Unto which we shall be the
more inclined, if we consider that we are Men also, and may possibly fall into
the same Error, and commit the same Faults: and then what we tolerate in them,
it will be their turn to bear withal in us. But especially if we consider, that
we are Christians, who lie under this Law: Bear ye one another Bardens, and so
fulfill the Law of Christ; Gal. vi. 2. Which Law of Charity, and Peace being
not fulfilled, is the cause of all the Vexatious Disturbances that are in the
World.

We do not mind this Christian Obligation, to bear one another Burdens. We
have other Inclinations, than to obey the Will of our blessed Lord. We seek our
selves, our own Glory, our own Pleasure, our own Interest and Satisfaction
in every thing; and are not satisfied with this, that God is glorified, our
Savior honored, Piety promoted, the Church edified; by our Patience, by our
Peaceableness, by our Forbearance one of another; and by our studying the good
of our Neighbors as the greatest Contentment to our selves.

Thus I have explained the first part of my Text, the Duty: which I have
pressed the more earnestly, because Strife and Contention, will spoil all the
Fastings and Humilitations of this season: nay, utterly defeat our very Prayers
and Supplications. Which then will obtain of the God of all Mercy, that
perfect Remission and Forgiveness, which we beg of him: when they dispose us
to be merciful, as our Heavenly Father is merciful; to be kind one to another
(as the Apostle speaks Ephesians. v. 32.) tenderhearted, forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us.

Come we now to the second part, which is the Reason, whereby the Apostle
urges this Duty.

II.
And that is double, as you heard: First, we are called to it. Secondly, we
are called to it, in one Body.

For the first of these, it suggests to us three Obligations; I.
whereby we are bound to be peaceable. First, by the preaching of the Gospel
to us. Secondly, by the Special Favor, which God has done us therein.
Thirdly, by the high Honor he has also conferred upon us, in making us
partakers of his Heavenly Calling.

1. First, I say, Calling is a word which relates to the preaching of the
Gospel, by which we were called unto Belief of the Truth (2 Thessalonians. ii. 13,
14.) and by that Truth not only taught, but required, to be at Peace among our
selves, (1 Thessalonians. v. 13.) and to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace (Ephesians. iv. 3.) Nay, if it be possible, as much as lies in us, to live
peaceably with all Men (Romans xii. 18.) or, if they refuse it, yet to follow
Peace with all Men, (Heb. xii. 14.) to seek Peace and ensue it, (1 Pet. iii.
11.)

Finally, brethren, (as St. Paul writes, 2 Cor. xiii. 11.) be perfect, (i. e.
complete Christians) be of good comfort (or receive this Word of Exhortation),
be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you;
that is, as we desire and hope for, the Favor and Love of God, and for all the
blessed Effects and Fruits thereof, we are bound to live in peace. For he is
the God of peace and love: and his Son is the Prince of peace; who left Peace
with his Church, as his last Legacy when he left the World: Peace I leave with
you, my peace I give unto you, John XIV. 27. And his Gospel is the Gospel of
peace, the word of reconciliation; which instructs us in that Heavenly Wisdom,
( Jam. III. 17.) which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated; or, easily persuaded, unto those things which make for peace, though
therein we deny our own Will, and particular Interest.

This is the Genius of that Religion, unto which we are called by the preaching
of Christ's Gospel.

2. And it was the greatest favor and grace that Heaven could bestow upon us,
to communicate unto us the knowledge of his Will, and to make us of this
heavenly Spirit; for so the word Calling is sometimes used in Scripture; for
the free Grace and Bounty of God, in opposition to any work of ours, whereby we
could deserve it; as in Romans IX. 11. That the purpose of God might stand, not
of works, but of him that called: that is, mercifully dispensed the benefit,
according to his own Free Will and good Pleasure.

We do not understand our own happiness, nor the great Grace of God to us, if
we do not think our selves highly obliged to him, in commanding and disposing
us by the Gospel of his Grace, to be peaceably minded; that is, to be, as I
said, of an Heavenly Spirit: For what other Notion can we frame of the
Happiness of those above, but that they live in perfect love of God, and of one
another, without any discord or contention; which would disturb their Blessed
Repose? For having all the very same End and Design, the very same Affections
and Desires, which are to do Honor to God, and to promote one another good;
there can be no rupture, nor so much as quarreling or dissension among them;
which arise from men's private desires and aims, and the cross Interests which
they pursue in this present world.

And therefore the more perfectly we divest our Minds of all selfishness, and
bend our thoughts to study the common good; the nearer we shall approach to
their Blessed State; and the fitter we shall be for the Company of happy Souls
and Spirits, by such a sweet Concord and Agreement here, as reigns in the
Peaceable Society of Heavenly Minds in the other World.

And on the contrary, while we live in Wrath and Bitterness, in Pride and
Disdain one of another; and thereby are engaged in perpetual Contests, and
quarrelsome Differences, pursuing one another with a deadly hatred; we are of
the same Nature and Disposition with the Infernal Ghosts, the Devil and his
Angels: And if we go out of the World in this wretched Temper of Mind (which
cannot be changed in a moment) we fall unavoidably into their troublesome
Company; who could not be quiet even in Heaven it self, but there raised such a
Faction and Disturbance, that they were thrust down from that Blessed Place,
and condemned to keep one another company in endless Misery and Despair.

And one great part of their Misery, we all apprehend, is, That they are ever
restless and unquiet, unalterably bent to trouble and torment themselves, by
contriving how to make disturbance among others.

Which shows what a kindness our Blessed Savior has done us, in calling us
unto Peace; and thereby redeeming us from the Society of those rancorous
Spirits; unto whom we are so strongly linkt, while we are of a turbulent and
untractable Spirit, that we must necessarily fall into their Company, when we
depart from hence; if we be not cured of this Disease, and have our Natures
altered into the peaceable Mind that was in Christ Jesus.

3. By which we understand, Thirdly, the Honor also our Lord has done us, in
calling us to be peaceable; for this the word Calling implies, in Romans XI. 29.
The gifts and calling of God, are without Repentance. Where Calling is the
great Preferment God designed for Abraham's Family, and to which accordingly he
advanced them; wherein he intended immutably to have continued them, if they
had believed on him, as Abraham did.

And indeed we are called to a very high Dignity, by being called unto Peace;
for it intitles us to the Honor of being the Children of the Most High. So our
Savior instructs us in his Sermon upon the Mount, Matt. V. 9. Blessed are the
peacemakers; for they shall be called the children of God.

Peacemakers, are peaceable minded men. For as to make a lie, in Scripture
Language, is to be given to Lying, and to make a practice of it: So to make
peace, is to have a strong constant inclination to it; and to bend that way,
upon all occasions. Which is a Divine disposition, and makes us like to God: So
like him, that we may thereby be known to be his offspring; who are endued
with his most excellent Nature, and act by his Spirit; and therefore shall be
partakers of his blessedness.

This is the sum of the first part of the Reason: We do not answer the gracious
design of the Gospel, and the great kindness and honor Christ has done us, if
we do not let the peace of God Rule in our hearts; unto which we are called in
one body.

II. That Is the second part of it; We are therefore called unto peace, because
we are called to be one body; of which Christ is the Head.

When we were made Christians, we were not brought into that state, to live
separately and distinctly, every one of us by our selves; as our particular
Fancies and Affections shall incline us: But to be knit together in one
Christian Society; every Part of which is to seek his own good, interest and
safety, by preserving the Whole in peace and quietness, without any rupture in
the Body of Christ. For by that the Body is destroyed; as by union of the
Members it is maintained and preserved.

There is nothing plainer, than that no Society can subsist, unless they who
belong to it, as Members of it, live peaceably together; as the Members of the
Natural Body do: which are made to love, and have a care one of another, and
keep all together, without any division; for that certainly tends to its
dissolution. But above all others, the Christian Body, or Society, is disposed
and bound hereunto: by its very Constitution; and by various Obligations.

As for its Constitution; It is founded upon the Law of love, and kindness, and
mutual care of each other: By which our Savior has told us, all his Disciples
are to be known, as by their very Badge and proper Character.

And as for their Obligation; St. Paul reckons up a great number of things,
wherein we are united; and thereby tied to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, Ephesians. IV. 5, 6. There is one Body, That Is the first and general
obligation: And what can be more unnatural, than for the Members of the same
Body, to quarrel and fall out, and tear one another in pieces? And one spirit
(that is the second) the Spirit of Love and Truth, which suggests the same
peaceable inclinations to every one, that it does to any one; and what more
unchristian than to throw off the Government of this one Heavenly Guide, and to
live as if we were severally acted by so many Infernal Furies?

Even as we are called in one hope of our calling, (that is the third) we must
all be Friends in Heaven, if we ever meet there; Why do we bite then, and
devour one another in the way thither?

One Lord, (that is the next) who redeemed us all, at the same rate of his own
most precious Blood: And is it agreeable to this relation, for the Servants of
the same Master to make disturbance, nay, confusion in his Family? Is this,
think you, for his Service? Or can it turn to our good account, when he reckons
with us?

One Faith, delivered to us by his Apostles; How come we to fall out about
that, which teaches us to agree? For faith works by love, as the Apostle
speaks, Gal. V. 6.

One Baptism, whereby we are received into Christ's Family, upon the same terms
and conditions. We are marked with the same Cognizance (as an excellent Writer
of our own glosses upon it Bp. Bramhall's Answer to S. W. p. 5^. Edit. 1.
) we use the same word, we march under the same banner; How come we to mistake
one another for Enemies?

Lastly, There is one God and Father of all, who is above all, by his most
excellent Nature; and through all, by his Providence and Care of the whole
World, especially of every Member of the Church; and in all, by the operations
of his Grace in our hearts. For Christians then to contend, and quarrel, and
fight, What is it, but to divide this one God, to commit him against himself,
to disown his Government, to cross his Motions, to refuse to follow the conduct
of his Graces, which works in us; and by abandoning our selves unto our own
passions, to throw our selves out of his Fatherly care of us, and Favor
toward us; and to expose our selves to all the sin and all the mischief, unto
which the malice of the Evil Spirit can hurry us? Behold here, not one or two
alone, but seven Bands of Unity and Peace among Christians: whereby they are
tied to such mutual care of each others welfare; that they cannot vex, much
less destroy one another, unless they forget all these Obligations, and break
these Bands in sunder.

Nay, there is not a Leaf in the whole Book of God (wherein we read these
things) but it teaches us this blessed accord. The very Body of the holy
Scriptures, we might easily see if we did observe, from the one end of them to
the other, is a most lively Image and Type of this unity of the spirit in the
bond of Peace, which the Apostle commends unto us in this place. For though the
Writers of them lived in diverse Ages, in distant places, and were of different
tempers; yet they all most admirably agree together, having the very same
relish in their writings; carrying on the same design, and aiming at the self
same end; without the least ground for suspicion, that they had any private
respect to themselves.

Let us but remember then, that we have so many ties upon us, and endeavor to
have a feeling of them; and then, as the consideration that we are Members of
the same civil Society, moves us to be at peace one with another in the State,
which cannot otherways subsist, but must be dissolved: So the serious
consideration that we are Members of the same Sacred Body of Christ, linkt
together by so many strong ligaments, will much more move us, to study the
Peace of his Church; which cannot be preserved, but by a firm Union of those
parts of which it consists, and is made up.

To end this, let it be considered that the peace of God, here mentioned, is a
branch of Charity; as appears by the foregoing words, v. 14. And above all
these things, put on Charity, which is the bond of perfectness. And let the
peace of God rule in your hearts, etc. Which tell us, that peace is the natural
effect and product, of a lively and sincere Love in the Heart: Especially of
such a love, as is between the Members of the same Body.

1. For we naturally fear to do any harm to those we love: And it is from the
injuries we do one another, of several sorts, that abundance of quarrels and
contentions arise among us.

2. But suppose any hurt be done, the affection we have to those whom we dearly
love, disposes to look upon all the faults we commit against them, as great;
and all that they commit against us, as small. Which stops up the very source
of quarrels: which, for the most part, spring from those false Ideas, which
make all things that concern our selves look very bigg; and those that concern
other men seem very little.

3. Nay, we are so far from being disposed to hurt those we love, that we
cannot but perceive an inclination we have to serve and succor them, the best
we are able. Which it is not possible for us to do, unless we be at peace with
them. For Peace is the very gate, by which we enter into their Hearts; which is
barred against us, when men have an aversion for us, and are upon terms of
Enmity or opposition to us. Therefore if we be bound to help, we are bound to
be at peace, one with another. And all that have any sense of Humanity, cannot
but confess that we are made by God to be helpful one to another: which
Christianity cannot but make us more sensibly acknowledge. Because of the
ardent love, which, above all things, it commends to us; and is no where so
strong, as between Members of the same Body; especially of such a Body as
theirs, which has Christ for its Head, and the Spirit of God for its Soul and
Life. Which inclines them and powerfully moves them, to hold all together in
love and peace: as the only means of preserving and edifying the Body of
Christ, and also of perfecting it for the happy Rest of the other World.

Thus I have given a brief account of the Reasons for this duty. Which
sufficiently commends it self to us, in that it is the peace of God: but the
Apostle presses it from this consideration also, that we are called to it in
one body.

III.
I proceed now to the last part of my Text, the means or help (as I understand
it) which the Apostle prescribes, for the introducing, and increasing the peace
of God; and giving it the rule over our hearts: which is contained in these
Words; And be ye thankful.

We are very apt, as you have heard, to be disgusted at many things, which are
disagreeable to us: from whence arises, much disquiet, discontent, and
sometimes quarrels with those, who give us such distaste. But if we would spend
that time, in recounting Gods mercies to us, and giving him our solemn thanks
for them, which we spend in complaining, in finding fault one with another, and
aggravating every thing which displeases us; we should be perfectly cured of
those distempers; and ashamed to make such a bustle and stir, as we are wont
to do, about such small things, as now disquiet us.

Thankfulness, we all agree, is a Christian Duty, as much as any other.

And not only a Duty enjoined us by God, but to which we are inclined by
Nature; if our Hearts be touched with the least sense of his Divine Benefits.

And that it is very pleasant and delightful, as all natural Motions are, every
one may feel, who pleases to make a trial.

And no less profitable and beneficial, we must needs acknowledge; because he
invites a new Benefit, who most gratefully acknowledges the old.

And lastly, (to omit the rest) we cannot but confess, that nothing more
becomes us, than Thankfulness; because we have nothing originally of our
selves, but all purely from God. Which makes it the most decent thing in the
World, to be paying him our perpetual acknowledgments.

Or if there should be any one so perverse, as not to be sensible of this, he
cannot but yield, that it is far more decent and becoming, than perpetual
complaints and discontents, brawlings and scoldings one with another, about
every petty difference.

Far more agreeable, I am sure, to the Christian Spirit (if we know what that
is) more beseeming those who lie under infinite Obligations to God our Savior,
which challenge our highest and incessant Praises; than it is to murmur and
repine, to find faults and pick quarrels, to contend and strive; which end too
often in fighting and destroying one another.

We may well be ashamed then, and confounded at our folly and disingenuity, if
we do not live in a sincere practice of this Duty: Which, if we do, will be an
effectual means to suppress all such unseemly behavior as that
abovementioned; because it strikes at the very root of all Discontent, and
Wrath, and Pride, and such like evil Affections, which give disturbance unto
us, and unto others.

We cannot easily be discontented about any thing, when we set our selves
seriously to consider, how many Blessings, both temporal and spiritual, past,
present and to come, we stand indebted for to the Divine Bounty; and
accordingly offer to him the Sacrifice of Praise continually, giveing Thanks
unto his Name.

We shall soon suppress Anger and Rage at those that offend us, when we
remember with due thankfulness, as we ought to do perpetually, how often we have
provoked God; and have been mercifully forborne, and forgiven by his patient and
long-suffering goodness toward us.

The swellings of Pride will presently go down, when Thankfulness puts us in
mind, that we are nothing, nor have any thing of our own; but depend wholly
upon God: Who can soon humble us, and lay us low, if we be forgetful of his
bounty to us.

All harshness and severity will be abated, by the thoughts of God's lenity,
compassion and kind dealing with us: there will be no room for fretting Envy,
to trouble us, or molest others; but it will be immediately thrust out of
doors, when this Thought comes into our Mind, and fills our Heart with devout
Affections to God: That we are in a far better condition than we deserve; and,
if we be ungrateful, may fear to be in a worse.

In short, All those Graces from whence (I observed in the beginning) the Peace
of God springs, are manifestly maintained and nourished by continual
thankfulness to God for all his Benefits. In which if we exercise our selves,
it will give the Peace of God the government of us; by making us humble and
courteous, mild and gentle, kind and merciful, meek and patient; which are the
natural qualities of a truly thankful Christian.

Let us make this then our constant employment and our delight; and look upon a
thankful Heart, Hom. 1. ad Pop. Antioch.
as a great Treasure (to use the words of St. Chrysostom) inestimable Riches,
a Good of which none can rob us, Armor of Defense against all Temptations.

I.
And first, as we are Men who live together in the same neighborhood, let us
be thankful to God for all the good we receive one by another; and then we
shall the easier pass by any evil that is done us; because it is small and
inconsiderable, in comparison with the good we do, or may receive, by our
neighbourly living together in one Society, Family, Parish or City.

There is not the meanest Man among us, who does not some way or other serve
the greatest: God having so made this World, that we should be helpful one to
another in our several ranks and conditions; nay, that one sort of Men should
not be able comfortably to subsist, without the service of the rest.

Which if we did consider, we should perceive so many and great benefits we
reap thereby, that it would make us confess we have great reason to be thankful
to the Creator and wise Disposer of all things: And that Thankfulness would
moderate all the Disgusts we take one at another, which disturb our private
peace and quietness.

Nay the Benefits we receive by some Men are so very considerable; that if we
were not extremely ungrateful, we could not be so apt as we are, to find fault
with every thing we do not like in them: But for the sake of the greater good
they do us, should wink at, or rather not mind, the smaller faults, we see or
fancy in them. With which we are wont to be so distasted, as to forget all the
Excellent Qualities they are endowed withal, and the great service they do to
all mankind.

II.
But if we enlarged our thoughts beyond these bounds, and considered our selves
as Members of the same Kingdom, we should find so many obligations to be
thankful to God for the invaluable Blessings of Order and Government; that it
would mightily appease that Heat and Violence which is very troublesome to us
and others; when our Passions begin to raise a commotion, and to make us
displeased with the present settlement.

For it is by the Protection and Favor of the public Government, that we
eat, and drink, and sleep, and do all other things, in safety.

Which thought alone is sufficient to quiet us, when our Spirits begin to fret
and be tumultuous: That is, to quarrel with our Happiness.

III.
But let us still further make our selves sensible, of the far Nobler Benefits
which we enjoy, by being Christians, and be truly thankful to God for them;
more particularly for his great Grace, in calling us to be one body in Christ;
and thereby calling us unto Peace one with another, and to Peace with him the
God of Peace (who will be with us, as I have said, while we continue perfectly
joined together in the same Mind and Spirit) and then, we shall not have the
heart to give the least disturbance unto this Blessed Society, of the Church of
God: But with united Affection, study to preserve it, and to promote the Honor
of it, by the most ardent Love and kindness, tenderness and compassion one
toward another; especially in that part of it where we live.

Read the pathetical Exhortation of the Apostle in the Verses foregoing, upon
which my Text depends; and it will be impossible not to have your heart
affected with it, if you attend unto it, and ponder every Word. Put on
therefore (as the Elect of God, Holy and Beloved) bowels of Mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering; forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, if any Man have a quarrel against any: Even as Christ
forgave you, so also do ye. And above all these things put on Charity, etc.

What if you did read these Verses deliberately every Morning, before you went
about any other business? It would not take up much of your time, nor cost you
much pains; unless it be in laying them to heart, and laying them up in your
Hearts. But whatsoever Labor you bestow in that, it will be abundantly
recompensed in the Benefit, you and others will receive by it: if this small
portion of the Word of Christ, dwell in you richly (as it follows immediately
after my Text) and dispose you to continue in this Heavenly Temper all the day
long.

And how can you choose but be so disposed, if you consider how much you are
bound to God for his inestimable benefits bestowed upon you: in making you his
Elect, Holy and Beloved. Ponder these Three Words seriously, and look upon your
selves as Elect of God, that is, chosen unto Salvation, through Sanctification
of the Spirit and Belief of the Truth (as he speaks 2 These. 11. 13.) Holy, that
is, separated from the profane World, to be his devoted Servants: Beloved, that
is made partakers of the greatest kindness Heaven could do us, in sending his
Son to save us: And then you will not be able to reject the Exhortation which
speaks unto you as unto Children V. Ephesians 1, 2. Be ye therefore followers of
God, as dear Children; and walk in Love, as Christ also has loved us, and has
given himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling
savor.

IV.
Especially when we remember that we are not bare Christians but Reformed
Christians: whose Principles lead to Unity and Peace, more than the Principles
of any other Christians whatsoever.

For the very Basis of the Reformed Religion is this, that all necessary Truths
are not only contained in the Holy Scriptures; but evidently and plainly set
down there. Which single Truth being agreed; it is manifest there must needs be
an Unity of opinions among us, in all things necessary.

And as for other things which are not evident in the Holy Scriptures, and
therefore are not necessary; what should hinder, but that notwithstanding any
different Opinions about them, there may be among us an Unity of Affection.
Unto which the Holy Scriptures direct and press us, as the most necessary duty;
and as the greatest happiness, of which this World is capable.

For there is nothing the Gospel urges so much, as kindness, forbearance,
tender compassion one of another: Such kindness, as making us look upon one
another as Brethren, and Fellow Members, will not let us break all the bonds of
Friendship, that are between us.

For why should there be any breach among those, who are agreed in this plain
principle? That there being Unity of Opinion among them in all things
Necessary; in things not necessary, Unity of Opinion is not necessary, but only
Unity of Affection Which will make us study, and embrace the means of our
Common Preservation; by mutual condescension to such terms of Agreement, as
will establish a firm and undisturbed peace among us.

In which, if there should happen any breach, the same Spirit of love and
goodness will dispose us immediately to make it up; by not adhereing too flifly
to our own private opinions; much less to any worldly interest: which must be
laid aside by all peaceable-minded men; that is, by all good Christians.

Who ought not to engage in fierce oppositions, much less in confident
censuring and condemning one another; but with all humility modesty, and
calmness endeavor each others information: or, if that cannot be obtained
patiently to bear with one another infirmities* according to the forenamed
golden* Rule of St. Paul, VI. Gal. 2. Bear ye one another burdens, and so
fulfill the Law of Christ.

The Law of Christ, that is, his peculiar Law, is the Law of Love: which he
calls a new Commanament, XIII. Joh. 34. and his Commandment, XV. Joh. 12. This
is my Commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you. Which we then
fulfill, or perfectly observe; when it makes us bear one another burdens, that
is, offenses; whether they be infirmities or sins.

For as long as there are any hopes of amendment, we ought (as the Apostle
there teaches in the Verse foregoing) if any man be overtaken with a fault, to
restore such a one with the Spirit of meekness; considering our selves, lest we
also be tempted. That is, we must tenderly admonish such offenders, study in
the kindest and softest manner to reclaim them: which is no small labor and
trouble indeed; but thereby we in the properest sense take part of their burden
upon our selves, whilst we seek, by such charitable means to rid them of it.

V.
And now if in the last place, we make our selves sensible, that we are such
Reformed Christians, as have been lately saved and delivered in a wonderful
manner, from the hands of those that designed our destruction; it will raise
our thankfulness to such a height, that it will surmount all those clouds,
which overcast our joy in God, and in his Salvation.

For what a blessing is it, that we have the liberties of our Holy Religion;
and meet here together in peace and quietness, without the least apprehension
of such dangers, as not long ago hung over us? If we had been deprived of it,
should we not have accounted, the loss to be invaluable? What is the matter
then, that we do not set the greatest price, upon the enjoyment? Is it Nothing
to be delivered from those fears, wherewith we were lately surrounded? what
should we think if God should throw us back again into them? But there is a
great deal more to be thankful for; which is the hopes we have that this
blessed Liberty will be continued and secured to us, and to our Posterity after
us. Which will derive a Blessing likewise upon all other Protestant Churches
abroad: Whose safety lies in our preservation.

Nay, this one single reflection, that we have had the happiness to behold a
Protestant King and Queen, here worshipping God together in this place (a
sight, which if it has been ever seen in England, yet not these Seventy years)
is enough to transport us with such joy, as should make us quite forget all our
differences and discontents: And let us think of nothing else; but what we
shall render to the Lord for such benefits, as he has bestowed upon us.

For which we can never thank him enough; and therefore let us thank him
continually.

Evening, and Morning, and Noon, let us give our solemn thanks unto him. Yea,

Let us bless the Lord at all times, let his praise be ever in our mouths.

When we sit in our house (as Moses speaks in another case) when we walk by the
way, when we lie down, and when we rise up; let us be talking of all his
wondrous works: saying with the Psalmist,

Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? Who can show forth all his praise?

Thy righteousness (or goodness.) O God, is very high, who have done great
things: O God, who is like unto thee?

Thou art great and do wondrous things: Thou art God alone.

I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with my whole heart: I will Glorify thy
Name for evermore.

For great is thy Mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my Soul from the
lowest Hell (i. e. the extremest Dangers)

Therefore shall my Tongue speak of thy Righteousness, and of thy Praise all
the day long.

I will Praise the Lord with my whole heart; secretly among the faithful, and
in the Congregation.

For the Works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have Pleasure
therein.

His Work is Honorable and Glorious: And his Righteousness endures for ever,

Now the God of all Grace grant unto every Soul of us, such truly thankful
hearts, that we may be always praising him and speaking good of his Name: And
then the Peace of God will Rule and Govern us; unto which we are called in one
Body, by Christ Jesus. To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be Eternal
Praises.

Amen.
FINIS.

