AN ANSWER TO Vox Cleri, etc. EXAMINING The REASONS against making any
Alterations and Abatements, In order to A Comprehension, AND Showing the
EXPEDIENCY thereof.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill, 1690.

AN ANSWER TO Vox Cleri, etc.

AN ANSWER TO Vox Cleri, etc.
THE Author of Vox Cleri writes as if he were Clerk or Secretary to the
Convocation, and so delivered the sense of that whole venerable Assembly; for
why else does he give such a Title to his Book, to amuse the World, and bring a
scandal upon the Clergy, as if they were generally of his mind: and yet he
tells us that nothing has been proposed to them: so that they have not yet
declared their minds, nor had an opportunity to do so: and, I think, he has
done them a great deal of injury, first, to suppose, and then, tell all the
World, that they are against Alterations and Abatements in some indifferent
matters for the sake of that Peace and Union which is the desire, and should be
the endeavor, of every good man.

I shall be very unwilling to believe so ill of so many wise and worthy men,
that they are against such a Design, so much for the honor of God, the good of
Religion in general, the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Interest of the Church
of England.

I cannot think that any man in cool and sober thoughts can be against it,
unless he be transported with some fit of anger, or which is as outrageous, of
eloquence; and then such a rash saying as, Nolumus mutare leges Angliae, may
come out without reason, and ought to be forgiven among friends: but however
the words chimed in a Speech to the Tune of Christ-church-bells, yet they were
as senseless and impertinent as this Author's quotation out of Solomon on the
Banner of his Book, Meddle not with them that are given to change; which would
have served the Quaker as well against changing his old clothes as the design
and business they are brought for: but if there had been no changes since
Solomon's time, nor since the Barons, in the Laws of England, we had been in a
very primitive, but not quite so good a state as at present.

But this Gentleman seems to be under some great fear as well as anger, as if
he were to be executed at the will of the rabble: What he has done I cannot
tell, but he seems for some reason or other to be afraid to go home; he
complains, he has not the privilege of other Malefactors, which all Law and
Equity gives them of making a defense, especially when their reputation, their
livelyhoods, and even their lives are concerned; so that he seems to be under
some dread and terror that has scared him, not out of his lively hood or his
life, I hope, but of something else, I fear, that makes him write as he does;
for he contradicts himself almost in the same line, and owns that several times
in a good mood which he writes all along against.

He and the Clergy in his Neighborhood are very inclinable, he says, to part
with several Ceremonies, and to submit to many Alterations for the Peace of the
Church and Satisfaction of sober Dissenters p. 1.
. Yet he musters up all the reasons he can against this; and his whole Book is
writ against it.

The end of the Commission is, he says, to take away all occasions of
difference for the future, as well as reconciling all their Majesty's subjects
at present. A Blessing! this to be seriously endeavored by all persons, but
rather to be hoped for than expected p. 17.
. If to be seriously endeavored by all persons, why does he all he can against
any such endeavors?

In another place p. 26.
I do here protest that were it not that the Dissenters have given us an
Assurance that though these and many other alterations should be made, it would
give them no satisfaction, nor bring them into our Communion, I would use all
the interest I have for such Alterations; and for that end also part with many
other Ceremonies. I cannot believe the Dissenters have given him any such
assurance, if they have, I hope he knows them better than to trust them; but
how is this reconcilable with what he so often harps upon? that, if they did
come in, it would make a worse schism in the Church, and so be more mischievous
than that out of it.

It cannot be a crime, says he very angrily, not to do that which is both
against the Law of the Land and the dictates of their own Consciences: by the
bye, I would fain know where that Law of the Land or those dictates of
Conscience are to be found that forbid a Convocation to make Alterations?

But in the same line he goes on, and says, It is not a crime for a man not to
do what none as yet has required of him to do? how does he then know that
it is both against the Law of the Land and the dictates of their own Consciences?

Something therefore seems to have injured this Gentleman's memory and reason,
and his imagination seems to be disturbed with fears of the Rabble, or
somebody's having some strange design upon him for being against Alterations;
and therefore he draws in the dark at all adventures, and stands upon his
guard, and throws about him, it being a thing natural, he tells us, for a man
to defend himself, there being no living creature so void of sense as not to
avoid another that attempts to destroy him, and every worm will turn upon him
that will tread on it; and if an innocent person chance to injure another that
injuriously assaults him, he is always held guiltless, as having done it Se
defendendo.

Why really I pity this Gentleman's case, if it be thus with him, for one would
think he were in some great pain and peril, but we have reason to be angry with
those that have thus assrighted him, for otherwise we had had a better Book,
or, which had been as well, none at all.

That terrible word Latitudinarian p. 6.
has scared him I doubt, and it is almost as dreadful as Vercingentorix; and
some timorous old men can hardly speak or hear it without trembling; they
imagine some Monster by it, of a mighty swallow and wide capacity, having both
a Church and a Conventicle, if not a Pope in its belly, tearing and devouring
the Ceremonies, mangling and altering the Liturgy, snarling and biting at
Episcopacy, and gaping for the Preferments which other men have signally
deserved, and are legally possessed of: Now such a creature as this may be in
some void space of a Map, or of an old Man's head, but no where else that I
know of. But I suppose this new Sect or Heresy are for making Alterations, and
therefore our Author is so angry with it, and resolved to confute it; and
since he and his Neighbors in the Country are so greatly pleased with Dr.
Jane's being chosen Prolocutor p. 1.
perhaps this may bring him to himself and put him into a good humor: and I
dare say, this Doctor's worthy Competitour was so little concerned, that rather
than spoil this, he would give it up, and let them have the comfort of
believing the other chose by a great and even double Majority, however false
that was, though it be put into the Acts of this learned Synod collected by our
Author, in order I suppose to be joined with the next Edition of the Councils,
where may be some mistakes, and some actions too as great as in this, though
scarce in any before, the Presbyters did so bravely hold their own, and stand
it out against their Bishops; so that I reckon the point is already gained
which he blames one of the Letters for requesting, That Presbytery may be
restored to its ancient privilege, and permitted to share in all Acts belonging
to their station p. 33.
. But I am afraid some of those Latitudinarian or Smectymnuan Presbyters that
are still among us, but are not of us p. 34.
, have not so much respect and reverence for their Bishops as they ought to
have.

I forbear, says our Author, to call Names Ibid.
, after he had used the most invidious ones he could think of; and I suppose we
had had Janites and Tillotsonians, but that the one sounded very little and
pitifully, and the other would make up as terrible a word almost as that of
Latitudinarians; but to oblige him for ever, and to make him amends for all
that is in this Paper, let the immortal name of Longitudinarians hereafter
belong to them, for about twenty reasons more than can be given for the other;
I mean to those who are for no Alterations or Abatements for the sake of Peace
and Reconciliation.

I own this is a matter of Prudence, and the good or evil of it depends upon
circumstances, so that wise and good men may have different apprehensions about
it and may not be all of the same mind, but our Author's Reasons do no way
satisfy me that this is not fit to be done, nor does he answer, to my
thinking, what others have offered for it.

I intend to argue the Point plainly and briefly with him, and then to prevent
all Heretical pravity of a long name, Omnia Ecclesiae Judicio submitto.

First then, Those wise men out of the West, his Neighbors in the Country, p.
2.
think it very reasonable that such as are aggrieved should make their
application to the Convocation; and do they think this will do? why really
yes, being in good humor themselves, and the Convocation being so too, which
is always to be supposed, our Author doubts not that such of the Dissenters as
will be satisfied with what in reason and conscience may be granted, that they
would be gratified, and a good agreement made, for all agree, according to our
Subscriptions, that such Ceremonies as concern Discipline and Order, may upon
just causes be altered and changed; as good natured as can be! surely then it is
but mere Complement whether the Dissenters should first ask or the Church give
without asking; and to me now it looks better and more for the Churches honor
and authority that That should give terms to the Dissenters rather than the
Dissenters give or propose terms to the Church. Our Author too is much of the
same mind in this, and I believe I shall show him that he is more of my mind in
most things than he knows or thinks he is; for Is it necessary, says he in
another place, that a Church which has authority to judge for it self, what is
decent and orderly, should subject her self to the judgment of her Members to
determine for her or themselves, p. ^.
what is decent and expedient and what is not: and a little before that, Is it
necessary that a Parent should yield to a disobedient Child upon his own
unreasonable terms? No rather let the Parent wisely and by fair means bring the
stubborn Child off from its disobedience if it be possible, without the Child's
offering terms whether reasonable or unreasonable.

I believe our Author and his Country Neighbors would not have took it so
well of the King, nor have been so quick and forward in addressing to him as
some others were, had he called an Assembly of Dissenters to treat with the
Convocation and have proposed terms to it; besides, what if the Church be wiser
than the Dissenters, and can better judge what Concessions are sit for them
than they themselves? It seems more proper for Governors to prescribe to the
governed than the contrary; the Preface to the Common Prayer says, It is but
reasonable that on weighty and important considerations, according to the
exigency of times and occasions, such Changes and Alterations may be made as to
those that are in places of Authority should seem necessary or expedient. This
our Author quotes too on this head, but does not mind it as he ought. If he
considers it a little better, he will plainly discern that the Church thinks it
reasonable to make Alterations sometimes as she thinks sit, whether the
Dissenters propose or agree in them or not, and it is well if the whole of this
do not seem to him a kind of Latitudinarian Principle crept into the Church,
which ought to be altered, though nothing else.

But 2. They think it reasonable that the end should be considered, before the
means be resolved on. This is very sage and grave, and becoming their Country
wisdom, which does nothing in vain, never brews Ale without somebody to drink
it, nor never sets a Hen but to breed Chickens; according to that Logical Axiom
which they have not quite forgot, Finis primum in Intellectu. I suppose they mean
here what they tell us in other places, to what purpose will it be to make
Alterations for the sake of Dissenters, when it will signify nothing? Cui
bono? to take the strength of it in a dram of Latin; p. 5.
to what end should any Alterations be made, when they themselves have so
plainly declared that they will not be satisfied? for they were not so by the
600 Alterations in 1661, nor by the Proposals of D. Stilling-sleet: and Mr.
Baxter, and the Healing Attempt propose strange things, so that Is it necessary
we should part with any thing to them whom we have reason to suspect that they
will not leave craving till they have all? And, We think we have a moral
assurance, that whatever Concessions the Convocation shall make with safety to
themselves will not only be despised but cast back as filth in our faces, not
only with a Quis Requisivit, but with a Pudet haec opprobria vobis, p. 2.
as if our manner of public Worship were so corrupt that we were ashamed of
it, and were convinced of a necessity to purge it. Here I have picked up and
gathered all the scattered Arguments on this Head, and twisted them all
together with the greatest strength, even with the shreds of Latin belonging
to them which help mightily to bind 'em; but I must unloose them a little to
give particular Answers to them.

First then, I doubt not but some of the Dissenters are as stiff and peevish as
other sort of men, and will be as hardly brought to come in upon Alterations as
others are brought to make them; I am very sensible of the inflexible and
indeed unchristian spirit that is in many of the Fanatics, but this I must say
for them, they have not engrossed it wholly to themselves, nor are the only
men that are unwilling to be brought to Peace and Union upon any tolerable
terms, or that refuse to have it upon any but their own. I doubt not, nay I
have moral Assurance that a great many of the best and wisest Dissenters would
come in upon some few Alterations, such as I think no wise and good Churchman
would refuse to them, for that end, such as altering the Subscription, and the
like Proposals made by that great man, the present Bishop of Worcester, whose
wisdom and learning fits him to be universal Bishop of the Christian Church,
if there were to be such an one, and would serve him instead of Infallibility;
Had there been such an opportunity as there is now of confirming those
Proposals of his by Convocation and Parliament, I question not but we should
long before this have seen the happy effect of them; for though some angry men
draw up Pleas for Nonconformity, as Lawyers draw up Bills of Pleading or
Indictment, which they stuff out with a world of hideous and dreadful things
for forms sake and to please their Clyents; yet they mean not much by them in
good earnest, and a few things which they demand and principally insist on
would satisfy and content them.

There were private and particular Reasons which hindered the full effect of the
Alterations in 61, but yet the number of those who conformed upon them exceeded
I doubt not and was much greater than the Alterations themselves; and were the
number never so little which were gained by this means, yet it renders those
who stand out more inexcusable, and vindicates the Church without any detriment
to it, for it loses nothing of what is substantial and necessary to its
well-being, but only some little things which are not worth keeping, when they
keep out Peace and Union.

I am not for pulling down the Pillars of the Church to enlarge it, nor am I
for letting in those at one door who will drive out either Episcopacy or
Liturgy at the other, without one of which there cannot, I think, be due
Christian government, nor due Christian worship without the other. But I
suppose we may take down an old Escutcheon, or sweep down an old Cobweb or two,
or set up a new Gallery, or whiten the old Walls, p. 35.
or the like, without taking down beam after beam, and after a less stone a
greater, till the whole Fabric be like to fall: and I believe the Church of
England would stand as well though Tobit and all the Apocrypha were taken out
of the Calendar, and some Ceremonies out of the Rubric, which do no more
conduce to the support or to the ornament of it, than those odd figures which
we see in some old buildings, that to unskilful people look as if they bore a
great weight, when nothing really lies upon them, and which any man would take
down, if they kept his good friends and neighbors from coming to his house.

I cannot see how these small Alterations in things owned to be indifferent and
alterable as the Church shall think meet, should be made any reflection upon it,
as our Author fears, that they will be cast back as filth in our faces, as if
our manner of public worship were so corrupt that we were ashamed of it, and
were convinced of a necessity to purge it. I do not remember that any of the
Dissenters who have writ against the Church since 61. though they have raked up
all the objections that zeal and anger could minister or invent, did ever make
use of this, or throw those 600 Alterations which were then made in its teeth;
if they had, it had shown only greater perverseness and unjustifiable
wrangling after they were gone, though they did not at all corrupt our worship
whilst they remained, nor make it at all unlawful; but an obsolete word may be
changed for one in use, and an expression altered for the better in a Prayer,
and a translation mended that is not so exact in many places, and an 100 such
alterations made, and yet no condemning our selves for any corruptions that we
were ashamed of and were convinced of a necessity to purge out.

Besides, these Concessions which we make for Peace sake are not so much from
the necessity of the things themselves, as from the weakness and ignorances,
the prejudices and mistakes of others, and the Church uses her Authority as all
wise Governors do, and as God himself did in compliance to the temper and
infirmities of those who are subject to it, and with regard to the greater ends
of Religion and Piety, Peace and Charity, which she prefers to Sacrifice or any
the Externals of Religion.

But the Dissenters will not leave craving till they have all; Give an Inch and
they will take an Ell. p. 51.
Well fare an old Proverb, but that which spoils it in this case is, that it is
older than 61. or than any Alterations of our Liturgy then or before, or
perhaps than the Reformation it self, and it was as true all along, and served
as well against all that desired any Alterations before or since, and yet it is
hard to get this, and Solomon's, Meddle not with those that are given to
change, out of some men's heads who have no great Latitude or Profundity.

If the Church makes a concession to some persons to have their Children
baptized without the sign of the Cross, must she therefore yield also to
Anabaptism and to their humor who will not have Children baptized at all? If
she should allow some to take the Communion without Kneeling, must she yield to
the Quakers who are for no Communion nor no positive Ordinances at all? If she
think not fit to pronounce the dreadful Sentence of Excommunication for small
matters, must she yield to the Erastians, who would take it quite away? This is
like the fear of the Lunatic, that if he let the Barber cut off his Beard, he
would cut off his Head too, and therefore was always against such a dangerous
Reformation of his Face.

I am not of that witty Dissenter's mind who was for taking away all the
Ceremonies, with a fine similitude, Religion is in a Consumption, and therefore
you must cut off its Hair; I do not think that is the way to recover it, nor
yet to give it Asses Milk, though that might agree better with some
Constitutions than more substantial food and better Instructions.

Let the Dissenters crave as long as they will, I hope the Church can deny as
stiffly as they crave unreasonably. And I am perfectly of our Author's mind,
though he had not Dr. Beveridge's Authority for it, That to alter the Episcopal
Government, to take the Power of Ordination from Bishops and place it in the
hands of Prsbyters, to take away a well ordered Liturgy and bring in
extemporary Prayers for public worship, to give every Minister a Jurisdiction
and Power of Excommunication, and many other things; without which some grave
Dissenters will not be comprehended; is more than the Learned Doctor, or any
Doctor in England, will grant, or desire to be granted to them. But surely our
grave Author knows that the best and wisest, if not the gravest Dissenters, who
are for a National Church, whose Interest is most considerable, and whose
Credit has done the most to keep up Nonconformity, that these will be
comprehended with something less than what he speaks of; and I do not doubt
but the bringing in of those into the Communion of the Church would tend
greatly to strengthen its Interest and the Interest of the whole Protestant
Religion, and to break that lamentable Schism and Separation which weakens
both, and gives our Popish Adversaries the greatest Advantage against us, and
which I hope they and we are both weary of.

If there are some Dissenters so wild that they can never be folded, nor
brought into any settled Flock or Communion, though I would not have them
hunted and run down like wild Beasts, and therefore I am not altogether so much
against the Toleration as our Author is, yet I think it would have done more
good, had the Comprehension took place before it, that so the Church might have
gathered first, before the Separation, and not have been left to glean after
that has made its full harvest.

But our Author, I perceive, is as much afraid at one time that the Dissenters
should come in as he is at another that they would not; And what, says he, p.
10.
if some leading Presbyterians be by our Alterations let into the Church, and
advanced to such Preferments as they hope for; what security have we that they
will not promote Divisions in the Church, more dangerous than the Schism they
made by Separation from us? A secret Enemy within the walls of a well fortified
City is more dangerous than an open Foe in the Field.

How then is this consistent not only with our Author's Opinion but most
serious Protestation in another place, p. 26.
I do here protest that, were it not that the Dissenters have given us an
Assurance that though these and many other Alterations should be made, it would
give them no satisfaction, nor bring them into our Communion, I would use all
the Interest I have for such Alterations; and for that end also part with many
of the Ceremonies. I should think there were a contradiction in these two
places, and that they would sall out were they not some Pages from one another;
but surely all things are not right in our Author's Head who has two such
different thoughts at the same time, but perhaps it is but a mere struggle
between the flesh and the spirit, if they should be let in and get Preferments,
they might keep him and others out; and if they would come in, the good of it
is so visible upon many accounts, that a man's reason cannot but desire it and
promote it; so that there is a natural tenderness and moderation on one side of
his head (which I suppose is the softest) toward Dissenters, but on the other
side there is a most stiff hatred and aversion to them; but which of these
shall take place when there is occasion, must depend very much upon the
Influence of the Moon and the Aspect of the Planets.

I consess I am not for letting in Enemies into the Church, but surely by
coming in they become Friends and cease to be Enemies, for then they own the
Churches Communion and submit to its Authority, and instead of standing out
they come in and join with it: now if any will do this I know no Church is so
well fortified as to keep them out, nor is there any way to distinguish such
secret enemies from its secret friends; but it is a Secret some men have to find
out distinctions and make differences between those of the same Communion,
which is very pernicious and mischievous; whoever comes up to the Churches
terms of Communion and to full Conformity with it, are by no means to be
counted secret enemies, when if this does not show them to be open friends,
every man may as well be suspected to be a secret enemy.

But if these Dissenters when they are taken into the bosom of the Church
should, like treacherous Vipers, endeavor to sting their Mother, or gnaw
through her Bowels, and attempt all they can to do mischief to her, how shall
they be able to effect this, and what way shall they accomplish it? Will they
set up Conventicles in their own Parishes and draw away people from the
Communion of the Church of which themselves are Ministers? or will they preach
or write against those Ceremonies or other things to which they have publicly
conformed? it would be strange if they should do this, but perhaps they may
do it another way; They may be chosen Convocation-men, and so have opportunity
to oppose and confront the Bishops; and though they should pretend great
reverence for the Episcopal Order and Authority, yet may slight and contemn it
as much as open Fanatics when it does not suit with their humor, and like bug
Diotrephes, love to have the pre-eminence above it. Now if I find they do this
and make a dangerous division in the Church by this means, I shall think 'em a
sort of Rebellious Presbyters that deserve to be turned out of the Church not
as secret but open enemies to the Bishops, and that they have forgot a passage
or two in Ignatius's Epistles, and therefore I shall be very much tempted to be
of our Author's mind to have those read hereafter in our Churches for the
edisication and reproof of such assuming Presbyters. p. 26.


I know but one Objection more that can be picked up out of your Author's
fardle of important reasons against any Alterations, for they lie there like
small wares in a Pedler's pack, neither sorted nor parcelled, but confusedly
jumbled together; as I suppose, they lie in his head: but the only remaining
Objection that I can find, and I am sure I have done him justice and given full
strength to any thing that looked like a reason, p. 6.
is this, That by making Alterations, the Church will run the hazard of
offending a greater number of more considerable persons than they are like to
gratisie thereby. And he gives it in as objected formerly against the Bill for
Comprehension, p. 11.
That as some might come in, so others that were in our Communion might take
offense by the Alterations, and detest it, and seeing our frequent changes in
some things, they might suppose that there is nothing certain among us; and,
from the many disputes about our Liturgy, proceed to question our Articles; and
at last fall off to the Church of Rome, which they saw more constant to their
Principles.

Now they must have a very mean opinion of the Churches Prudence, and give very
little deference to her Authority, that shall be offended at her making such
Alterations in things that she always declared are in their own nature
indifferent and alterable, and which she has reserved to her self a power to
alter according to the exigency of times and occasions, and upon such
prudential reasons as she shall think fit, of which she is alone the most
proper Judge: for, as our Author says, The People ought not to prescribe to
the Church in such things, but the Church to them.

They must therefore be no very dutiful and obedient Sons of the Church who
shall not be satisfied with such Alterations as she shall think fit to make for
the ends of peace and concord, and the allaying those heats and divisions that
are among us.

They must have a very wrong and superstitious opinion of the outward Rites and
Ceremonies and Circumstantials of Religion, who lay so much weight and stress
upon them as to think that there is any great matter in them besides their
subserviency to outward order and decency, or that they are so necessary to
those that the Divine Worship may not be performed as acceptably and reverently
without some of them as with them.

It is to be feared that such weak persons have not been sufficiently
instructed in the nature of things Indifferent when they are so zealous for
those above the weightier matters of Peace and Charity, to which they ought
always to give way.

If some zealous or designing men have drawn ignorant and well meaning persons
into a greater opinion and admiration of themselves by ceremonious formalities
and overdoings, by unprescribed bowings and cringes, by prostrations at the
Eucharist and the like inventions of their own, they have used the same ways
that other Fanatics have done to fill up their Congregations with gathering
out of other Churches, by shows of greater piety and devotion, and have hereby
broken the settled orders of the Church, and opened a gap for all the follies
of an indiscreet zeal and forward superstition, whereby some pious but not wise
men have in all ages brought innumerable fopperies and singularities into the
Church, to the great mischief of Religion.

But surely a Church that thinks it not necessary to bring men to a Religion by
any such superstitious devices, but by more true and rational methods of a
sober and discreet Piety, and needs not to make use of any such tricks and
pious frauds to impose upon the folly and weakness of its Votaries, nor has any
paltry and by ends to be served by such Religious Cheats should put a timely
stop to all such ceremonial excesses, and honestly teach all its Members that
Religion lies not in any such shows or forms of Godliness, but in sober and
manly devotion and in a virtuous and good life.

Now when men have such a true notion of Religion, which the Church ought
always to give them, and to correct all mistakes to the contrary, there will be
no great danger that they should be much offended at the loss or alteration of
a few Rites or Ceremonies which are no more of the Essence of Religion than our
Clothes are of the Essence of a Man, who so long as he is decently habited
according to the custom of the Country, he may leave it to the Governors
thereof to change the mode as they think fit.

But above all folks commend me to those in our Communion, who, our Author
tells us, may take such offense at our Alterations as to desert us and fall off
to the Church of Rome. p. 11.
These do well understand and have been well instructed in the Religion of the
Church of England, who can make no difference between baptizing with the Cross,
as a signal of Christianity, and adoring it as an object of worship, between
kneeling at the Sacrament and worshipping the Host; but however this is a
terrible danger, if by bringing some ost from Fanaticism, we shall be likely to
make others Papists, which is ten times worse; let us therefore see what reason
our Author may have to fear this: Why seeing our frequent changes in some
things they may suppose that there is nothing certain among us, and from the
many disputes about our Liturgy proceed to question our Articles, and at last
fall off to the Church of Rome which they saw more constant to their
Principles. If they are for such a constant Church as shall never make any
Alterations, then indeed they must be for an Infallible one, and none bids at
that but the Church of Rome, but yet still she has made very often great
changes and alterations in her Liturgies, and Ceremonies, and often corrected
and reformed her Breviaries and Missals; so that if this shall shake and
startle a man, and by seeing so many alterations about those things in their
Church, he shall suppose there is nothing more certain in that than in ours, I
hope he will quickly come back again like a fool as he went. He must be a
Member of no Church in the world, nor ever could have been since the beginning
of Christianity, who will desert and leave it for this reason because it has
made frequent Alterations in its Liturgy and Ceremonies; and if a man will be
so fickle and skeptical as by seeing frequent changes in such things to suppose
there is nothing certain among us, and from some disputes about Liturgies,
question the Articles of a Church, and at last fall to what is more constant in
its Principles, he must even fall off from all Churches and from all Religion,
and for the same reason from all living under Laws and Government, for there
are disputes and alterations about those, and from eating and drinking too, for
all men are not agreed in the same meat and drink or way of dressing it, nor
have always thought fit to stick to one way of Brewing or Cookery.

Thus I have fairly examined our Author's Arguments against making Alterations,
and where there was any seeming weight in them, I have fully considered it;
where they were weak and ridiculous, I have made bold to expose them, for the
Book was put out, and fell into my hands in a time of merryment, and I was very
curious to see what some folks could say for themselves. I assure him, had he
or his Neighbors in the Country showed any good reasons why they are so stiff
against Alterations, that could have convinced me that they were prejudicial to
Religion or disserviceable to the Church, I would have sent him my thanks for,
instead of an Answer to them, or would have done my best to have written a
Panegyric upon that Noble Motto, Nolumus mutare Leges Angliae, That after all
is the only mighty and irresistible Argument that remains to be answered in
this matter; but I wont undertake it, since it has been done to my hands by all
the Parliaments and all the Convocations in England ever since the Barons wars,
unless by the present Convocation which has done nothing, whose mind we do not
yet know, and till we do, it may pass for an infallible Council; for surely
Vox Cleri is not the mouth of it; nor is our Author to be taken as the Churches
Representative or Procurator General, or to be allowed so many Proxies as shall
make up a House. But though he calls his Book Vox Cleri, yet Tuba
Stentorophonica, Balaam's Ass prophesying, or the like Title might have been as
significant and suited it as well.

Having seen what he has to say on one side, I am now to consider what has been
or may be offered on the other, and what he has to say against them. The
Reasons for some Abatements and Alterations at this time are so plain and
considerable, so great and important, as shows the manifest expediency, if not
necessity, of doing it, and our Author has so little to say against it, though
he was bound to say what he could, that he has thereby done more to give up the
cause and satisfy every impartial man about it, than if he had industriously
pleaded for it; though I will not say as he does of one of the Letters, that a
man would think this Writer to have been hired to betray the cause -- by his
weak and impertinent arguments for its Defense; for I believe our Author does
honestly what he can, and I don't suspect any treachery at all in his writing,
unless it be between his Will and his Understanding, and I doubt the one does a
little trick and impose upon the other; for were it not for his implacable
aversion and ill will to the Fanatics and Latitudinarians; I am very confident
that his Reason is for Alterations and Abatements, by the little he has to say
to the contrary, and to the obvious and important reasons for them; and because
he himself so often and so expressly declares for them in his good moods and
lucid intervals.

The first objection which he makes to himself, and which rose up in his own
thoughts, for it is not in answer to any of the Letters, is this; p. 5.
Herein we may please the King, the Parliament, and a great part of the
dissenting Laity, which if it be true is very considerable. Now as to the
latter, the dissenting Laity, I don't know what to say to the great ones and
the Politico's among them, who are for keeping up a Separate Party, as a Civil
Faction in the State, whom they who are the Heads of it, and would make but an
inconsiderable figure without it, can manage upon occasion, and have it ready
raised and formed for their designs; and I doubt they will not be so well
pleased to have this and therefore themselves lessened by lessening the
strength and number of the Separation, as I hope the best and most honest of
the Dissenting Laity will, who are more concerned for the sincere good of
Religion than carrying on Designs and Intrigues, who will no doubt follow and
accompany their Leaders into the Church, as they went out with them.

But this I hope will be so far from being an objection to our Author or any
Church of England man, against Alterations and a Comprehension, that it must be
a very strong Argument for it, since it is the Schism and Separation in the
Church that keeps up those Parties and Factions in the State, which help to
disturb the civil peace and quiet of the Kingdom, and has been the cause of the
greatest confusions in it; so that whoever is a lover of the Church or Kingdom
must be desirous to have an end put to them, as far as is possible, that we may
unite in one religious and civil Interest.

As to the pleasing the King and Parliament hereby, that I think is not to be
doubted, since the Parliament addressed to the King for calling a Convocation,
and the King was pleased thereupon to call one for this very end and design,
and to grant a Commission, as has been usual in the like case, to prepare
things in order to it, so that it is to be feared, that some men who are no
great friends to the present settlement and constitution, and who are upon some
account angry and discontented, are at the bottom of all this heat and
stiffness against Alterations, and who make use of others as Tools to work and
hammer out their Designs by, or at least to keep up a noise and disturbance
among us, as if great numbers were dissatisfied because they themselves are so
for private reasons. These men are mighty zealous against the Churches making
any Alterations in the Circumstantials of Religion till the Court makes some
Alterations in the Substantial places of profit.

I know we complain on all sides of being made and used as Tools, as if this
were the Fate of Churchmen, and Religion were only an Engine in their hands,
charged with the terrors of another world to do Execution only in this: Our
Author wishes he could leave his Country Minister (who wrote one of the
Letters) well in his wits to consider whether he be not used as a Tool to
destroy the established Church, p. 42.
by some who think themselves mighty Politicians. Nay he tells us, That the
Authors of the two Letters may be Papists, who by such Arts seek to divide that
they may destroy us. Now this is the deepest Plot of the Papists, if it be one,
that ever was laid to destroy and blow up the Church, and if those who are for
Alterations in order to unite Protestants and strengthen the Church are Tools
in the hands of Papists or other Politicians to destroy it, the Church is in a
lamentable condition, and must necessarily be destroyed both by its friends and
its enemies too, and by those ways, which in all appearance, tend most to
preserve it, and the Design is laid so secretly, and to be wrought so
strangely, that it is impossible to prevent it.

On the other side, it is plain and notorious matter of fact that some Great
Discontented Laymen, though not so Great as they would be, did manage several
of our stiff men against Alterations: It was not so much behind the Curtain but
the hands were seen if not the wires which moved the Puppets; besides the
dissatisfied Bishops and Clergy who have not taken the Oaths, nor will own the
present Government, had more influence upon those who have sworn to the present
King and Queen, and most solemnly recognized them in the name of the Church of
England, than could be expected that men of such different Apprehensions, and
acting by such different measures should at this time have had. I am very sorry
for their Suspension, but it is strange they should hereby have more Authority
over their Clergy than they had before in a matter of greater moment and
greater difficulty, and it is equal wonder to me that some men who are so stiff
in other things should so soon forget their Promises, and others hardly
remember their Oaths.

That the King and Parliament will be greatly displeased with the Clergy unless
they consent to some Alterations and Abatements in order to a legal
Comprehension, is as much to be feared as it is certainly known that a
Convocation was first desired, and then summoned for this very purpose, as
appears by the Address of the House of Commons, the King's Writ and Commission,
and his Letter to the Convocation, by which their minds are sufficiently known
and declared for the doing the thing in general, though they left the
particular manner of doing it to the Clergy themselves. Now the King and
Parliament are to be allowed very proper Judges of the expediency and fitness
or prudential necessity of this, and therefore of advising and directing it, as
the Clergy are the fittest to execute and accomplish it, since it is a matter of
a Religious and Ecclesiastical nature that belongs properly to them. Now then
for them to be called together for this very purpose by the Desire of
Parliament and the Command of the King, and to tell 'em when they come that
they think it not prudent but dangerous to meddle and do any thing, is, as if
the President and College of Physicians should advise that in such a case such
an operation should be performed, and send for the Surgeons of the Hall to do
it, but they should tell 'em there was no need of it and they would not meddle.
Where though the latter are more fit to perform the Chyrurgical Operation, yet
the other are as good and proper Judges that it is fit and expedient or
necessary to be done.

But our Author seems to deny that this will be pleasing either to the King or
Parliament, for four or five great and substantial Reasons.

1. As to the King, his Majesty has devolved that Province to the Convocation
and Parliament; as if the King were not pleased with any thing but what he does
himself, and did not commit several things to be done by others which are very
pleasing to him. He has devolved the Province of reducing Ireland to Shomberg
and his Army, and yet no doubt but it will be very pleasing to him; and he as
much expects, and has given Commission to do the one as well as the other; and
the happiness of his Reign and the Peace of his Kingdom depend, though not
equally, yet in great measure upon both; The King devolves the Province of
raising Money to the parliament, and yet what is left to them and their
Prudence to do is very necessary in it self and very pleasing to the King.

2. He has declared his satisfaction as to the present Constitution. Several
of the Clergy have declared theirs too, if I be not mistaken, and something
farther than the King has done or can do, unless he subscribe and take Orders,
and yet they would be mightily pleased with some Alterations for the good, as
they think, of the Church and Religion, and the Peace of the Kingdom, not
because they are dissatisfied with the present Constitution, though they
suppose some little things in it may be Altered and Amended; as our Author, I
believe, is not dissatisfied with his dear Body and Carcass, but yet is willing
now and then to amend and repair it for the better.

3. He does confirm his declared judgment by his constant practice in
communicating with the Church as established, and frequent promises to favor
and protect it. The more reason has the Church to oblige and gratify him in
what he desires and proposes, and thereby engage him to be its more firm and
hearty friend, as well as requite him for what he has already done for it.

4. As to the Parliament, they do generally live in the Communion of the
Church. Is living in the Communion of the Church then a certain Argument of
being against Alterations? Surely our Author lives in a very gross Air, and
his Head wants a little clearing, or he would not talk at this rate.

5. Nothing can be obligatory but what shall be enacted by them whose consent
we are not assured of, i. e. by King and Parliament. Was any thing ever
obligatory as a Law of the Kingdom but what was so enacted? Would he have the
Convocation stay till it was so obligatory, and so enacted by the Civil Power,
before they do any thing? or can we ever be more assured of their Consent to
enact any thing than This?

I pass now to another Reason for making these Alterations and Abatements in
order to a Comprehension; and that being one of our own making, it must be a
great reproach to us to be against it at this time, when we promised and
declared for it in another; I mean in the Bishops Petition to King James, which
was in the name of the whole Church and Clergy, who made it their own by
consenting to it and approving it, viz. That they wanted not due tenderness to
Dissenters, but were willing to come to such a Temper as should be thought fit
when the matter should be considered in Parliament and Convocation. What was
the meaning of that? Was it to stand our ground and do nothing at all, but be
very stiff against all Alterations for the sake of Dissenters? No sure; that
was not the Tenderness nor the Temper they were willing to come to, but they
must mean by it the very same thing that I am pleading for, and this our
Author owns they did when he heartily wishes those Bishops were in a condition
to perform their promise, even for the Dissenters sake p. 41.
, and he denis not what his Adversary had said, that, he doubted not but they
would agree to the Alterations that are desired; and he acquiesces in the
Judgment of another whom he writes against, That if nothing unreasonable were
designed, it might then have passed, and a firm establishment ensued; for
doubtless the calm tempers of those Reverend Fathers would mightily have
influenced their Sons p. 17.
, some of the hottest of which mightily wanted such a calm Influence.

But now what becomes then of all their and our Author's wise and important
Reasons against making Alterations, as if the Church were to be destroyed
thereby, as if these Concessions were only losing of ground, and gaining
nothing thereby, since none would come in upon them, but would rather be
encouraged to crave more and more till they had got all, and would never be
satisfied neither. All these must be given up, since they are all overruled by
this promise and opinion of the Bishops for surely They are not Tools, whatever
others are, to destroy the established Church, made use of by some who think
themselves mighty Politicians: nor are They to be compared to an unskilful
Architect, who has undertaken to repair a good old Fabric and make it better;
but pulling down beam after beam, and after a lesser stone a greater, till the
whole Fabric has been like to fall; and then (what perhaps was designed at
first) he persuades the Owners that there is a necessity wholly to destroy the
old, and erect a new one upon better Foundations p. 35.
. Neither are They of another Trade, as scandalous almost as that of being
unskilful Architects, viz. of being Ecclesiastical Tinkers, who undertaking to
mend one hole, do usually make two or three p. 45.
. Now all the wit and all the reason of these two Comparisons will fall upon
the Bishops as well as others since they were for the same thing, as our Author
owns.

What then can he say to this promise of the Bishops? why, They are not in a
condition to perform it now, if they were never so willing p. 53.
. Is it not therefore fit to be done at all by those who are in a condition, if
they were willing? Ay but put the Bishops in statu quo and then see what they
will do. They may put themselves into it when they please, but must not
Promises be performed because men are not in statu quo? I take it to have been
the Promise of the Church and Clorgy in general at that time, and not only of
those particular Bishops, and so the Dissenters and all men took it, who were
extremely pleased and satisfied with it, but to have another Vox Cleri now
speaking quite contrary to what it did before, will be such a Reproach to us as
if the Church had a Double Tongue; as if fear did inspire us with more good
nature, than the greatest mercy and blessing; as if a common danger could do
more to bring us to Tenderness and good Temper than a common Deliverance.
Surely our present Safety and Happiness should not make us forget the Vows we
made in our Distress and Adversity, as if they were only like the Vows of
frighted Mariners in a Storm, which are broken and recalled when the Tempest
is blown over and there is a calm and clear Sky. Was there not a kind of Solemn
Protestation, a Tacit Agreement, a General Resolution at that time among all
thinking and sober men, that if they were once freed from the Danger they were
then in by the Common Enemy, who was strengthened and had like to have ruined us
by our Divisions, that they would do all that was possible to cure and remedy
them for the future, and come to good Terms, and fair Correspondence, and
Christian Union with one another? and will not those kind Promises, and good
Words, and fair Pretenses we then made be looked upon as a mere trick, a
shameful collusion, if we do not now make them good, when we have a fair
opportunity and are called upon to do so, and will give too just reason to
others never to trust us again, but for ever after to suspect the Tenderness
and the Temper, nay the Truth and the Justice as well as the Moderation of the
Church of England? I say this with hearty and affectionate concern because I
think the Honor of it lies at stake, which I would bring some men, who seem to
be concerned for it, seriously to consider.

What were the great and important Reasons which moved the Bishops to this kind
Promise, to come to a Temper with the Dissenters, (and which persuade others at
this time to the same thing) by making some Alterations and Abatements in
things which they scruple and we hold Indifferent, is so easy and obvious to
discern, that he must be blinded with passion and zeal and bigottry who does
not see them.

The bitter animosities, the uncharitable heart burnings, the rancorous
passions, the uncharitable and unchristian temper which has been begot by our
lamentable Schisms and Divisions, should affect every Christian heart with deep
and sensible resentments, and make us use all possible remedies that are likely
to cure them.

The sad evils and mischiefs we have felt by keeping up a kind of Religious war
so long in the Bowels of the Church and Kingdom, whereby we have treated one
another as Enemies, and furiously contended on all sides for matters of no
great worth or moment (for in other things there were fair steps made toward
an agreement in 1662.) should dispose us to make up a Peace upon reasonable and
fair terms, and rather give up a Ceremony or two be they never so significant,
than still fight it out for such poor trifles in comparison to the greater
things of Religion.

The Advantage that is given at all times to Atheism, Irreligion and
Profaneness, as well as sometimes to Popery by our Divisions, should make every
lover of God and Religion, not willing to sacrifice either Religion in general,
or the Reformation in particular to an obstinate zeal and humoursome stiffness
for little things.

Our love to the best Church in the World, and which needs fewer Alterations
than any other Church whatsoever, should make us do all we can to enlarge,
beautify and strengthen it, and not venture a desparate push to let its
Enemies wait for a juncture to ruin it, when we may so easily secure it by
bringing in the Presbyterians into its Communion by a very few Concessions,
that will satisfy them and be no manner of loss or injury to our selves.

Lastly, Our love to our Country, and to the present peace and settlement of
it, which nothing can endanger but our fatal Divisions, which tend to throw us
back into the miseries we have just escaped, and are therefore kept up and
fomented by the wicked Policies of Discontented men, who infuse jealousies and
variances into others heads from their own private feuds and self-interest,
should strongly engage us to a fair union and accord with one another, and to
the Design which I have been pleading for because I think it will tend so much
to promote it, and which few men, I hope, upon second thoughts will be against.
I shall leave it to their serious consideration in the words of that learned
and good man Dr. Beveridge, out of whose Sermon our Author would pick something
if he could to his purpose, but he considers not well what he writes himself,
or what he transcribes out of him; these are the words as they are quoted by
him, which are a good Summing up the matter at the last. This only I dare
affirm, that if it be necessary to reduce wandering Sheep into Christ's Flock,
if to take off scruples from the minds of weak Brethren, if to allay hatred,
appease anger, and as much as may be to suppress all Dissensions concerning
Religion, if to recall Ecclesiastical Discipline to its primitive Vigor, if to
Defend and Establish the best Church in the world against the Assaults of Men
and Devils; if these things seem necessary to any man, it will also seem
necessary to that man to admit such Changes as he is persuaded will conduce to
such ends p. 8.
.

I have now done with the Cause, and leave it to any man who reads his Book and
this, whether any thing loosely and scatteringly offered in the one, has not
had its full force fairly given it, and as full and complete an Answer returned
to it by the other. But I have a word or two of Friendly Advice to our Author
before I have done with him as a parting civility.

1. First then, I would advise him not to speak so loudly and openly against
the Toleration, for fear the Parliament should hear him, as he does upon all
occasions, telling us the Reasons against it are irrefragable, that it used to
be granted at the instance and for the sake of professed Papists, that it is a
greater favor than was granted the Church Party in the late Wars. I hoped
those old Sores had been healed, or however that we should not take example of
our Enemies ill usage and cruelty to revenge the same upon them. The Papists
were never for a Toleration of Protestants only, as we have it now, with
exclusion to themselves, and they were as much for putting the Penal Laws in
execution at one time, as they were for Toleration in another: so that they
have been playing their game on both sides, and both have been tricked by them.
But with submission to the Irrefragable Reasons of the Parliament in 1662. we
have since sufficiently tried other methods, and found them not only
ineffectual but mischievous, so that some such Expedient as a Toleration was
absolutely necessary, either to prevent on one side the scandalous unsuccesfull
prosecution of weak and wilful men, or on the other, the King's illegal
dispensing with over severe Laws: I see the mischief of a boundless and
unlimited Toleration, but whether the mischiefs of Persecution, i. e. Extreme
penalties for the sake of Religion, be not greater, I leave to experience and
the judgment of our Governors to determine. However it does not become
Clergymen, who should use the other methods of Tenderness and Persuasion more
proper to the Gospel and their Office, to grudge and repine at the favor of
the State to those who differ from them, and thereby discover their angry and
revengefull Resentment, and their good will to use other methods if it were in
their power.

2. I would never have a man that writes against all Alterations, at the same
time propose any, especially such strange ones as reading in our Churches the
Epistles of Ignatius and Polycarp, or some select Chapters out of King Charles
the Martyr's (...), p. 26.
. For since he knows some People are greatly offended at the Apocryphal
Lessons, and would have nothing read in the Church but what is undoubtedly
Canonical, it will look very odly to make such a Proposal to the Convocation at
its next sitting; and therefore I would desire him not to move any such thing,
though perhaps the thing might take with some men if others were much against
it, and out of mere spite to the design of Alterations they might clog the Bill
with such an Encumbrance. I do not intend to examine particular Alterations,
but shall leave them to the wisdom of the Church, i. e. the Convocation, and
the wisdom of the Nation, i. e. the Parliament, to agree and settle them as
they shall think fit. I am for making some few Alterations, but am by no means
for this of our Author's proposing, of reading Ignatius and Polycarp, and
(...), in our Churches, though I like them almost as well as Tobit and his Dog,
or Bell and the Dragon: however some question whether they are all genuine.

3. Above all, I would advise our Author when he writes again, never to make
Comparisons between men, because he knows, by the old Proverb, they are odious,
and nothing can excuse them, but when a necessary defense calls for them.

Thus though Dr. Jane be a very worthy person, and fills both the Professor's
and Prolocutor's Chair very well and gracefully, yet why he and his Neighbor
Clergy should be in such mighty Joy and Triumph because he was chosen rather
than Dr. Tillotson, and look upon this as a good Omen for the good of the
Church p. 1.
, as if the choice of the other would have foreboded some mischief to the
Church; this is so unmannerly rude and reflecting that it requires the temper
of that excellent Man to forgive it, who has done as much good to Religion and
the Church, as half a Convocation, Prolocutor and all.

But I perceive the bottom of the pique, our Author has a most ill opinion of
Sermons on Weekdays Lectures, and the Dean has been a Preacher of such, and
has thereby provoked some, but taught more to Preach well and to Live well than
any man perhaps since the Apostles; but why has our Author and some others who
are not much for Preaching on any day such a spite against Sermons on the
Weekdays Lectures, why, he tells us, because in those many great Absurdities
tonding to Schism and Sedition are injected into the minds of the People p. 26.
, and cannot they be as well injected on Sunday Lectures, if Men have a mind,
as well as on Weekdays Lectures? nay, I know no absolute Preservative but that
they may be injected in Sermons on Sunday morning, as well as at any other
times, if the Preachers be very much inclined to it.

I will by no means dispute with our Author, whether there be not in the
Country many Ministers, who for their Learning may be without disparagement
compared with most of the City Ministers p. 15.
; that they may I Will assure him; and very much exceed them too, if he be a
Country Minister himself, as I have two or three Reasons besides his Latin
Sayings, which are far beyond the learning of most City Ministers, to believe
him to be. But why must he be comparing the Country and City Ministers, like
the Country and City Mouse, as to the great ease and pleaty of living p. 37.
? I perceive he has been searching not only into their Vestries, where they
sometimes tarry, he says, till Prayers be ended; (he might have added, where
they drink Sack too sometimes after Sermon, which they don't in the Country)
but into their very Kitchings, and so far as I know he might be for Reforming
of those, were he not against all Alterations and Amendments whatsoever. What
brave Stories does he carry down, I warrant you, and tell his Neighbors in the
Country of the City Ministers plentiful eating and seldom preaching, having
such frequent Supplies, besides Lectures and Readers Ibid.
, whereas the whole burden lies upon them in the Country of studying
carefully and accurately penning their Sermons, and then preaching them in
great Churches, besides writing against Popery, and defending at all times the
Cause of the Church and Religion. Further, It ought to be considered, he says,
that a great part of the Country Ministers have traveled some an hundred some
near two hundred miles (but not the Apostolical way of footing it I suppose) to
meet in Convocation for the benefit of the Clergy, and I hope the great good
they have done there is a sufficient reward for all their pains; and sit
sometimes near the whole day in the depth of Winter, but they were hot enough
they say for all this; and I pray where do the City Clergy of the Convocation
sit then? in a Vestry, or some other warm place. One would think a man doated
either with age or some other feebleness who would thus trifle and expose
himself by such drivelling and ridiculous malice: This is so below Don Quixot
and Fur Praedestinatus, to which he mighty wittily compares the Authors of the
two Letters, p. 56. but with an unaccountable impertinence and silliness, that
I can think of nothing for a New years gift for him but a Coat with long
Sleeves and this Badge upon it, Nolumus mutare Leges Angliae. So I take my
leave of him and wish him and his Neighbors a merry New Year.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THere is newly Printed a Large Folio Bible of a fair new Roman Letter with
Annotations, and Parallel Scriptures or References (some Thousands more than
are in the Cambridge, Oxford, or any other Bible yet Extant.) To which is
annexed, the Harmony of the Gospels: As also a Reduction of the Jewish Weight,
Coins and Measures to our English Standards: And a Table of the Promises in
Scripture. In One entire Volume, containing 325 Sheets. Printed for Richard
Chiswell, Jonathan Robinson, and Brabazon Aylmer.

Allegiance Vindicated: or, the Takers of the New Oath of Allegiance to King
William and Queen Mary justified; and the Lawfulness of taking it asserted, in
its consistency with our former Oaths; and also with the Doctrine of the
Reformed Church of England, concerning Non-resistance and Passive Obedience. By
a Divine of the Church of England. Printed for Brabazon Aylmer.


