A TREATISE OF THE Necessity and Frequency of Receiving the Holy Communion.
With a Resolution of Doubts about it. In Three DISCOURSES begun upon
Whit-Sunday in the Cathedral Church of Peterburgh. To press the observation of
the Fourth Rubric after the Communion Office.

By SIMON PATRICK, D. D. Dean of Peterburgh, and One of Hi^ Majesty's Chaplains
in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, MDCLXXXV.

IVth Rubric after the Communion.
And in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Colleges, where there are many
Priests and Deacons, they shall all receive the Communion with the Priest,
every Sunday, at the least, except they have a reasonable cause to the contrary.

To the Most Reverend FATHER in GOD WILLIAM By Divine Providence Lord
Archbishop OF CANTERBURY, HIS GRACE, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan,
one of His Majesty's most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL, etc.
May it please your Grace,
HAving endeavored, with some success, to restore the Weekly Communions, in
that Church to which I relate, and hoping for greater, by publishing these
Discourses, which I made there upon that occasion; I take the boldness to send
them abroad, under your Grace's Protection: that if they can do any good, all
that shall receive it may understand unto whom, under God, they principally owe
it, and stand obliged to acknowledge it.

For it was by your Grace's Fatherly Care, that I was put in mind of this great
Duty, and exhorted to put it in practice: which produced these Meditations,
wherein I have pressed it upon others. Who will be stirred up, I trust, by this
means, to bless God for setting over them such a Faithful Pastor, as, by taking
care to have this Sacred Food provided continually for them, seeks their
increase in true Religion, and their nourishment with all goodness.

They are very blind who do not see this to be a singular blessing; and very
hard, whose hearts are not affected therewith: especially at such a time as
this, when Religion calls for all the supports we are able to lend it; and
teaches us, it desires no better, no other than it self, if we will but uphold
it in our hearts.

Of which I beseech the Lord of all power and might, the giver of all good
things, to make every one of us so deeply sensible; that we may be no longer
negligent in the principal office of it: but, in some measure, return unto that
First love toward our blessed Lord and Savior; from which we, as well as
other Christian People, have long since shamefully fallen.

And may the same Good God, who put this thing into your Grace's heart, be
pleased to bless and prosper all your pious designments: and prolong your
days, which are spent in the study of the public good, to see the ancient
Devotion, and Virtue too, not only bud again in this Church, but flourish also,
and bring forth fruit in such abundance; that it may be the joy of all its
Friends, the terror of all its Enemies; and, as the Prophet speaks of
Jerusalem, a Praise in the Earth.

Then will this that your Grace has done, be spoken of with Praise; and
Posterity will call you Blessed. Nay, to have but designed and attempted this,
whatsoever the issue be, is so praiseworthy; that it will make your Name no
less honored in future Generations, than that great Devotion, which we see
combines in you with eminent Learning, that deep Humility, which cohabits with
the highest Dignity, makes your Self to be reverenced in this.

With which Reverence, if the Confidence I take, in making this small Present
to your Grace, seem inconsistent, I comfort my self with the long experience I
have had; that the best men are not always the hardest to please, but ever the
easiest to forgive: As I doubt not your Grace will the presumption of this
Address, from,

7th Sunday after Trinity, 1684. May it please your Grace, Your Grace's Most
humble and Most obedient Servant, Simon Patrick.

To my Beloved Friends the Inhabitants of the City of Peterburgh.
THE reason of Printing these Discourses, is nothing else, but the hope I have,
that by presenting to your Eyes, what you heard lately with your Ears; it may
make not only a new, but a more lasting impression upon your hearts: because
you may have recourse to it when you please; and thereby not only refresh your
memories, but settle in your minds the remembrance of those things, which you
perceive have a power in them, to persuade you to the constant performance of
that duty, which is the subject of this Book.

A weighty Duty it is, whose practice I here most earnestly press: and thereby
invite you also to the enjoyment of a very high Privilege; the highest we are
capable of, in this present State.

So it was accounted in ancient times; when to be detained from it by sickness,
or such like hindrance, was looked upon as a very sore affliction: under which
they groaned so heavily, that they were wont to be comforted, by having the
Holy Sacrament sent home to them, from the Church, in token of Peace and
Communion. But when any one was denied the Communion, being thought un^orthy to
receive it, they looked upon it as the greatest punishment in the World. Such a
punishment, that they could not rest quietly under it; but, being full of grief
and sorrow for those sins which kept them from such a Blessing, they made most
humble supplications, with many tears and most lamentable cries, to be restored
to the peace of the Church, and Communion with Christ in his benefits. They
fell upon their Knees, and beseeched the forgiveness and the Prayers, and
Intercessions of their Christian Brethren: whom they entreated, after a most
lowly manner, to solicit for them, that they might no longer remain in that
forlorn condition: banished from the presence of God, and from the Society of
his People.

And till this was effected, they were in anguish of mind, and bitterness of
Spirit: looking upon themselves as lost men, who had the sentence of death
passed upon them: from which they begged, in sackcloth and ashes, that they
might be delivered.

Upon which things when I reflect, I am amazed, and cannot but cry out, saying;
Good God! how are we fallen? What a dismal decay is there of Christian Piety
among us? What an universal Lethargy has seized us, in these Ages? Wherein we
see men lying very contentedly under that, which the first Christians thought
the heaviest Calamity: Nay, willingly refraining the holy Communion, and
keeping themselves from it, as unworthy of the benefit; and yet are not at all
troubled at it.

What an alteration is this? What new, or rather no Christianity is it; which
teaches men now, to lie quietly in such a condition, as they themselves confess
makes them unfit for Communion with God; and never to think of bewailing it,
and being reconciled to Him, whom they have thus hainously offended?

This is so sad a consideration, that it ought to awaken all good men, to call
upon their people, and earnestly beseech them, to remember from whence they are
fallen, and repent, and do the first works. When there was no need to use so many
arguments, as I have represented, to prove this to be a Christian Duty; nor so
many motives, to persuade men to the frequent practice of it: but they ran
forwardly to the holy Communion; and were troubled, above measure, if they
might not have the privilege to receive it.

There were no quarrels then raised in those days, against the manner of its
Administration: no disputes against the posture, wherein it was received. The
Ministers of Christ had not their precious time taken up, in answering
objections, and satisfying doubts and scruples; much less did they stand in
need of the assistance of the Civil Power to enforce the practice of this duty.
Which all took to be a Commandment of our Lord and Master, to commemorate his
wonderful love, and show forth his death and passion for our sakes; and
therefore was no less cheerfully and readily obeyed, than if they had been
invited to the most delitious Feast, and promised to receive the greatest
largesses in the World.

That it may be so again, is the design of publishing these Papers; in which I
have represented those Truths, which, if they be weighed and laid to heart,
will save us this labor for the future. For I have shown you a short way to be
free from all fears, and doubts about this matter: which is, not to leave your
selves in uncertainty whether you shall go to Heaven or no; but by making that
sure, to make your selves sit for the Holy Communion: unto which you may go
with an assured confidence, if you have any good hope to be admitted into the
Society of the blessed in Heaven.

If that be out of doubt, you need not doubt of acceptance with Christ, at his
holy Table. For which the best preparation is an holy Life; or a serious
Resolution of it for the future, if hitherto we have lived otherwise. What
other Preparation had the Apostles, for the partaking of the first Eucharist,
with our Blessed Lord and Savior? What other could they have, when Christians
received it every day? If we have this therefore, which is the main thing, let
us not stand upon little niceties: nor waste that time in questioning and
debating, whether we be sit or no; which ought to be spent in doing this and
other Christian Duties, whereby we shall be every day fitter to have Communion
with our Savior.

Remember, that it is in actions of Piety, as it is in those of Policy. A
Wisdom that is too scrupulous, commonly does nothing for fear of doing ill. We
read of Cities that have been taken, while the Senators were gravely
deliberating how to preserve them. Even so is it here too; overmuch niceness
about preparation, makes men never to be prepared. Therefore it is a fault;
when it hinders that duty, which it keeps us still thinking how to perform.

Let us not confound our selves with words, but understand the sense of things:
and then we shall not be perplexed, as many have been, in this business of
Preparation.

Much less will any be affrighted from the holy Communion, by being commanded
to kneel when they receive it. Which is no more than they do at their daily
Prayers; and therefore should the rather be inclined to do here, when we pray
and give thanks for the greatest blessings: which we cannot do in too humble a
manner. We worship also and adore our Blessed Lord, in this holy action: and
therefore, one would think, should be disposed of our selves, without any
injunction, to fall down upon our Knees, in token of the worship which we give
Him. Which is no Popish Ceremony; being not so much as injoined by that Church
in the act of receiving; nor observed by the Pope himself (who when he
receives, rather sits, or leans a little forward, upon his Throne) but an
ancient devout Posture of the best Christians, which the people of the Roman
Communion, observe, by long custom, without bidding: And therefore should much
more be cheerfully observed by us; when we are enjoined to keep to the ancient
reverence, wherewith the Saints of God received the pledges of our Saviors
love.

Vouchsafe, I beseech you, to give this small Book, wherewith I present you, a
careful Reading, and I doubt not it will free you, not only from these, but
from all sorts of scruples, if any of you be troubled with them; which now
hinder many people, from the greatest duty, and comfort too, of our holy
Religion.

Which if you would be persuaded to perform often; the profit which would
redound to you thereby, would be as great as the Credit which it would do to
our Church and Religion. For no man can come seriously to the holy Communion;
but with some Resolutions of being better than he has been: which Resolutions
are not presently broken, but last for some time: And therefore if there were
not too long a distance between one Communion and another, it is likely they
might last for ever. For before the force of the first Resolution were quite
lost, it would be backed and strengthened with a second: and so being reinforced
from time to time; while it remained in some power, would become so firm, that
it would never be broken.

Make a trial, I earnestly entreat you; and suffer not this pains, which I have
taken to serve you, to be thrown away, without that good effect. Which it will
not be, if you make the trial with the same seriousness, wherewith I have
written this Treatise. In which you will meet with nothing to entertain the
fancy, not so much as with fine words and elegant composure; but with good
store, I think, of solid sense, to inlighten the mind, to inform the judgment,
to pierce the heart, to stir up holy devotion; nay, to turn the will, and
produce godly Resolutions: which if they be pursued, and have their fruit unto
holiness, will in the end bring you to Eternal Life.

And that such Resolutions may be both produced and pursued, I will here add
one observation more, for the removing the greatest of those hindrances to Holy
Communion, which lie in the way of those who pretend to Religion. It is this:

That doubts and scruples, being the weakness, and sickness of the Soul, they
that readily entertain them, and then suffer them to remain there quietly and
peaceably, are in a very ill case; nay, ought to look upon themselves as in a
very dangerous condition. For it is a sign all is naught within; and that they
deceive themselves with a vain opinion of their being Religious. For they who
are truly so, groan under their doubts and scruples, as under a sore Disease;
and therefore will not let them long dwell with them, but seek with all speed
to have satisfaction: which when it is offered, they receive with all readiness
of mind, and are not loath to be cured; but rejoice that they are set at liberty
to serve God without impediment, and that there is nothing left in their Souls
to oppose their duty.

Whereas bad people, in a quite contrary way, give admission to those scruples
and doubts into their minds, with a secret pleasure; and having entertained
them, let them rest, and take up their lodging there very willingly: because
they will plead their excuse, they fancy, for not doing their duty; and be a
defense to their lazyness, Worldly mindedness, and other naughty affections.

In short, Doubts and Scruples never arise in good men's minds without grief,
nor stay there without much trouble; and therefore they long to be rid of them;
and are glad when they are discharged; because they hinder the performance of
their Christian Duty: but bad men not only listen to them willingly, but
embrace them as welcome Guests, which they cherish, and never part withal,
without difficulty, and some sort of inward displeasure; because they desire
the Worldly Spirit that is in them should not be left without all excuse, but
have something to say for it self, when it is pressed by the force of Religion,
against its inclinations.

Search, and try your selves by this mark, and the Lord give you a right
judgment in all things, for Jesus Christ his sake. In whom I remain

Your Faithful Servant, S. Patrick.

Discourse I. THE NECESSITY OF Receiving THE Holy Communion.
THE neglect of the Holy Communion of Christ's Body and Blood was so general,
and so long continued, in the late distracted times, being laid aside in man
whole Parishes of this Kingdom for near twenty years together, that in some
Ages of the Church it would have been interpreted a downright Apostasy from
Christ, and a renunciation of the Christian Faith.

And, though, blessed be God, since the Happy Restoration of his Majesty to
his Throne, and the settlement of the Church upon its ancient foundations, it
has not been so generally neglected; yet it is not so much frequented as it
ought to be.

No, not upon such great and solemn days as this; when we are assembled to
commemorate that stupendous Grace, which our Lord purchased for us by his
precious Blood, and bestowed upon his Church, in sending the Holy Ghost the
Comforter: to be a Witness of his Resurrection and Exaltation at God's right
hand; and to confirm us in the belief of all that he has taught and appointed
in his Church.

For we content our selves only with the Common Prayers (and I wish I could
say, that they are duly attended) and with the Sermon: and then turn our backs
on that part of the Divine Service, which is properly Christian; and
consequently is above all other, most acceptable unto Christ, and unto his Holy
Spirit.

Which I shall therefore at this time press upon your Consciences; as a means
to revive that ancient Devotion, wherewith such Festivals as this was kept:
which now, alas! is wanting among us. And I shall do it from those words of St.
Paul, 1 Cor. xi. 26. wherein he recommends this duty unto us upon this
particular account; that as often as we eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, we do
show the Lords Death till he come.

In which words it is easy to observe these three practical truths. The two
first whereof are plainly supposed; and the other is affirmed and enjoined.

I. The first thing here supposed is; that it is a Christian Duty, to eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup, here spoken of; that is, to receive the Holy
Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood. II. The second is, that it is a Christian
Duty, which ought to be often performed. And then, III. It is here plainly
asserted, that when it is performed, the thing designed in it, and which we
ought to aim at, is, to show the Lord's Death till he come.
The last of these will be sufficiently explained, in the handling of the other
two; viz. the Duty; and the Frequent repetition of it: unto which I shall
confine my Discourse. And of the first at this time.

I.
THat it is a Christian Duty, incumbent upon every one of us, to eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup: that is, to receive the Sacrament of Christ's Body
and Blood.

This is supposed in the words. Which are not to be understood as a mere
permission, that we may do this, if we think good, and when we think good: but
as a command of something we ought to do.

For when he tells us what it is we do, when we eat this Bread and drink this
Cup, (in which we show forth Christ's Death) it plainly implies that it must be
done, and is not left to our choice, whether we will show forth the Death of
our Lord or no.

Of which more anon: when I have laid some other things before you, which will
convince you, if they be considered, of the Obligation that lies upon you, to
the serious performance of this Duty.

And for our clear and orderly proceeding, I shall cast my Discourse into this
method.

I. First, I shall show you, that there is a plain institution of this
Sacrament; and a command that it should be received. And then, II. Secondly, I
shall show from the practice of the Apostles (after that time when they first
received it with our Savior) that it was no temporary command; but of
Everlasting Obligation. III. Thirdly, That there is more ^han their practice to
interpret the meaning and obligation of this command. IV. Fourthly, That in
this Discourse of St. Paul to the Corinthians, there are evident proofs of the
necessity of its performance. V. Fifthly, That the very Text shows the same, by
the end for which it was instituted. VI. Lastly, That all these reasons are
exemplified, by the practice of the Universal Church of Christ.
I.
And first, let it be considered that this Holy Sacrament, is a Divine
Institution, Ordained, Commanded, and required by Christ Himself. Who, the same
night that he was betrayed, took Bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave
it to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body. And he took the Cup,
and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it: For this is
my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of
sins. Matthew. xxvi. 26, 27, 28.

Here is as manifest an Institution of this Sacrament, and as formal a Command
to take and eat and drink what Christ then gave, as can be contrived in words.
Unless they be plainer which we read in other places: for the Institution is
recorded by the two next Evangelists, St. Mark and St. Luke; and here again, in
this Chapter, by St. Paul. Which two last named say, that our Savior added
these words in the Institution of this Sacrament; This do in remembrance of me,
Luke xxii. 19. 1 Cor. xi. 24, 25. Which enjoin this duty by as express a
Command, as those of old; Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy: And,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother. Which may henceforth be blotted out of the
number of the Commandments, if we take this to be none; This do in remembrance
of me. For we can see no difference at all in the way and manner of the
expressions, wherein these things are delivered: much less any such difference,
as makes the former to be enacting words (as Lawyers speak) and the latter to
enact nothing.

Now, if there were nothing, but this express command alone, to be urged for
this duty, one would expect, it should be sufficient to awaken every man to the
performance, who hopes to find mercy with God, and to be saved by Christ Jesus.
For ye are my Friends (says he himself, who knew no other terms of it, Joh.
xv. 14.) if ye do whatsoever I command you. Which he had said before, in the
very first words of the Gospel for this day, Joh. xiv. 15. If you love me, keep
my Commandments.

How are we then the Friends of Christ? Where is our love to him; if we do not
this, which is one of the things that he has commanded, in as downright and
solemn terms, as any other thing whatsoever? His Friends? No; He that shall
break one of the least of my Commandments, says he again, and teach men so, he
shall be least in the Kingdom of Heaven: that is, he shall not have any share
therein; but be slighted and rejected, as he slighted that Commandment, Math.
v. 19.

And therefore what will become of those, (I beseech you consider it) who break
not one of the least, but one of the greatest of his Commandments; as this
certainly is? For it is his last, and dying Commandment; and therefore not the
least. The same night that he was betrayed, he took Bread, etc. (says St. Paul
here in this Chapter, v. 23.) The very night before he suffered, he instituted
this Sacrament, and enjoined his Disciples to do this in remembrance of him: as
a means no doubt to make all the rest of his Commands the better observed; by
preserving him, and his wondrous love perpetually in their memory. Where will
they appear then, who refuse, or neglect to do this? Or what will they be able
to say for themselves, who have no regard to such a remarkable Commandment?

For suppose it had come only in the form of a request, and not with the
authority of a command; could any sensible heart have refused to perform it?
What? not yield to the desire of such a Friend, as well as such a Master, who
has laid such obligations upon us, as none of mankind ever received, nor can
receive, but from him alone? This is strange: this is unaccountable. For all
the World looks on him, as a man of a barbarous nature, void of all humanity;
who denies the last suit of a dying person; though a mere stranger to him:
especially, when it will put him to little or no trouble; but rather be a
pleasure to perform it. What a wretched Creature then is he, by what monstrous
name shall we call him, who puts away from him the last request of a dying
Friend, and of a great Friend; one that has merited ten thousand times more of
him, than his request comes to? This adds the most hideous ingratitude to his
Crime; and is moreover such a shameful violation of the sacred Laws of
Friendship; that it makes him most odious both to God and man for ever.

And yet their guilt is not so small as this; who mind not those last words of
our blessed Savior, Do this in remembrance of me. Which are more than a
Request; nay, more than a command; being his last Will and Testament, which he
was about to seal with his blood: and the last Will of him, who loved us better
than his own life; who dyed, that we might live; who of his own accord laid
down his life, which no body had power to take away. For he had all things,
even Angels themselves at his command; and more particularly, was our most
gracious Lord and Master, and has the most unquestionable Authority over every
one of us.

Who cannot therefore neglect this his last Will and Testament, without the
most dreadful aggravations of such disobedience, nay contempt; as will remain
without a Name, till that terrible day, when he shall come himself to charge
men with this guilt of slighting his dying words.

Think of it I beseech you, what sort of command this is. And (to use the words
of an Excellent Man) if you have any sense of shame, you cannot; any sense of
duty, you dare not; any sense of love, you will not neglect it: but come as often
as you have opportunity, and do this in remembrance of him. Whose Command ought
to overawe you, as he is our Lord; since he might have expected to have
prevailed with you, by his bare entreaties, as he is our Friend.

For it may be further added unto this consideration, that it is a command of a
peculiar nature: having no reason for its performance but purely our regard to
his will and pleasure, and our true love and affection to him; which is hereby
tried, more than by other duties of Religion. Unto which there is something in
nature to incline us; and it is made our manifest interest by the frame of our
Souls and Bodies, and by the constitution of that Society one man has with
another; to be just (for instance) and merciful; to be sober, faithful and
grateful; to live peaceably with our Neighbors, and obediently to our
Governors; and to commend our selves also to God by Prayer, and to give him
thanks, etc. But of doing this, we should never have thought, had not our Lord
required it. And therefore the performance of it, is a pure respect to him; the
mere effect of our Faith in him; and a singular proof of the love and the
reverence, which we bear toward him: as the neglect of it is an evident
demonstration, that whatsoever natural virtue men may have, they have no
Christian; and so have no title to go to that blessed place, where Christ our
Lord and Savior is.

This is the First: upon which I have staid the longer, because it lays the
Foundation of all that follows. For

II.
Secondly, Upon this Precept of Christ, the Apostles built their practice,
after his Resurrection from the dead, and Ascension to Heaven; from whence he
sent the Holy Ghost to confirm that which he had instituted and ordained. For
immediately upon this, on the very day that the Holy Ghost came down, the
number of Christians being enlarged by the addition of three thousand Souls to
the Church, all those Converts, continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine
and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in Prayers. Act. ii. 42.

Which shows that they did not understand, the command of our Savior about
this matter, to be one of those, which the Hebrews call the precept of an hour
(that is, to be observed only at that present time, when it was commanded) but
to be of perpetual obligation, in all future times: For as soon as ever any man
became a Christian, he looked upon this as one part of his Christian duty; as
much as hearing the Sermons of the Apostles, and Prayers.

I am loath to spend the time, in going about to prove against vain Cavillers,
that by breaking of bread is here meant, this holy action of receiving the
Communion: and not their bare eating together. But to give full satisfaction in
that matter, let it be briefly considered: First, that breaking of Bread is
here placed in the midst, between other holy actions, preaching, fellowship,
(or communicating to one another necessities) and prayers; and therefore, in
all reason, must be concluded to be it self of that nature: not a common, but
an holy action.

And besides, secondly, their eating at a common Table, if it be at all
mentioned in this Chapter ( Acts ii.) under the phrase of breaking bread, is
spoken of v. 46. and therefore not intended here. No, nor there neither, I
shall show hereafter, for even in those words also [they continued daily with
one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, or at home,
etc.] the breaking of bread belongs to the holy Communion. And to put all out
of doubt, thus the Syriack (an ancient Translation) understands it; expressly
turning it thus, in the Eucharist. As it does also Act. xx. 7. Upon the first
day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached
unto them, etc. that is, when they came to receive the Eucharist, (says that
Translation) which was a part of their Lords days work; nay, the principal
part; for this was the thing for which the Disciples came together, and not
merely to hear the Apostle preach. And who can give any reason, why it should
not be so now, as it was then? when in familiar speech it was as usual with
them to say, they would go to Church to receive the holy Communion; as it is
with us to say in these days, we will go to Church to Prayers, or to hear a
Sermon.

III.
But more than this, not only the practice of the Apostles, and first
Believers, after they were divinely enlightened by the Holy Ghost, expounds the
meaning and the obligation of this Precept to be perpetual: but Christ himself
showed it so to be, after he went to Heaven, and was exalted at Gods right
hand. For appearing to St. Paul, to make him one of his Apostles, and, in order
to it, revealing himself and the whole Christian Religion to him, which he gave
him commission and authority to preach; He declared this to be a part of his
Will, and a piece of his holy Religion. For I have received of the Lord (says
he in this Chapter, v. 23, 24. etc.) that which I also delivered unto you, that
the Lord Jesus, the same night he was betrayed, took bread; and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my body which is broken
for you; this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner also, he took the
Cup, saying, This is the New Testament, etc.

Observe here, an evident proof, that what our Lord did with his Apostles at
his last Supper, he intended should be done by them and by others, when he was
gone. For sending one, who was not then with him, nor had any knowledge of him
while he was on Earth, to preach his Gospel; he gives him particular
instructions about this matter; to take care to see this done, in remembrance
of him. So St. Paul (who was the man to whom he appeared, and gave a special
Commission, after he went to Heaven) avows to the Corinthians in this place:
telling them, that he delivered nothing to them but what he had received of the
Lord: and what he delivered to them, was this, that they should do what the
Lord Jesus had done with his Apostles, in remembrance of him.

This he received from him: that is, it was of the Lords Institution, and to be
practiced by his order and special command; and therefore called, the Lord's
Supper, v. 20. When ye come together into one place, this is not to eat the
Lord's Supper. Where it is called the Lord's Supper, not because it was eaten
by the Lord with his Apostles (for at that Supper the Corinthians were not
present; nor was that now done, in this place where they came together) but
because it was instituted by the Lord: both then, when he eat that Supper with
his Apostles; and now again, when he appeared to St. Paul, and required him to
see this practiced, in the Churches which he converted. And accordingly, was
now practiced in this Church at Corinth; to whom this Discourse of St. Paul is
directed.

IV.
In which we find many things more, to prove this to be a necessary Christian
Duty: which was the fourth head, mentioned in the beginning.

I shall single out two: which will make it evidently appear to all
unprejudiced minds.

I. The first is very remarkable; that the Apostle takes a great deal of pains,
and spends a great deal of time, in showing the manner, how the holy Communion
ought to be celebrated among them. Which he would not have done, if this had
not been a necessary duty, incumbent on them, by virtue of Christ's Command, and
a Divine Institution.

Do but consider this, I beseech you, and be at the pains to ponder at your
leisure, how serious, earnest, and laborious the Apostle is here (in this
eleventh Chapter of his Epistle) to make the Corinthians sensible, by a long
Discourse about it, after what manner they ought to approach to the Table of
the Lord: reproving their scandalous behavior at the Communion, directing them
how to reform it, and make a due preparation to receive the benefit thereof.
And then tell me, or rather tell your selves, was there any cause, for a
reasonable man, to write so much to show how, and after what manner the thing
should be done, if the very doing of the thing had not been necessary, and
under the obligation of a Command?

Can the manner and way of doing an action, be matter of duty; and yet that
action it self be no duty at all? Or can a man of common sense be very
solicitous in giving directions, how men should order themselves in a place,
and about a business; into which they may never come, but let it alone?

Can the Apostle be supposed, to say so and so you ought to eat this Bread and
drink this Cup; and yet there be no command tying them to eat it and drink it
at all? And so and so you ought to prepare your selves to partake of Christ's
Body and Blood; and yet after that preparation, they might choose, whether they
would do the thing for which they were to be prepared?

Surely we cannot imagine the Apostle to have had so much idle time to spare;
nay, to be so impertinent, as to busy himself in ordering the circumstances of
an holy action; if the action it self had not been a necessary, nay, a very
weighty duty, and of exceeding great moment: which therefore he was highly
concerned, and took due care, should be duly performed.

II. To which add this consideration: that had not this been a divine
Institution, and, the practice according to it, a duty incumbent on them; it is
not to be conceived, that the Apostle would have suffered the Corinthians to
have run so great a hazard, as they did, by the rude manner of doing that
action; if they might innocently have omitted it; and, without any guilt, not
have done it at all. Nor would the Corinthians themselves have been so
unreasonably cruel to their own Souls, as to have incurred the dreadful danger
of Damnation and Death, by an unprepared participation of this Sacrament; if
they could have satisfied themselves that it was no duty to participate; or not
of such consequence, but that it might with safety be let alone.

He that eats and drinks unworthily (says the Apostle) eats and drinks
damnation to himself: and for this cause many are weak, and sickly among you,
and many sleep. That is, the divine judgment being passed against you, has
seized on you; and struck many of you with sicknesses; others with infirmities,
aches and pains, and some with Death; for your riotous eating of the Supper of
the Lord. Does it not concern you then, unless you be content to lie still
under this scourge of God, till you be all cut off, to be better advised, and
not expose your selves in this manner, to the wrath of God: which, it is plain
by terrible Executions, is more than kindled against you?

Now, unto what course does he direct them, that they might avoid these
Judgments? Does he advise them to abstain from the Holy Communion, for fear of
profaning it! to forbear to come to the Table of the Lord, lest there he
stretched out his hand against them, and gave them their Deaths wound?

This had been the shortest, and the safest way, according to the ignorant
resolutions men make in this present Age, to prevent the danger of Damnation:
unto which the Apostle, no doubt, would have charitably directed them; if he
had not known that the thing it self was a duty, and such abstinence from it a
sin.

He could not otherways have refrained, when he beheld the Sword of Divine
Vengeance thus hanging over their Heads, and many already lie bleeding under
it, being stricken down to the ground by Sicknesses, Plagues and Death; he
could not I say in this lamentable case have abstained, from calling to them
with the greatest earnestness and compassion; saying, why do you thus venture
your Souls and Bodies to destruction? Why do you not rather stay away, and
wholly forbear to approach to the Table of the Lord, where you are in danger to
be undone, for your unworthy receiving the sacred pledges of Gods love?

But we hear no such language; because the Apostle had not thus learnt Christ;
nor thus received of the Lord. Who commanded and expected that they should not
abstain from the Sacrament (as the manner now is) but come to it: net rudely
indeed, as they did, but in an holy, decent and prepared manner. Which it had
been in vain to discourse of; if it would have been as well, or would have
sufficed, to abstain from the act of receiving.

This was an invention, not thought of in those early days: when they took
themselves not to be Christians, if they did not frequent the Holy Communion;
as St. Paul proves they were not good Christians, if they did not take care to
come in an holy manner unto it.

That Is the thing to which he presses them; and the only way, he knew of, to
avoid Damnation. Abstaining from the Communion, would not secure them: but let
a man examine himself; and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup,
ver. 28. Not to eat and drink of that holy food, he could not give them a
license. He had no such authority; but lay under an obligation to enjoin the
doing of the thing, and to press it earnestly: as a duty that could neither be
safely omitted, nor practiced without serious Examination of themselves, that
they might not come together to condemnation, v. 34. To come together for this
purpose, to eat and drink that Bread and that Cup, there was a necessity: their
only care was, that it might not be to condemnation.

Which things, being well considered, do convincingly demonstrate, that this is
not only a duty, but a weighty duty, strictly enjoined, and not to be omitted:
no, not in that Church, where the profane doing of it, had brought down Death
and destruction upon them from Heaven.

V.
The same is evident from the end, for which our Lord instituted this
Sacrament, and commanded us to receive it: which is, the publication of the
Lords Death till he come. That's the meaning of this word (...), Ye do show: you
do publish, the word signifies, and tell it abroad: you profess this, and
declare it to all the World, that Christ died for you, and is Lord over you,
having purchased you by his blood; and that you own him so to be, and are the
Servants and Worshippers of that Jesus; who gave himself to be Crucified, and
to die for you.

This is the general meaning of this holy action. Wherein we publicly own
Christ, and profess his Religion: and give it out to all the World, who see
what we do, that we are his, and that we are sensible of it, nay, glory in it,
and intend to continue his for ever?

Now, who can have the confidence to call himself a Christian, and not think he
stands bound thus to own Christ Crucified? And therefore he is bound to do
that, whereby he does own him: which is to receive the holy Sacrament. Which as
often as we do, we show forth the Lords Death: and as often as we neglect, we
do as good as say we are ashamed of him, and of his Cross; or that we repent of
our Christian Profession.

For if to do this, be to show forth Christ's Death, then not to do it, is to
stifle and smother it, as much as in us lies: so that no such thing as the
Death of our Lord should be published, or known in the World.

This I am sure is a true consequence: and our neglect of this duty, will be
thus interpreted by our blessed Lord, when he shall come to take cognizance of
it.

Why? will some say, we testify the contrary, every time we say the Creed: when
we make an open and solemn confession of our Faith in him.

But let such persons observe, how they argue in this against themselves. For
our Lord, in whom they profess to believe, requires that we should not merely
in words, though never so express, but in plain actions also represent his
Death and Passion for our sakes; and thereby our high obligations to him.

That Is the Doctrine of the Apostle in this place. For to what end do you break
the Bread, but to show the breaking, i. e. the wounding and crucifixion of the
Lords Body? And to what end do you pour out the Wine; but to represent the
shedding of the Lords Blood, by those wounds he received for our sake? And for
what end do you eat that Bread, and drink that Cup, but to show that we are
made one with him, and have Communion with him in his Death and Sufferings?

This is the general end of this Sacrament, gratefully to commemorate the Death
of Christ; to show, express, declare, and publish his Death for us, and our
interest in it, in plain and significant actions. Which not being performed, in
obedience to his Command, the Faith which we profess in him does but condemn us
of shameful infidelity to him.

As for the particular ends of it, they are as many as the uses are, which we
can make of his Death and Passion. Wherein, whatsoever love God the Father
showed unto us, in giving his dearly beloved Son to die for us; whatsoever
kindness God the Son expressed, in offering himself freely unto the Death, and
making himself a Sacrifice for our sins: and whatsoever confirmation God the
Holy Ghost has since given us of this love, and this kindness; it is all here
commemorated.

Whatsoever worship, honor, and service is due to our ever blessed Redeemer,
and most bountiful Benefactor, it is all here acknowledged; and after a most
peculiar manner, and with a special respect to him, performed.

Whatsoever strength we can derive from our Feasting with Christ upon his
Sacrifice, and from the oblation we make of our selves, Souls and Bodies unto
him, with most powerful Prayers and Thanksgivings: whatsoever comfort we can
enjoy in Communion with God, and in Communion with his Church: whatsoever Peace
we can have in renewing our Covenant of Friendship with him, in remission of
sins, in receiving the power of the Holy Ghost, in the hopes of eternal life,
in all holy intercourses between Heaven and us: all this is to be expected, and
may be obtained in the Celebration of this Holy Sacrament.

And therefore as this one thing, the Annunciation or publishing of Christ's
Death and our relation to him, is the general end; and these comforts, these
establishments in Faith, and Hope, and love and obedience, are the particular
ends of this Institution: So all these lay a strong obligation upon us duly to
observe it; unless we be content to renounce our interest in Christ: who has
made this the most solemn badg, and authentic mark of our Christianity; and
the great means of conveying to us the benefits of his Death and Passion, as
well as a pledge to assure us thereof.

And this one argument alone, taken from the end of its Institution, is
sufficient to convince us that this Sacrament was intended by Christ, to be
continued in his Church till he come (as my Text speaks) that is, till his last
coming to judge the World: for till then it will be useful, nay necessary for
all these holy ends which I have briefly named. And whosoever he be that hopes
for mercy at that dreadful day, without the careful performance of this duty,
is a presumptuous person, and vainly expects it: because he lives in the
neglect of the very best way of preparing himself, for that great account,
which must then be made of all our actions.

VI.
But now let us suppose, that the words of the Institution had been so
ambiguous, that they might possibly (if we had had no further explication of
them) have been thought to be limited to that particular feast which Christ did
eat with his Disciples, and extended no further: yet the practice of the
Apostles, and the practice of the Church in the Apostolical times, and in all
succeeding times ever since (which are the best Interpreters of the Scriptures)
do expound the words to be a lasting Institution; and an Institution of such
moment that it ought to be most punctually observed.

And did not Christ's own Apostles, think you, understand their Masters meaning,
when he instituted this Sacrament? Or if they had not understood him then,
would they not afterward have understood him; when the spirit was so
plentifully poured out upon them, that they discovered the greatest secrets:
even the thoughts and designs of men's hearts?

Has the universal Church in, and after those times, and during all Ages
since, lived in an error; and taken up an unnecessary practice, or made too
much stir about it, and been too busy and officious in it? Was there not in
this very Church of Corinth (as the Apostle shows in the next Chapter) a
miraculous abundance of miraculous gifts? the spirit of wisdom, the spirit of
knowledge, the spirit of faith, the gifts of healing, of working miracles, of
prophesying, of discerning spirits, of diverse kind of tongues, of
interpretation of tongues? And could not all those gifts, all those spiritual
powers, and supernatural assistances, enable them to understand the words of
Christ's Institution? Was not that indeed, the true Age of the Spirit? Were they
not infinitely more enlightened, than any can pretend to be now, or hope to be
hereafter? And could they not discover by their illuminations (if it had been
true) that which some vain Enthusiasts dream of, that where there was such
plenty of the Spirit, there was no need of such outward Ordinances, as the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper? Could they not see this so clearly, and be so
sensible of it, as that they should not have been so much concerned, as they
were, about the practice of this duty, in that Church, if there was no need of
it, or our Savior never intended it should be of much moment? Nay, as that
they should not have with such danger to themselves (as I noted before) have
repeated it in their Church, if our Savior never intended any such repetition?

Surely, these things carry such evidence in them, that to add more light, in
so clear a case, would be (as we say) to hold a Candle to the Sun. And
therefore I shall here make an end of my proofs: supposing I have said rather
too much than too little in this argument; and that you stand fully convinced,
the Celebration of this holy Communion, is not only of divine Institution, to
be used by the Church in all Ages, but must of necessity be duly practiced by
us, if we hope to be saved.

And if that be true, hearken then I beseech you what follows thereupon.

I.
What shall we then think of those, who live in the constant neglect of it?

Suffer me to propose this single plain question to you. Whether the willful
continuance in any known sin, be not a damnable State? A state of direct
opposition to our Savior; and consequently a state wherein there is no
Salvation? Can this be denied? and it is as undeniable, that a constant neglect
of a known Precept of Christ, a Precept so universally owned, so universally
practiced, as you have heard, in the Church of God, is a wilful sin. What is it
else? or what can make a sin willful, but acting against a clear knowledge, and
conviction, and means and opportunities, of doing otherways?

Consider of it, I beseech you, again and again. If willful sins do not
actually damn, being continued in; let us know, for what sins they are, for
which men are damned: or do you think there is any such thing as damnation at
all? Certainly, if there be damnation, it is for wilful sins: and if there be
wilful sins, they are sins deliberately committed against a known Law: and if
there be any known Law among Christians, this is one; that they ought to
receive this holy Sacrament, in remembrance of their Lord and Masters Death for
them: and therefore the constant, the affected, the upbraided, the reproved,
and yet not reformed, omission of this duty, is most certainly a deliberate,
nay a presumptuous omission of it; or else there is no such thing as
presumption in the World.

What will you think then of your selves, I ask again, if from time to time,
from month to month; nay, from year to year, you wilfully neglect a plain, an
evident, an undoubted Precept of our blessed Lord and Savior? a Precept
commanding us to commemorate his Death, to represent his Passion, to admire his
Love, to praise his Kindness, to partake of his Graces, to share with him in
his Comforts, to knit our selves faster to him in holy Obedience, and to
rejoice in hope of feasting with him and all the Company of the blessed in his
Heavenly Kingdom?

If you have not been hitherto convinced of this duty, your sin is the less;
and may in some measure admit of an excuse. But if, being now convinced, you
stand out, and still neglect the performance of it; then can you not in any
wise have the least excuse for your wilful disobedience. And if you be not now
convinced, by these things which have been represented to your minds; I must
say, it is because you wilfully refuse, because you will not receive
conviction. And this wilful refusal to be convinced, this shutting your Eyes
against the clear light wherein this duty is shown to you, is still another
wilful sin; added to the presumptuous neglect of the holy Communion.

II.
Satisfy your selves about what I have now proposed: determine what is like to
become of you, if you continue in a wilful sin (as the neglect of the holy
Communion most certainly is, when the will of Christ, in an express Law
commanding it, is made known to you and pressed upon you) and then I may be the
less earnest in beseeching you, to remain no longer under this heavy guilt. For
how can you, with your Eyes open, run your selves into Eternal Damnation? what
need is there that I should beseech you, not to throw your selves headlong into
the Fire that never shall be extinguished? It is sufficient to entreat you once
more, to consider what has been said, to believe it, and to keep it in mind:
and then you will make an amends for former neglects, by a more careful and
zealous performance of this duty, in time to come.

Especially if you consider how by neglecting this duty, you neglect all those
invaluable blessings, which are represented, offered, and communicated to us in
the right performance thereof.

This is the only Argument whereby I shall further urge you: but I will press
it in a few particulars.

I. And first, there is nothing wherein all Christians do more universally
agree than this, that God in giving his Son to die for us, demonstrated the
greatest love that was ever shown to mankind. Which incomparable love we all
agree likewise, is represented, expressed and recommended to us, in the
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. And can we think fit then, to
neglect this holy Communion? For do we not therein neglect and undervalue that
wonderful love, which in the holy Communion is most effectually represented,
laid before us, and exhibited unto us?

Is the love of God so inconsiderable a thing, as to be slighted and passed by
with careless neglect? Is the Death of Christ, wherein that love appeared, so
small a thing, as to be forgotten, or seldom thought of; and that although he
has instituted a Sacrament on purpose for its Commemoration? And do we not
forget and slight it, when we regard not that Institution, and make no such
Commemoration?

I know how loath men are to yield to these convictions; and how desirous they
are to support themselves in a belief, that they neither undervalue that love,
nor forget this Death, though they do not attend at the Table of the Lord. For
they remember both, they say, in their own private thoughts; and give God
thanks for his inestimable love in giving Christ to die for them.

But suppose they say true; that they have such a sense of God and of our
blessed Savior; as not altogether to let them slip out of their minds, nor
wholly forget their benefits: yet let them weigh this seriously, that where a
known divine institution, appointed on purpose for the Commemoration of Christ's
Death, and of Gods love therein manifested, is neglected; it must be confessed
that the same love of God, and death of Christ is in a very sinful degree
undervalued and forgotten. For no Friend will think himself remembered by him;
who lays aside that very thing, which he left him, and solemnly desired him to
wear, in token of his remembrance.

Let such men consider also, that they stand bound not only to remember or call
to mind Christ's Death privately, but openly to make that solemn and public
Commemoration of it, which is commanded by our blessed Lord. And in like
manner, it is not sufficient to have a value of Gods love; but we ought to show
our esteem of it, in the practice of that Institution, wherein that love is
signally represented to us.

In brief; we deceive our selves if we imagine we remember Gods love in the
Death of Christ as we ought to do; while we do not express and show our
remembrance by that sign and token which he has appointed as a Testimony
thereof.

If we do it not in this way; He will look upon us as forgetful of him and of
his love.

II. And by forgetting that, it is not to be conceived how much mischief we do
to our selves and others. For we are all agreed that the consequence which St.
John draws from what has been now said, is good and strong; Beloved, if God so
loved us, we ought also to love one another, 1 John iv. 11. Which mutual love
the Apostle presses by such Arguments in that Epistle, as demonstrate a man
has nothing of God in him, who wants this grace? which contains, at least, one
half of the duty of a Christian.

Do we not need then to have this love inkindled, or rather inflamed, nourished
and increased in us, by all means? And is there any means so effectual, as the
consideration, the solemn consideration how the great God has loved us, though
utterly unworthy of his love, nay deserving his heaviest displeasure? And where
is this represented so lively to us, as in the holy Communion? Which Christ
has also appointed on purpose, to be a sacred Bond of love, unity, peace and
concord among Christians; by their all eating of one and the same Bread, and
drinking of one and the same Cup.

Which while they neglect, how can they pretend to the love of God? or how can
they hope to have this mutual love one to another, rooted in their hearts? when
they never or seldom communicate together in the most holy things? never own
that they are members one of another; nor link themselves together by that
common tie of Charity, which their Lord has instituted, and commanded them to
use, for this very end, among others; that they may be knit together in one
body, be of one mind and heart, and live in peace?

No, they are all broken in pieces, they are torn in sunder, and continue so;
and hate and malign, and bite and devour one another: and that with a most
implacable rage and malice, to the great scandal of Religion; the spoiling of
humane Society; the danger of over-turning Government; and thereby ruining all
our outward comforts.

And shall we heighten this guilt by adding this aggravation to it, that we
love to have it so?

If we have any kindness left one for another, nay any kindness for our selves,
let us not refuse the means of a cure: this Sovereign means, which alone will
prove an effectual remedy. Being a remedy of Gods own prescription and
appointment, for the quenching all our unnatural heats, and the killing all our
unchristian hatreds, and the burying of all our animosities and quarrels, so
that they shall never rise again: Or if they do, be immediately extinguished,
and laid again in their Graves, by laying a new obligation upon our selves in
this Sacrament, to love one another; and to walk in love, as Christ also has
loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for
a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. v. 2.

III. In which Sacrament I might represent how many comforts there are
contained, besides those of love; comforts infinitely more satisfactory, than
those vain, those perishing pleasures, of which sensual men are so greedy, that
they make them neglect this holy Communion: and thereby lose those divine,
those heavenly joys, which Christ, in the serious use of it, imparts unto his
members.

But, to shorten this Discourse, let it suffice to ask you, what is there in
the love of God toward Mankind, which you can think more valuable, than the
Covenant of Grace, by which alone, you have the promise of remission of sins
assured unto you? And consequently, how can you forget that most precious
blood, which ratifies, which confirms and seals that gracious Covenant? Or how
can you neglect that special means, which the love of God our Savior has
ordained, for the preserving the remembrance of his most precious
bloodshedding fresh in your minds?

If you do truly remember that blood which was shed, that body which was broken
for you; you must at the same time judge it fit and necessary, to demonstrate
you remember it, by making that Commemoration of it, which our Lord requires:
and not neglect to see that represented to the Eye, and expressed by real
actions lively signifying the Death of Christ; which you pretend gratefully to
Commemorate in your hearts.

It is much to be feared, that they do but deceive their own Souls, who pretend
to the one without the other.

For did not God frame and fashion you in your Mothers Womb? And does not he
who framed you there, know your frame ^d your mould better than you (...) do
your selves? And did he not therefore appoint this outward representation of
his love, in the holy Communion, because he knew otherwise you would not be
sufficiently sensible thereof? What other reason can there be assigned for this
Institution, but the wise goodness of God; who knows that divine things
accommodated to sense, do, by affecting the Eye, better affect the heart, than
it would be affected without such sensible applications? This is the reason,
why he has made spiritual things to become in great measure sensible; in
accommodation to our nature, and compliance with our frame; which he best
knows, because it is of his own contrivance. Who has clothed our Spirits with
flesh: and therefore moves the inward powers by (...) Which if we slight, (...)
these means of being affec^ (...) spiritual things, which God (...) most
perfectly understands how our minds may be best moved, has accommodated and
appointed for that end: it is evident we despise the Wisdom of God; or are
vainly conceited of our selves: and presume to think that we can be as well
affected, without these outward means and sensible helps, which he has
instituted for our spiritual improvement.

A strange presumption, this! But which every one is guilty of, who contents
himself with bare thinking of Christ and of his love in dying forus: without
the use of those sensible signs, which he has appointed, to awaken our minds,
unto a more lively and deep apprehension and sense of his love, than any thing
else can give us.

(...) which considerati^ (...) be added; that the (...) ^pport and comfort,
the ^fe of every Christian Soul, is to be in a state of Friendship with God; by
continuing in the Holy Covenant we have made with him, and he with us in Christ
Jesus. If this be not preserved carefully; all true joy in this World is lost
together with it.

Now, do you not find your selves too prone to break your Baptismal Vow; and
thereby to violate that Covenant, wherein you stand engaged, and sacredly
promised to keep? And shall not that Covenant, after you have violated it, be
solemnly and speedily renewed; that the breach between God and you may be
healed, and you may notwithstanding look upon him, as your Father? And is not
the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood appointed for this renewal? Do you know
any other solemn way of being reconciled again?

What account then can be given of it, that so many having broken this
Covenant, are not at all concerned to renew it? but remain separated from God,
and from holy Communion with him? How come we to be so careless of our Souls,
so negligent of God, so unconcerned in the Covenant of Grace, as wilfully,
continuedly, from time to time to forbear that Holy Ordinance; wherein not only
this Covenant is renewed, but so many mercies of God, as you have heard,
commemorated and represented; so many joys, so many comforts and spiritual
assistances communicated unto us?

There is no account to be given of this matter; no reason that can be assigned
but only this: that men will not seriously consider, either their duty, or
their interest. Or if they do, when they are clearly represented to them, they
forget and lay aside all those considerations; and do not immediately pursue
them, whither they would lead them. And so they turn to something else; which
takes up their thoughts and their time, and ingages their affections: till they
be carried away Captive by the Lusts of the Flesh and of the World; beyond the
power of any means, that we know of, to rescue them from destruction.

But I hope better things of those, who duly attend to what has been said; and
that all those who have not now prepared themselves for this Holy Duty, of
showing forth the Lords Death, whereby he purchased, among other blessings, the
great gift of the Holy Ghost (which it would have been most proper, on this
day, to have most solemnly acknowledged) will speedily set themselves about it;
and be ready against the next opportunity: that is, against the next Sunday, or
at least the next after that; and so for the time to come be careful to perform
this duty, as often as the Christian Religion requires.

Which, I shall demonstrate in the next Discourse, is much oftener than men
imagine.

The end of the first Discourse.
Discourse II. THE FREQUENCY OF Holy Communion.
HAving demonstrated in the foregoing Discourse, that it is a duty
indispensably lying upon all Christians, to receive the holy Sacrament of
Christ's Body and Blood; a duty of great weight and importance; for the neglect
of which I do not see, how we can atone, by the performance of any other duty
whatsoever: I proceed to show, that it is a duty which ought to be frequently
repeated; for as often as ye eat this Bread (says the Apostle) and drink this
Cup, ye do show the Lords Death till he come. Which plainly insinuates, that
they did this often: and that it was their duty so to do, shall be the subject
of this present Discourse.

And here now, in the very entrance of it, I must acknowledge, that we are not
told either in this place of Scripture, or any other, how often we ought to
Communicate, or how frequently the Church ought to make this Commemoration of
Christ's Death and Passion for our sake.

Of which observation men now make a very bad and preposterous use. For,
finding that our Lord has only said, This do, in remembrance of me, but no
where said, when, at what time, or times, it is to be done, they imagine that
they satisfy his will; if they do not wholly withdraw themselves from his
Table, though they come never so seldom thither.

And truly, by this sort of reasoning, that because we are no where told how
often we should do this, we need only take care to do it sometime or other; it
may be thought sufficient, if we do it but once in our whole life. And so
dangerous are such conceits, which men frame to themselves from such
Observations, that vast numbers (though otherwise not wicked) live in a
constant neglect of this Duty, till they come to die: and then, upon their
Deathbeds calling for this Sacrament and receiving it, they think they have
fulfilled the will of our Lord, in doing this, as he has commanded; because,
though he has commanded it to be done, he has no where commanded when, or how
often it should be done.

From whence we may certainly conclude that this is a false consequence, which
men draw from the silence of the holy Scriptures in this matter: because it is
so dangerous and pernicious, that, in a manner, it quite destroys our Religion;
by taking away this part of it, which is the principal; and making it
unnecessary as long as a man lives, so he be but sure to receive when he is at
the point of Death.

Of that indeed no man can be assured: but supposing he does receive the
Communion at the very last gasp, he is thus far safe and not guilty of the
breach of this Commandment, if this consequence be true: that because our
Savior has no where appointed the time, or said how frequently we should do
this in remembrance of him, we do comply with his Institution, provided we do
it sometime or other.

Now to destroy this false notion, from whence such absurdities flow, I shall
in the first place show you; that the quite contrary, naturally and necessarily
follows from this observation, of our Saviors appointing no time, for the
performance of that which he required to be done in remembrance of him.

From whence men's wicked hearts draw this conclusion, as I have said, that it
may suffice to do this now and then, though never so seldom.

I.
But the true, the genuine, and honest conclusion which follows from thence is
this: that our Lord having named no fixed settled time or times for the
performance of this holy action, it is an argument that he designed and
appointed it as a constant, common, and ordinary part of the Christian Service,
which he would have performed in his Church at all times.

Let those words of Christ, this do in remembrance of me, be well weighed, and
there is no man can infer less from thence, than that if he had intended this
should be done only at some such great and solemn times, as the Passover was
among the Jews (when he first instituted this Feast, and eat it with his
Disciples) he would not have suffered us to be ignorant of his meaning, but
told us in plain terms, that upon some certain days, and at some extraordinary
Assemblies, this should not be forgotten: But that he having named no time
whatsoever, we ought to look upon his words, as instituting this holy action to
be a part of that Worship, Honor and Service, which he expected from his
people in all their Religious Assemblies.

For being ordained in remembrance of him, it is most reasonable to think he
intended this Commemoration should be as constantly made, as they met together
to acknowledge him for their Lord and Savior, and only Mediator with God the
Father.

And being a Commemoration ordained instead of all the Sacrifices, whereby,
under the Law, they daily implored the mercies of God, or gave thanks for them;
it ought, in all Conscience, to be as continual a rite of Religious Worship as
those Sacrifices were.

And thus, when men had upright hearts, and unbiassed affections, they did
honestly understand our Saviors meaning; and accordingly made this a constant
part of their Divine Service: Which is the next thing I would desire you to
observe. For I would not have you to rely merely on my reasonings and
inferences (though I verily think this would appear, a true way of arguing, and
a right conclusion unto any unprejudiced mind, if we had no more to justify it)
but as a further evidence of this; nay, as a full conviction that we ought so
to take it, I beseech you seriously to consider; that

II.
Thus the Apostles and the first Christians understood the meaning of our
blessed Savior in this Institution. And can we have any better Expositors of
his words, any surer directors of our practice, than such great Servants of
his, who were filled with the Holy Ghost? Who never met together to worship
God, and our Savior; but this was a part, and a principal part too, of the
service they performed in those Assemblies. If I can make this good, the other
will follow: for there can no other account be given, why they did this as
constantly as they assembled themselves for Divine Service; but because they
took that to be our Saviors meaning and intention, when he said, This do, in
remembrance of me.

Now there is nothing more apparent in the holy story, than this, that the
Apostles, and those whom they first converted, made this a daily part of the
offices of Religion. For we read that when three thousand Souls joined
themselves to the Church upon the day of Pentecost, they continued steadfastly
in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of Bread, and Prayers.
Act. ii. 42. Where breaking of Bread, I proved before, signifies their
receiving the Eucharist; and now observe, that the words we translate continued
steadfastly (which in the Greek are (...)) signify, that they were constant and
assiduous in this holy action. For the word imports frequency, as appears from
other places; particularly from Romans xii. 12. Where there is the same word in
the Apostles Command for Prayer; and we translate it, continuing instant in
Prayer. And Coloss. iv. 2. it is joined with watching thereunto with
thanksgiving. From which Observations we gain this; that as frequent and
instant as they were in Prayer, so frequent and instant they were in breaking
of Bread: for they were (...), constant and unwearied in them, both alike.

Now what this constancy or frequency was, is expounded in the 46. verse: where
St. Luke says, they continued (the same word again) daily with one accord in
the Temple, and breaking Bread from house to house, or at home; as the word is
better translated in the Margin of our Bibles. Where we see that breaking of
Bread at home, in their own private Houses, was as daily, as their going to the
Temple publicly: and can be meant of nothing, but their receiving the holy
Communion every day. For no man can so much as imagine a reason, why breaking
of Bread should be mentioned as their daily practice at home, together with
their resort to the Temple service abroad: but to signify that they
communicated among themselves, in the service of the Eucharist or Holy
Communion, proper to the Faith of Christians; as they communicated with the
Jews in the service of the Temple, common to all the Disciples of Moses.

You may impute this, it is possible, to the warmth of their zeal: but remember
withal, that this zeal was grounded upon knowledge; which they wanted not in
those days. And the knowledge they had of Christian Religion taught them; that
when our blessed Savior commanded them to do this, in remembrance of him,
naming no time when it should be done, he meant it should be done always in
their Christian Assemblies: as the perfection and Crown of that Service, for
which they Assembled.

III.
And indeed, if we had not had these records of the practice of the Apostles,
and of the first Christians, to explain the meaning of our Saviors
Institution; yet we should have had reason to think it was so in the Apostles
days (and therefore the meaning of our Savior) because this practice of
receiving the holy Communion every Day, continued in the Church for some Ages.
I cannot say, in every place (for we have no Records of that, but rather of the
contrary) but in many places, and in the most famous that are come to our
notice; and where the vigor of Christian Religion remained; and where they
were awakened, by more than ordinary dangers, to consider their obligation.

Thus we find St. Cyprian in his Exposition of the Lords Prayer, takes that
Petition, give us this day our daily Bread; to signify, in the spiritual sense,
our desire to be fit to receive the Eucharist every day, for the food of
Salvation. And in his Epistle to the Church of Thibaris, speaking of a more
grievous and fiercer fight of persecution hanging then over their heads, he
tell them, therefore the Soldiers of Jesus Christ ought to fortify and arm
themselves well against it, with an incorrupt Faith, and robust Virtue;
considering that they did for this end quotidie calicem Christi sanguinis
bibere, etc. every day drink the Cup of Christ's blood, that they might also be
able to shed their own blood for Christ's sake. In which words he addresses his
Discourse to the Laics, as well as the Clergy: exhorting all the faithful unto
the constancy of Martyrdom; which Men, Women and Children endured.

Nay, long after this, we learn from St. Hierom (in his Apology to Pammachius
for his Books against Jovinian, and other places) that this Custom continued at
Rome, and in Spain; as well as in Africa: where St. Austin tell us (in his
famous Epistle to Januarius) that in his time, some did quotidie communicare,
etc. daily communicate of the body and blood of our Lord; though others, he
acknowledges, did it only on certain days. St. Basil also begins his Epistle to
Caesaria Patritia in this manner; to communicate every day, and partake of the
holy body and blood of our Lord Christ, (...), is a commendable and profitable
thing: and then adds, that they did communicate four times a Week in his
Church, on the Lords day, Wednesday, Friday, and the Sabbath, that is Saturday;
and on other days, if the memory of any Martyr fell upon them.

Nay, three or four Ages more after this, such a sense of this Devotion
remained, that Walafridus Strabo (in his Book of Ecclesiastical Affairs, c.
20.) says, it seems to be very full of reason, that Christians, especially
Clergymen, should every day be employed in divine Offices; and, when some very
grievous spot of mind or body does not hinder, receive the Lords Bread and
Blood, without which we cannot live: imitating the wholesome diligence of the
primitive Church; concerning whom we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that
they persevered in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of
Bread and Prayers: and a little after, they continued daily with one accord in
the Temple, and breaking Bread from House to House etc. quoting the words I
named before.

All which, and much more that might be said, make it apparent, that the Church
in the best times, and the best men in the Church, in after Ages, looked upon
this as an ordinary part of Christian Worship: which Christ intended should be
performed in his Church, as often as they Assembled for Divine Service. And what
other ground could they have for it, but this; that Christ having confined it
to no time, they thought, in reason, it should be taken for a duty he expected
from them at all times, when they came to worship him, and make their thankful
acknowledgments unto him.

IV.
And truly, we can gather no less from the very nature of this holy action;
which sufficiently shows it was our Saviors meaning, that it should be a daily
part of the Churches Service. It being, as all know, a solemn Thanksgiving unto
God, and a Form of Prayer and Petitioning (which every one confesses are acts
of Worship to be constantly performed) and also a commemoration of that upon
which the efficacy of all our Prayers and Thanksgivings depends, viz. the
Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross: which is here likewise represented unto
God, as that which appearing always before him in the Heavens, intercedes for
us, and makes all our Sacrifices acceptable to his Majesty.

And besides all this, is the peculiar worship which the Church gives unto
Christ, as a grateful acknowledgment of his unparalled love, in laying down
his life for us, to purchase the most inestimable benefits; which he herein
also assures unto us, and bestows upon us. Which is in part declared in these
words, upon which I have built my Discourse, wherein we are told the end of
this holy Sacrament is, to show or publish the Lords Death: that is, show it
with praise; predicate, extol and magnify (as the word (...) imports) proclaim
with our highest praises, the loving kindness of the Lord; in the glorious work
of our Redemption, through his most precious blood. But is more fully declared
in the very words of the Institution, when he said, Do this in remembrance of
me: which show that our doing this, is the peculiar honor, we do our blessed
Lord; by making a public commemoration that he took our nature upon him, that
he died for us, that he obtained thereby a glorious Victory over all our
Enemies; that he purchased for himself and for us immortal glory; and is now at
Gods right hand, in full power to bestow it upon us. In memory of all these
things, says our Savior, do this; that when I am dead, I may always live in
your hearts; and the knowledge of all these things, may go down to all
posterity; and be commemorated from one Generation unto another for ever, with
thankful praises: but especially the memory of my Death may be transmitted to
them; and be celebrated with continual acknowledgments.

For it was but fit that he should be publicly honored in that, which when he
suffered, exposed him to the greatest contempt. And no doubt it was the design
of God in appointing this Rite of holy worship, to have his Death commemorated
with Everlasting praises, which, for the present, had brought him into the
utmost disgrace. To which purpose is that passage, in an Easter Sermon,
ascribed to Caesarius Bishop of Arles: because he intended to remove out of our
sight the body which he had taken, and to place it in Heaven; it was necessary
that in the same day, he should consecrate for us the Sacrament of his Body and
Blood, to the end, that we should honor by the type, that which had been once
offered for the price of our Salvation.

In short this is the proper worship of God Incarnate, and of our Crucified
Savior: and therefore cannot be thought by wise considerers, to have been
intended to be left unto uncertainty, whether we would perform it or no, or
when we would be pleased to perform it: but to have been ordained as a daily
Service, which should be continually performed unto Christ.

Which, in truth, the continual necessities of the Church require: it being the
principal Act whereby we have Communion with Christ; and partake of the
Sacrifice he made on the Cross. We are united unto him, as Members of his Body,
in the other Sacrament of Baptism; wherein also his holy Spirit is bestowed
upon us, as a principle of life and motion suitable to our Religion: which
directs us unto this Sacrament as the chief outward visible means of preserving
our Union with Christ, by having constant Communion with him, and with his holy
spirit. Whose influences he here communicates unto us, for our growth and
increase in spiritual life and holiness: and we therefore, in reason, should be
desirous constantly to receive, because we constantly want them; and are too
apt to start aside from him, unto whom we ought to keep our selves steadfastly
united, by Faith, and Love, and uniform universal Obedience.

Put now all this together, that it is an act of holy worship; a worship
altogether as peculiar to the Church, as the Sacrifice on the Cross is peculiar
to Christianity; the only worship wherewith we honor our blessed Lord and
Savior; a Commemoration, nay, a representation of that which makes all our
Services acceptable unto God; and the principal way and means whereby we have
Communion with Christ; from whom we stand in continual need of the
Communication of his grace: and we shall soon be satisfied, that the plainest,
and most reasonable answer that can be given to those, who ask, how often did
Christ intend we should eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup, is this; as
often as we assemble publicly to worship God our Savior. For there is no
worship peculiar to him but this; nor is there any, wherein we have such
Communion with him, as in this: by which we do truly and indeed participate of
the Sacrifice offered unto God upon the Cross, as the Jews and the Gentiles did
of their Sacrifices offered up on their Altars.

Thus the Apostle discourses at large in the Chapter before my Text, 1 Cor. x.
16, 17. etc. where he takes it for an undeniable truth, that Christians do
communicate with God their Savior, in the merits of his Death, by receiving
the holy Eucharist. And thence proves it to be unlawful for them to partake of
the Gentile Sacrifices; by proving that to eat of their Sacrifices was to be
accessory to their Idolatries: as the Jews by eating of such Sacrifices as were
offered among them, did partake of the Altar (or did communicate with the
Altar) that is, Communicate with God, whose Altar that was upon which the
Sacrifices were consumed. Which evidently supposes that Christians also did in
the Eucharist, partake of a Sacrifice, and were thereby joined to Christ, who
was that Sacrifice. Which though carried by him into the most holy place of the
Heavens, there to be presented unto God, is no less participated by Christians,
in this holy Feast of the Eucharist, than the Jews did participate of their
offerings of thanksgiving on the Altar.

I know very well, it will be objected, that by understanding our Saviors
meaning in this Institution after this manner, we prove a great deal too much;
and argue our public service to be defective; when it wants this peculiar
worship of Christ, which he ordained.

To which I shall only say this, that if by discoursing thus, we prove no more
than is true; our worship must be confessed to be but imperfect, when the Holy
Communion is wanting: not so perfect, at least, as that of the ancient
Christians was. Which we had much better honestly acknowledge, and beseech God
to accept for Christ's sake, of such services as we do perform, though, in some
regard, and in comparison, imperfect ones: than, by going about to defend
untruths and establish false notions in Religion, to make our selves more
guilty before God.

I know also it will be urged against what I have said; that surely it is
sufficient, if we every day pray to God in Christ's name, and for his sake
desire our Prayers may find a gracious Audience; praising him also, as our
Savior and Redeemer and Intercessor at Gods right hand: though we do not use
these visible signs, which he has appointed.

But, if this be entirely sufficient, so that our Christian worship may be
justly thought entire, complete, and perfect, without doing this in remembrance
of Christ: then for what end was it instituted by him? Why did he appoint it,
if our worship be complete without it? Then it is as needless and superfluous
an addition to the Christian Service, as we seem now, by our entire neglect of
it or seldom performance, to imagine it to be.

Which, since no Christian dare say, because it disparages the wisdom of our
Savior in appointing it, if all be perfect without it; we must therefore, to
our shame, take the other course, and say; that we are fallen into a state of
imperfection, but hope our less perfect services will be accepted, by virtue of
that most perfect Sacrifice of Christ, which we commemorate publicly, as often
as we are able.

V.
And that might very well be oftener, than we do commemorate it; for I shall now
proceed to tell you (as an Introduction to the account I am about to give, how
the Service of the Church came to be so defective) that when Christian people
grew less devout, yet still they did not fail to perform this peculiar service
to Christ, every Lords Day, and Holy Day, at the least: that is, on those days
of the Week, as you heard out of St. Basil, when the memory of any Martyr was
celebrated. Which in time becoming the practice of many Churches, made an
ancient Writer about Divine Offices (mentioned by Cassander in his Book of
Liturgies) affirm, that men employed in secular businesses, received the
Communion, even in the primitive times, only on the Lords Days and other
Festivals: interpreting, as many think, the practice of the most ancient times,
by the Customs of his own.

It is possible indeed that he had a better reason for what he affirmed;
because we find something in Scripture to countenance this opinion, that very
early some Christians did content themselves with so doing. For in Acts xx. 7.
we read, that at Troas upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples came
together to break Bread (i. e. to receive the Eucharist) Paul preached unto
them, etc. From whence it should seem (says our learned Mr. Thorndike) that in
this Church at Troas the Eucharist was celebrated, even in the times of the
Apostles, not every day as it was at Jerusalem, but only on the Lords Day.

For the first day of the Week being mentioned as the time, when they came
together to break Bread, it seems, says he, to stand against the rest in terms
of difference; as if upon other days they did it not.

And thus much I believe is certain, that when the Church was multiplied, all
Christians could not meet together every day: but some one day, some another;
and all on the Lords Day. Which being the principal day, it came to pass in
process of time, that it was the only day of the Week when they celebrated the
Eucharist: but on that day none omitted it, no more than they did the rest of
the Christian Service. And thus, it seems to me most reasonable to understand
the matter here at Troas: where they did not omit the Communion on other days
(for I cannot persuade my self, but that they were conformable to the Mother
Church of Jerusalem) but such as could assemble themselves, and attend upon
Divine Service daily' did receive it; and on the Lords Day all the Christians
in the City came together for that purpose; and whatsoever business they had,
which hindered them on other days, it did not hinder them on this: but they
all came to do their duty to their Savior, and make a public Commemoration of
his love.

And in this they were so strict for a long time, and it was accounted so great
a fault to be absent, that if any persons were found not to have Communicated
for three Sundays together, they were to be Excommunicated, and separated from
the Society of the Church, by the Canons of three several Synods mentioned by
Zonaras upon the eleventh Canon of the Apostles: which orders them to be cast
out, as an offense to the Church, who entered into the Church and heard the holy
Scriptures, but did not stay for the Prayers, nor receive the Holy Communion.
Which was thought so necessary, that the Deacon who before the Communion (as
you shall hear anon out of St. Chrysostom) cried, all you who are under
penance, you who cannot pray ( i. e. with the faithful) go out; is appointed by
the Constitutions called Apostolical, to stand with the Subdeacon, at the Door
of the Church, and hinder all the rest, who were not under Penance (and so
bound to Communicate) that they should not go out till they had received the
holy Sacrament.

And unto this pitch of perfection, if not higher, our first Reformers desired
to bring the Service of the Church. I say, if not higher, because in the first
Communion Book of Edward VI. there is a Rubric which supposes daily
Communion, not only in Cathedrals but in other places: as there is another
which takes care the people should be admonished and quickened; when they are
negligent to come to the Communion upon the Sunday, or Holy Day. Which shows
(as the learned person abovementioned observes) that they affected the
frequentation of this Service, according to the primitive pattern; so far as
they thought it attainable: desiring that even upon other Holy Days, as well as
Sundays, it should be celebrated; in the Mother Churches, at least, as patterns
and examples unto the rest. And thus much Mr. Calvin himself roundly declares
(after he had commended the ancient custom of communicating daily, and
condemned the custom of communicating only once a Year, as a Diabolical
invention) that the Table of the Lord ought to be prepared for Christian
people, at least, once a Week: and that all should be exhorted and stimulated
(and the slothful chidden) to flock, as hungry people, unto such a Banquet: As
his words are in his IV. Book of Institutions C. xvii. n. 46.

And so it is still enjoined, in one of our Rubricks, that in Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches, and Colleges, where there are many Priests and Deacons,
they shall receive the Communion every Sunday, at least, except they have a
reasonable cause to the contrary. Now nothing, you have heard, was thought a
reasonable cause in ancient time to keep any of the people from the Communion,
except such sins as threw them into the number of the Penitents: For none of
the rest were suffered to go out of the Church, but stayed to receive it. Nay,
such was the devout affection of the primitive Christians, while they remained
one heart, and one Soul, that they never celebrated the Communion (as we learn
from Justin Martyr his first Apology) but they sent it to those Believers who
were absent (particularly to those whose bodily infirmities kept them from the
public Assemblies) that they might have Communion with the Church; and it
might appear, by their partaking of the same Bread, that they were one Body,
with those who were present.

And here let me briefly tell you, that this Rubric or Rule, ought in reason
to be the rather observed (as it will hereafter in this and other Cathedrals)
that the people who live near, or come, upon occasion, thither, may have
frequent opportunity to Communicate with the Mother Church. Where anciently
Christians were very desirous to receive this holy Sacrament, as often as they
could; that they might testify there was but Vnum Altar, one Altar, as they
called it, one Christian Society and Communion; unto which they all belonged,
and with whom they were in Union: Particular Parishes in the Diocese, being not
distinct Churches, but parts and Members of one Church, which is the Mother
Church, from whence they all, in ancient time, did originally spring.

For so we find in the Monuments of the Church, that a Bishop and his Clergy
having made Conversions in some considerable part of a Country, there they
seated themselves, and from thence spread the Gospel into neighbor places; who
all looked upon themselves afterward, as depending upon that one prime place, as
a stream upon a Fountain: which they owned by communicating there, with the
Bishop and his Clergy, as often as it was possible for them so to do.

Thus it is apparent, by the History of the Acts of the holy Apostles, that the
very first Preachers of Religion began in Cities; and afterward carrying the
glad tidings of the Gospel into the adjacent Towns and Villages; those Towns
and Villages looked upon themselves as but one Church with that City, and
thither repaired, as often as they could, to testify their unity therewith.
Especially at the high Festivals: when anciently there was such a multitude
came to receive, that in some places the Church could not contain them. So we
learn from a Letter of Leo the First, Bishop of Rome, to Dioscorus Bishop of
Alexandria, in the Fifth Century: where he advises him, that when any great
Festival makes the Assembly more numerous, and there meets together so great a
Company of Believers, that one Church cannot contain them, there is no question
but the oblation of the Sacrifice must be renewed; when the first company is
gone, and the Church is filled again with the presence of a new Assembly,
Epist. 81. And St. Austin tells us (in the famous Epistle before-named) that
the Thursday before Easter, the numbers of the people were so great in some
places, that the Sacrament was celebrated both Morning and Evening: whereas on
that day the custom was to celebrate it only in the Evening.

Which as it shows the wonderful decay of Devotion among us, in comparison with
ancient times, so reproves that grand error which is now crept in among us,
even among well-disposed people, in many such places as this. Where the people
imagine, that if they Communicate in the Parish Churches of the City where they
live; they need take no notice at all of the Cathedral there. No, they rather
endeavor, and sometimes with a factious kind of zeal, to advance the credit of
their Parish Churches, in opposition to that great Church, from which they all
flowed, and on which they still depend.

This is quite out of the way of ancient Religion, which taught men to bear the
greatest regard to the Mother Church, where the Principal Pastor of their Souls
was seated (and thence called the Cathedral) and to desire with him immediately
to communicate, as often as they had opportunity, or could conveniently.

For to do otherwise, was in effect to throw off all respect to him, or very
much to neglect him and his See; and was looked upon as the principle and
beginning of Schism, by breaking the unity of the Church: and in time led men
to that pestilent fancy, which now very much prevails; that every Parish Church
in the Diocese is a distinct Church; which has all power within it self.

VI.
We therefore who are Priests and Deacons, placed in a Cathedral, should, above
all others, be willing, nay desirous to comply with the Order of our Church,
now recited: and not easily admit of any cause, as a reasonable excuse for our
forbearance. For, let me further acquaint you, that, after the people contented
themselves with receiving every Sunday, at least; still the Priests and the
Deacons, and such, as were not entangled in secular business, continued the
ancient custom of receiving the Communion every day.

This we learn from Micrologus, and Walfridus Strabo beforementioned, and the
old Book of Divine Offices in Cassander; and from Rhegino, who lived not much
above seven hundred years ago. In whose Book of Ecclesiastical Discipline, we
find this memorable record; that if any Priest, or Deacon, or Subdeacon, or
any other of the Clergy, being in a City, or a place where there was a Church,
did not come to the daily Sacrifice, he should not any longer be accounted a
Clergyman; if, upon reprehension, he did not amend.

And can we think it unreasonable then to be tied unto less? which is, to
attend upon this Sacrifice (as it may be truly called, in many respects) every
Lords Day, at the least? We should rather think it an honor, and high
privilege, that we may wait upon him so often at his Altar: and look upon our
selves as bound to do him honor, who has so highly honored us, by restoring
this Commemoration of him in his Church, as near, as we can, to its primitive
perfection.

VII.
And, as a motive to it, let me now proceed to tell you, that when Christian
People grew less frequent in receiving the holy Communion; this neglect was
attended with a great decay of holiness and good manners. As when they grew
less devout, they grew more negligent in this holy duty: so this negligence
produced great sloth and carelessness, in all the other duties of a Christian
Life. For becoming less sensible of their obligations to their Lord and Master
Christ, who bad them thus remember him, they became unmindful of the rest of
his Commands; by forgetting this, which was intended for the making of a
perpetual Sacrifice of their Souls and Bodies to him. As we may be convinced,
by observing what a wide difference there is between the first Christians, and
us in these days: that is, between them who had Christ continually in their
thoughts; and us, who seldom remember him.

Then their thoughts were, in a manner wholly employed, in contriving how to
get to Heaven; and now all our thoughts are, how to get as much as we can in
this present uncertain World. Then they had but one Soul, in the whole body of
Christians; and we are so many men, so many minds. Then they would lay down
their lives one for another, now we kill and destroy, at least hate and bite,
and are ready to devour one another. Then they were for doing all the good they
could to others; now we are all for our selves, and it is well if we be not
contriving mischief, and doing injuries, or ill offices to our Neighbors. Then
they feared no dangers; but now we are unwilling to suffer any thing. Then they
lived in absolute obedience to the worst of Governors; but now we are apt to
quarrel with just Authority, and to find fault with every thing that is done by
our Prince, and our Superiors.

Unto what can we more probably ascribe this difference, than to their
frequenting and our neglecting of the Holy Communion? In which opinion I am not
singular, for Dr. Jackson, I remember (sometime Dean of this Church) thought it
very likely, that the Wars of Kingdoms, the Contentions in Families, the
infinite multitude of Law-Sutes, the personal hatreds, and the universal want
of Charity, which has made the World so miserable and so wicked, may, in a
great degree, be attributed to the neglect of this great Symbol and Instrument
of Charity.

Which could not but closely knit us together in Brotherly love and affection,
if the nature of it were duly considered. For that is such, says Mr. Calvin,
in the place before-named, as shows it was not intended to be received once a
Year only, but to be in frequent use among Christians: that in a frequent
memory they might repeat the Passion of Christ; and by that Commemoration
support and strengthen their Faith, praise the loving kindness of God, and
cherish mutual Charity among themselves; nay, give a testimony of that one to
another, whose Bond they beheld in the unity of the Body of Christ. For as often
as we communicate of the Symbol of Christ's Body, we strictly ty our selves
mutually one to another (by giving, as it were, and receiving a token and
pledge thereof) to perform all the offices of love and kindness: so that none
of us will do any thing, whereby our Brother may receive any harm; nor omit any
thing, whereby we may be helpful to him, when his necessities require, and our
abilities are sufficient.

VIII.
And now, in the last place, I shall further show the great necessity of this
duty; by representing to you this sad truth: that as the seldom Celebration of
the Holy Communion, was attended with a lamentable decay of holy Living; so
thereby the Christian Worship it self was no less woefully corrupted and
depraved. For from hence have risen, I can clearly show, sundry dangerous
corruptions in the Roman Church: of which we complain very justly; but do not
charge upon the right cause.

I will mention three or four.

I. First, The Priest's communicating alone by himself, which in truth is no
Communion, arose from that gross negligence, which I am now persuading you to
amend.

The Church of Rome has thus far preserved a right notion of the holy
Communion, as to conceive it to be a part of the daily Service: upon which the
people, as you have heard, attended, more or less, for some Ages. But in
process of time, they, growing cold, left only the Priests and Deacons to
communicate with him that ministered: and the Priests and Deacons also growing
remiss, he was at last left alone. Who, in some places, continued to say all
the Prayers, and read the Epistle and Gospel, and all things else belonging to
this Service, until he came to the Consecration; and there broke off: but, in
other places, he ventured to proceed further; and consecrated, and received the
holy Communion by himself alone. Which last way of proceeding, being found most
for the profit of the Priests, it grew to be a custom in the Roman Church, for
the Priest that officiated, to communicate alone, when there was no Body to
receive with him. For if there had been no Communion, there would have been no
offerings; and therefore they continued the Communion, though there were none
to communicate: nay multiplied private Masses, that there might be as many
oblations as ever.

This is one corruption, which has most certainly sprung from the indevotion
of Christian People.

II. Another, as bad or worse, is this; the giving the holy Communion in a
Wafer.

For the ancient custom being, as we read in Honorius Augustodunensis, for the
several Families in a Town to bring to the Priest, the flower, with which the
panis Dominicus, as he calls it, the Lords Bread was made; or else to join
together to bring a Loaf ready made by a common contribution to it; which was
called their oblation, and the Host (being for the representation of our
Saviors Sacrifice on the Cross) when the Church was increased in number, but
grew less in sanctity (as his words are) this Loaf dwindled from a great one
into a little one, according to the small number of Communicants: till at last,
there being no Communicants at all, it shrunk up into a Wafer; that is, a
little thin bit of Bread, in the form of a small piece of money (the people
offering such pieces of money in stead of Meal) being just so much as the
Priest could eat himself, when there was no body to receive with him.

This is the Original of Wafers; which still retained the name of the Host,
after it was no longer the offering of the people, nor a representation of
Christ's Sacrifice: these Wafers having brought in this corruption, that now
there is no breaking of the Bread, in representation of the breaking of Christ's
Body. Though it be expressly mentioned, in the Institution of this Sacrament,
where we read, that Christ took Bread, and brake it, etc. and is so much
belonging to the essence, as we speak, of the Sacrament, that the Sacrament
took its name from hence; and is called in Scripture, breaking of Bread.

Behold here again, what Christian people have done by their indevotion.

Which has given occasion to such a considerable depravation as this. For St.
Paul speaking of this part of the Eucharist, calls it the bread that we break,
1 Cor. x. 16. and our Lord himself explaining the Mystery of this Bread, says
positively, this is my body, which is broken for you, xi. 24.

Which evidently shows, that the Bread ought then to be broken, or else it
cannot be Christ's Body broken for us: and therefore that this breaking of the
Bread is not such a superfluous thing, as the Church of Rome now makes it (for
the Bread is not broken there) but such a part of this Sacrament, as without
it, the sufferings of Christ upon the Cross are not fully represented to us.

But thus, as I said, the negligence of Christian People, in not frequenting
the Holy Communion, has maimed this Sacrament. Nay,

III. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in all probability came from the same
original. For the Priest being left alone at the Communion, they found it
necessary to magnify what he did there, as much as it was possible: that so the
people might bring their offerings more freely, though they did not receive
together with him. And they magnified his operation so much, till at last it
brought forth this prodigious conceit; that he held the very natural Body and
Blood of Christ in his hands, after the Consecration. Which fancy obtained the
more easily, by the help of the Wafers now mentioned: which having neither the
form, nor figure of Bread, nor being like any sort of food, used in the World,
served to banish out of peoples minds, the thoughts of any such thing as Bread,
which they received in the Holy Communion.

See here again how men have spoiled our most excellent Religion, by neglecting
the constant practice of it. For this Doctrine of transubstantiating the Bread
into the very natural Body of Christ, is the more absurd; because in reality
there is not so much as true Bread presented unto the Priest to
transubstantiate; if such a feat could possibly be wrought. For the best
Christians, after these Wafers were introduced looked upon them as unfit for
consecration; being unworthy of the name of Bread, and not being at all broken;
and therefore did ad Christum and Ecclesiam nihil pertinere, not at all belong
to Christ or his Church: as Bernoldus a Priest of Constance adventured to
speak, in the Eleventh Century. For he is that ancient Writer, whom Cassander
mentions, as the Expounder of the Roman Order; and commends, as a pious,
prudent person, and well skilled in the Ecclesiastical Traditions; excepting
only the indignation he expressed at the reducing of the oblations of Bread for
the use of the Sacrifice, into this form of Wafers, much different from the
form of true Bread: which he called therefore in contempt mites of nummulary
oblations (being in the form of little pieces of money) and ascribes to them an
imaginary shadowy lightness, which deserve not the name of Bread, they are so
thin: and inveighs against them in more and sharper words than these; which
Cassander (in his Book of Liturgicks, cap. 27.) says he, thought it not
expedient to transcribe in that place. But what he has transcribed abundantly
shows how wise and good men resented this change in the Sacrament; by reason of
which the Divine Service, and the Religion of the Ecclesiastical office, as
that Author speaks, was much, every way, confounded.

IV. Lastly, This very thing has turned the holy Communion, in that Church,
into a propitiatory Sacrifice, offered up to God both for the quick and the
dead. Which has proved a most horrible abuse, having no other original than
that now named: the peoples not communicating, but leaving the Priest alone at
the Altar. Who, being loath to lose the oblations, as well as the peoples
Company, began to speak very high things of the saving efficacy, which from
this action of the Priest alone, redounded even unto those who did not
Communicate with him.

Which opinion being once received, as a popular conceit, men gave money freely
and abundantly for private Masses; out of a persuasion, that thereby they
should procure remission of sins, both for themselves and for others; both for
those alive, and those who were dead.

By which things I hope you see the great mischief of neglecting the holy
Communion; which has even undone the Christian World: for it has spoiled
Christ's holy Religion, and turned it into quite another thing; by most gross
depravations of it.

Which have had this effect, even upon us, who are called Reformed; that they
have rooted out the principal part of Gods Service from among us, and made it
lame and imperfect. For the Church of Rome, having retained the custom of
celebrating the Communion every day, but turned it into a Sacrifice for the
quick and the dead, though none but the Priest partake of it; this is the use
which the Enemy of Mankind has tempted us to make of their abuses: to persuade
our selves that so long as private Masses are abolished, we need not trouble
our selves to be frequent in the Celebration and Communion of the Eucharist.

Now this is even according to the hearts desire of our grand Adversary the
Devil; who can be content with such a Reformation as this, while we retain the
very root and foundation of all the abuses which we have reformed: viz.
Negligence in frequenting this Holy Sacrament. Which I hope we shall be careful
also to reform at last; if men will but lay to heart, such things as I have
laid before their Eyes.

Which let us see, that though the particular time of communicating be not
named in Christ's Institution, yet that is no argument, we may take our own time
for it, and do not offend God so it be done some time or other: but quite
contrary, that our Lord intended it should be performed at all times, when we
assemble for Divine Service. Thus the first and best Christians understood it;
thus they practiced, and transmitted this practice unto Posterity, who for some
Ages continued it; and though it be not continued till these times, yet we are
forced to acknowledge, that the remembrance it imports (as that excellent man
Mr. Thorndike speaks) is so proper, so peculiar to the profession we make, that
our Assemblies never look so like the Assemblies of Christians, as when it is
celebrated: But are really naked without it; or, at least, want the Crown of
that Service for which we assemble; that most excellent piece of Service, which
is peculiarly appropriated to the worship of our blessed Lord and Savior. By
the neglect of which, the love of God and the love of one another is deplorably
decayed; and the Christian Religion also so depraved, that they who reformed it
in many things, have not been able to restore it to its integrity.

And therefore now that God has put it into the heart of our pious
Metropolitan, to call upon us and enjoin us, to live more strictly according to
the Rules and Orders of our Religion, by celebrating the holy Communion at all
our more solemn Assemblies; I hope none of us will be any longer disobedient
and refractory to so godly a motion: but rather forward to comply with the
Command of God, and of our Governors.

It may not be in the power of man perhaps, so to command the occasions of this
World, as that all should be always disposed to communicate; yet in so great a
number as here come together to worship God, there cannot but always some
persons or other be found, who are not so encumbred, but they may be fit, if
they please, to receive the holy Communion with us. Certain I am it ought so to
be; and what ought to be, may be, and will be, if the reason upon which it
depends be duly considered. If it be not, so that for want of persons disposed
to communicate, the holy Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, cannot be
celebrated every Sunday; it is a wilful neglect, for which nothing can be
alleged, but too much love of this World: which arises from too little a sense
of the love of our blessed Savior, and too small valuation of his inestimable
benefits.

Which I beseech you, let us awaken our minds to weigh and ponder; and then we
shall make it part of our business, to contrive our affairs in this World, in
such a manner, that there never want some Company at the Holy Communion. And it
is no hard matter so to order things, that some receiving one Sunday, some
another; all may receive, at least, once a Month.

What should hinder, if we have any mind to it, and will set our selves about
it? what can stand in the way of such a blessed, and comfortable Reformation as
this? Of which though we have not heard a word from the great pretenders to
Religion, in an Age wherein so much has been talked of the Reformation of the
Church; yet all the true Children of it, who understand and seek its good are
sensible, that the continual celebration of the Eucharist, and the Discipline
of penance to preserve the people in a disposition fit to receive it, are such
points of reformation in the Church (as the great man before-named expresses
it) that without restoring these, all the rest is but mere noise and pretense;
if not mischief.

And these are the things at which the Order of our Church aims, for as it
earnestly sighs and groans (as you read in the Commination) toward the
restoring of public penance (which is the only means established by the
Apostles, to maintain the Church in condition to communicate continually) so it
enjoins, as you have heard, the continual celebration of the Eucharist, in
Cathedral, and Collegiate Churches, and Colleges, every Sunday at the least:
which supposes it would be still more agreeable to its desires, if it were done
also upon other Festivals.

Now what should hinder us, I ask again, from coming thus near to the primitive
Devotion, though we do not come up quite to the utmost perfection of it? Unless
it be the fancy which works in many minds, that to Communicate three times in
the Year (as the Church injoins every Parishioner, at the least, to do) is
sufficient for any Christian. Which may well be called a fancy; since it is
manifest, the Church names three times in a Year, as the very lowest degree of
Devotion, less than which it would account profaneness: and I have
demonstrated, that we have little or nothing to say for our Communicating so
seldom as once a Month; but only this, that in most places it is no oftener
administered.

In the Mother Churches it will hereafter be more frequently: which will, in
some measure, conform us to those ancient Churches which communicated every
Sunday. For all the Country Churches in the Diocese, being but parts of the
Mother Church; it may be truly said, the holy Sacrament of Christ's Body and
Blood, is administered once a Week, in all our Churches.

Where I beseech you let us never want a competent number of Communicants: And,
that we may not, do not any longer imagine that you show sufficient respect to
our Savior, if you resolve to come thrice a Year. I wish every one were
careful of doing so much; but, let me further tell you, they that set
themselves such a stint, will be in danger too often to fall short of that: And
therefore it is far safer, and more becoming to aim at, and endeavor after
higher seize; by coming more frequently to the Table of the Lord.

Hear how sharply that great person, St. Chrysostom, inveighs against those,
that contented themselves with receiving only at the Festivals, especially at
Easter. It is in his third Sermon upon the Epistle to the Ephesians: where
having expounded the last words of the first Chapter; which represent our
blessed Lord as the Head of the Church, advanced far above all principalities
and powers, etc. He thus begins his Sermon.

Let us reverence our Head; let us think with our selves of what Head we are
the Body: a Head, to which all things are subject: what an honor is this, to
be, in some sort, viz. in our Head, advanced above the Angels and the
Archangels? Let us reverence then this kindred, this affinity, which we have
with Christ our Head. Let us fear, lest any of us be cut off from this Body;
lest any of us fall away; lest we appear unworthy of our relation to him.

If any body had set a Diadem, or a Crown of Gold upon our Head, would we not
have labored by all means, not to appear unworthy of those liveless stones?
And yet, now that there is not so little as a Diadem put upon our Head, but
Christ himself, which is infinitely more, is become our Head, we make no
account at all of it. The Angels reverence it, the Archangels and all the
Heavenly Powers do him honor: we only who are his Body, neither for this
reason, nor for the other, have any considerable regard to him.

What hope then is there of our Salvation? Think upon that Royal Throne; think
upon that exceeding great honor God has conferred upon thee: and it will be
more powerful than Hell fire it self, to affright thee into a due regard
toward him.

With a great many more such like efficacious words (which I do but abridge) he
presses his people to the greatest purity of life: and then, at last, comes in
particular, to press them from this Argument to a religious care of receiving
the holy Communion.

I see, says he, many of you receive the Body of Christ, but it is rather from
custom, and for order sake, than out of reason and understanding If it were the
holy time of Lent, says one, or if it were the Epiphany (that is Christmas
Day) says another; who would not prepare himself to partake of the Holy
Mysteries? Is it then Christmas, is it the time of Lent, that makes a man a
worthy Receiver? I thought it had been sincerity of Soul, holiness and purity
of Life. With these come always: without these thou have no right to come at
all. For as often as you do this, you show the Lords Death (quoteing my Text)
that is, you make a Commemoration of the Salvation wrought for you, and of the
benefit Christ bestowed upon you.

Consider then, how abstemious, how careful were they, who did partake of the
old Sacrifices, under the Law. What did they not do? What expense were they not
willing to make? They were always purifying themselves, that they might partake
of the Altar. But thou, coming to a Sacrifice, at which the Angels are
astonished, circumscribest the business, and confinest it to certain periods of
time (thou will receive it at Easter, at Christmas; then thou will be pure and
clean to partake of it.) But how will thou appear before the Tribunal of the
Lord Jesus, who dare with impure hands and lips to touch his Body? For so it
is: at other times you will not come, no not though you be pure; but at Easter
you will needs come, though you have lately perhaps been bold to commit some
great transgression.

O the power of Custom! or rather, O the power of Presumption! The daily
Sacrifice is in vain; we stand at the Altar to no purpose; there is no body to
partake with us: but then (at Easter) abundance of Company by all means will
crowd in upon us; though as unworthy as at any other time.

I do not speak this, that you should receive without any more ado; but that
you would prepare your selves to receive worthily, oftener than you do:
considering, if thou art unworthy of the Sacrifice, if thou art unworthy to
partake; how art thou worthy to pray with us?

Thou hear the public Officer, making Proclamation, All ye that are under
penance, depart. They then that do not partake, are under penance. If thou art
one of those, thou ought not to partake: for he that partaketh not, is in
the number of the Penitents. To what purpose does he proclaim, depart, all ye
that cannot pray? ( viz. with the faithful) and yet thou impudently stayest,
and do not depart?

But thou art none of those, and therefore thou do not depart. That is, thou
are in the number of those that may receive, and art invited to it; and yet
thou regardest it not, thou make no account of this matter.

Mind, I beseech you. There is a Royal Table spread; the Angels minister there;
the King himself is present; and thou stand gaping carelessly; refusing to
partake with him. What a shame is this! Do thou appear there in filthy
Garments, and art nothing concerned about it? No, thy raiment is pure: why then
do thou not approach and partake? How come thou to be here, if that be not
thy business? For all that are in their sins, are first thrust out: and
therefore thou that stayest, ought to partake of the mysteries; or else thou
art impudent and wicked too. Had it not been better, if a man invited to feast
with a great person, had not appeared, than to come, and not to touch a bit of
the meat? Even so it is with thee; thou art come to this holy Banquet; thou
have sung the Hymn with all the rest; by this very thing thou professest thy
self in the number of the worthy, in that thou did not depart with the
unworthy: how comes it to pass then, that when thou stayest, thou do not
partake of the Lords Table?

I am unworthy, thou say. Then, I say again, thou art unworthy of that
Communion, which is in the Prayers: For not only for the holy mysteries, but
for the Prayers also, and for the Hymns, the Spirit descends always.

A great deal more, says he, might be added (as indeed he does say much more,
which I have omitted) but that I may not burden your minds, this may suffice.
And they that are not reclaimed and brought to a better mind, by what has been
said; will not be mended, though we should say never so much.

And these things are said by us; But, O that he who pierces the heart, he that
gives the spirit of compunction, would vouchsafe to prick every one of our
hearts! That these things may be deeply ingrafted there, and, in his fear,
sprout and bring forth fruit: so that, with all confidence and freedom we may
approach unto him, and it may be said as it is in the Psalms (though to a
different sense) Thy Children are like Olive Branches, round about thy Table.

The end of the second Discourse.
Discourse III. A RESOLUTION OF DOUBTS About Receiving the Holy Communion.
THE Necessity of this Holy Duty, the high Obligations we have unto it, and the
reasons why it ought to be frequently performed by Christian People, have been
so fully and so plainly laid before you, in the two preceding Discourses; that
I cannot but think, all that will take the pains to consider them, must be
convinced both of the one, and of the other; of the duty, and of the repetition
of it frequently.

For I have shown, that it is a part of the daily service, which Christ
appointed in his Church; a principal part of that service; whereby we maintain
our Communion with him, and with his benefits: and therefore cannot be
neglected, as now it generally is; without the greatest offense to him, and as
great dishonor to our holy Religion. Which I have demonstrated has been many
ways corrupted and depraved, by the lamentable carelessness of Christian
People, in this great office of it. Who must be persuaded therefore, if they
make any Conscience of their ways, to resolve to do this in remembrance of
their Savior, oftener than they have done.

And what impediment there can be, to the putting such resolutions in
Execution, I cannot imagine; unless it be some particular exceptions, which
they, in their own private thoughts, take, not against the duty, but against
their performance of it; at least for the present. For how necessary, how
beneficial soever it be in it self, and may be unto others; yet unto them, some
fancy, it is not so: but rather they ought to forbear the Communion, until
they be satisfied about some things, in which they are doubtful. For while
those doubts and scruples remain in their minds unremoved, they think they have
a just reason to hinder them from coming to the Lords Table: nay, they say they
dare not come, for fear of offending the Divine Majesty; and so persuade
themselves they are as religious in staying away, as others may be in going
thither.

Now these exceptions which they make against their performance of this duty,
are generally drawn from one of these three heads.

First, From the form or manner wherein the holy Communion is now administered
in our Church. Secondly, From the Company to whom it is administered, and with
whom it must be received. Thirdly, From the person himself who is called upon
to receive it: who judges himself altogether unfit for so solemn a duty.
Unto all which I doubt not to make a satisfactory Answer; if men be as willing
to be rid of their scruples, as to retain them: but shall most largely
endeavor to satisfy the last; because it is the greatest and most weighty.

I.
About the first of these [the form or manner wherein the Holy Communion is
administered, in this Church] a long Discourse cannot be expected, for it is not
proper, in this place. Nor is there any need at all of it: but it may suffice
to say a very few things in answer to it.

For let it but be considered, first, how various the minds of men are, how
weak and captions, which disposes them, too often, to boggle at every thing, with
which they have not had a long acquaintance: And then you will, next of all,
grant me, that it is impossible for any man before hand, to know or imagine,
till he speak with them, what such minds will object or scruple about this
matter. For some have a fancy against one thing, some against another: That
which one allows, another dis-approves: and that which he disapproves, another
allows: And the very best constitutions, it is possible, are disapproved by
many narrow, weak, and scrupulous minds.

Now this being granted, which cannot be denied, that it is impossible, in so
many several ways wherein several men wonder, to trace every man's errors, find
out his particular conceits, and pursue him from scruple to scruple, till no
more be started, all that is pertinent to be said in this case, will be reduced
to so small a compass; that there is but one advice only, which can be given
for such men's satisfaction. Which is this,

That seeing it is certainly our Christian duty, to communicate together at the
Lord's Table, in some form, manner and method or other; they that are
dissatisfied with that order and method, which our Church uses, ought in
Conscience, to apply themselves to their spiritual Pastors privately, and make
known to them their objections against it, with a mind ready and desirous to
receive satisfaction. For in an age which abounds with such various fancies,
and conceits as we sometimes meet withal, no Minister of Christ can be able to
guess, before he confer with them, what every one of his flock will object to
the present established way of Worship; and therefore cannot out of the Pulpit
attempt an Answer to them without running the hazard of speaking at random, and
beating the air; in guessing that to be objected which is not, or omitting that
which is; and which, perhaps, he could not imagine would have been objected.
For which reasons, it is impossible, even for the Press it self to meet with
every particular exception; though a large Book should be written on the
subject.

And therefore the short, the sure, and the easy way to certain satisfaction,
is, for every one that has any thing to say, against the manner and form of
divine administrations among us, which hinder him from communicating; to
address himself to his spiritual Guide, whom God has set over him (or to some
other discreet and learned Minister of Gods word) and to lay open his whole
mind before him, that he may free him from his scruples.

Unto this every man is bound, because he is bound to communicate; but cannot,
he says, till these scruples be removed: which therefore he ought to endeavor
to have removed; by this means, which is of Gods own Prescription. And being
used uprightly, with a sincere desire to be rightly informed, and a humble
willingness to learn; and being continued with constancy, from time to time,
and not presently laid aside, because the mind is not immediately convinced;
will, I doubt not, by Gods blessing, in the issue dispossess that man of his
doubts, and bring him to conformity, who seriously tries it, with patience.

II.
As for the second head, from whence objections are drawn against the practice
of this Christian duty; viz. the Company which partakes at the Table of the
Lord; which some perhaps think unfit for them to communicate withal: I shall
answer to it a little more largely.

I. And first, I take it to be undoubtedly certain, that no Man or Woman, who
professes and understands Christianity, and do not contradict their profession
by a profane and scandalous conversation, can lawfully be denied the Holy
Communion, when they present themselves to receive it. For who were they for
whom Christ prepared this Table, but his Disciples? And what other rule have we
whereby to judge who are his Disciples, but only by men's professing
Christianity, and by their living (for any thing that appears to the contrary)
suitable to this profession. If such as these may not be admitted to the holy
Communion (and consequently we receive with such) then none are to be admitted;
but we must turn all people whatsoever from it: and so, breaking all Christian
Communion, for want of Company to partake of this Sacrament, extinguish the
Ordinance it self, which Christ has most solemnly appointed.

II. Now this being settled as a well-grounded truth, it follows that no good
Christian can be forward to judge others to be unworthy to communicate: but
rather will be very scrupulous, lest he offend in so judging. For it is so much
against the rules of Christianity, to pass such censures on others, that they
who are too forward to do it, are as unworthy, for any thing that I can see, as
any other persons whom they censure. Because they act contrary to the Christian
Religion; which makes it a sin to be hasty in condemning our Neighbors: there
being such great danger that we may be mistaken.

For though a man have contradicted his Christian profession in some things,
yet this is a truth wherein we all agree; that whosoever is a true penitent,
and purposes to leave those sins whereby he has contradicted it, is, by that
repentance, restored to Friendship with God: and therefore really worthy to
receive the holy Communion. Now whether a man, whom you judge unworthy, have
this serious, settled purpose or no, is very hard for you to know: since you
cannot see into any man's heart, nor know what is between God and him in secret.
But he coming to the Lords Table, you ought rather to judge that he does so
purpose and resolve: because he is invited thither upon those terms, and no
other; nay, required to come so prepared, or else not dare to approach unto it.
For so you find it, in the Exhortation that is read, when the Minister gives
warning for the celebration of the holy Sacrament. And so he speaks again at
the time of the Celebration, in those known words.

Ye that do truly and earnestly repent you of your sins, and are in love and
charity with your Neighbors, and intend to lead a new life, following the
Commandments of God, and walking from henceforth in his holy ways; draw near
with faith, and take this holy Sacrament to your comfort.

III. And that leads to the next. Our Church, you see, proceeds according to
the undoubted Rule, I named at first: for its Constitutions do not admit, but
exclude all scandalous persons from this holy Sacrament. And therefore you
ought not to depart from its Communion, when any Minister thereof does admit
such evil Livers to it; because it is his personal fault, who alone is to be
charged with it; and not any fault of the Church, which ought not to bear the
blame, nor upon this account to be forsaken.

Nay, that Minister himself perhaps may not be in fault; having no knowledge of
the scandal: and therefore not to be blamed:

And more than this, he perhaps who complains of the scandal, is the very man
upon whom this blame will light at last. For if he knew of any such notorious
evil Liver, who was admitted to the Communion, his duty was not thereupon to
withdraw himself from it, but to make proof of the scandal whereof such a man
stood guilty; that he might not, without amendment, and open Declaration of his
repentance, be admitted to it again. Which this Exceptioner neglecting to do,
his abstaining from the Communion, because of such offense, is the effect of
his own negligence in another duty of Christianity. And so he becomes doubly
guilty; both in withdrawing himself from the holy Communion; and in not
acquainting those with the crimes (which he pretends for the cause of his
withdrawing) who were concerned to redress them.

IV. And, lastly, suppose that, after information given, they, who are
concerned, do not take care to redress those things, but such scandalous Livers
be still admitted to the Communion; yet, this not being the fault of private
persons, but of those who have power to exclude them, it ought not to keep any
good Man or Woman from the Table of the Lord. For there can be no reason, why
any man should be hindered by this from doing his own duty; because another man
does not discharge his.

And let it here be seriously considered, that if this were a just hindrance,
it would have hindered Christ, and his Apostles, and the primitive Christians,
from communicating. For there was ill Company among the very first
Communicants; Judas, the Traitor, in all likelihood, being there when our Lord
himself administered. And in this Church of Corinth it is evident, there were
such disorders, that many did eat and drink their own Damnation: and yet it did
not hinder good Christians from partaking with them to their Salvation.

And the very truth is, if this were a sufficient reason to hinder us from
Communion, it ought also to hinder us from being Christians; and make us
forbear to become members of any Church or profession. For there is no Church,
but consists of a mixed multitude, good and bad, and therefore compared by our
Savior unto a Net; wherein all sorts of Fish were caught, Math. xiii: 47, 48.
and unto a Field wherein wheat and tares sprung up, which must grow together,
till the Harvest, lest by an indiscreet endeavor to gather up the Tares, the
Wheat be also rooted up with them, ver. 24, 25, 29, 30.

And therefore this scruple driven home, will destroy Christianity; as it has
done in some places: where men have divided and subdivided, till, by their
separation from them whom they accounted wicked, they have crumbled into
nothing; and left no Church at all remaining, but what was in their particular
person. That is, none: for the Church is a Society; and there is no Society,
nor can be any, but we may find some exception or other against every person in
it: and particularly against such persons, who judging others unworthy to
Communicate with them, abstain on that account from the holy Communion.

For, besides the suspicion of rash judging, and pride that is in the thing,
they are apparently guilty of a gross sin; in not coming to the holy Communion
of Christ's Body and Blood, according to his Commandment. The secret reason of
which, perhaps, they do not declare; and so others have as much authority to
judge them unworthy, as they to judge others: and, by this means, all of them,
if this be a just excuse, may let the holy Communion alone.

I hope you see by this short Discourse, whither such exceptions as these lead;
and therefore that you will no longer be guided by them: but, notwithstanding
the faults you think you can find in any person there present, be persuaded by
the weighty reasons you see for it, to do your own duty at the Table of the
Lord.

III.
Where we should have more Company, than is usually seen there, were it not for
another hinderance, arising, not from others, but from men's selves alone. Who
are wont sometimes to say, we would come to the Table of the Lord, being
convinced it is our duty; if we were worthy of so great a benefit: but we are
deterred from it, by the consideration of our many sins, or great frailties. We
have, at least, too many diversions by business, too many avocations by the
affairs of this World: for I am always in a hurry, says one; I have no leisure
to examine my self; or I am not disposed for so serious a work, says another.
We had better forbear, than be rash, say all of this sort: it is safer to
honor the Sacrament by a fearful and reverent abstinence from it, than by a
careless and unprepared forwardness to partake of it, profane it. In a word,
we conceive our selves to be utterly unfit, therefore we dare not come to it.

Now in answer to this third Exception against the performance of this duty,
which has a show of humility in it, and looks like a pious care not to do good
things in an ill manner, I have many things to propound to your consideration;
which are so convincing, and will so unmask the dangerous deceit that lurks
under such pretenses, that they will not suffer you to be cheated by it any
longer.

I. And, in the first place, every one who complains of his unfitness, and
makes that the reason of his not coming to the Holy Communion, ought to
consider, both whose fault this is, and whether it be not likely he shall grow
still more unfit every day than other; that is, be more in fault, by not
receiving it. For you will not, you cannot say it is our Savior's fault, who
commands you to come, that you are not sit to come to it. Whose fault is it
then, but your own? And why do you not then amend it, lest you still grow
greater strangers to him; nay, Enemies, by evil works, and by continuing to
neglect the means of living better?

For this very unfitness, which you allege for your forbearing the Communion,
is your sin; and will you turn your sin into an Apology, and make it serve for
your Plea, for the neglect of a plain duty? Can you think that this will pass
at the Bar of the Divine Judgment, when you appear before it? Dare you thus
excuse your neglect of the Sacrament, by acknowledging another crime? When an
accusation, a just accusation lies against you, will you then go about to turn
it into a defense of your self, as you are bold to do now?

I come not to the holy Communion it is true, but it is because I am unholy; I
am sensible of the looseness of my life, which is not strict enough; I am not
in Charity; or, at best I am Worldly minded, and too much distracted with the
affairs of this life.

This is the plea of some men: who do not mind, how, after a strange manner,
they make one sin an excuse for another. For this is the plain sense of their
Plea, God, we hope, will be merciful to us in forgiving one sin, because we
commit another, which is the cause thereof: Pardon, that is, the neglect of the
Sacrament, because they neglect to fit themselves for it. For none can deny,
that it is one sin not to commemorate the Death of Christ, as he has
appointed: and it is also another, to neglect a due preparation for it. And so
instead of amending one, such men add another to it; heaping evil upon evil,
and aggravating their Condemnation by their very pleas and excuses.

Of which they could not be thus senslesly guilty; were this plain truth duly
considered; that there is the same reason to be scrupulous about this
unfitness, whereof they complain, that there is to be so, about their unworthy
receiving. And yet, they take no notice of the one, any further than only to
make it an excuse for the other. What unjust, what partial dealing is this?
What kind of Christians are these? who, if they were serious and in good
earnest religious (as some of this sort would be thought to be) would be as
afraid to remain unfit, as they are to receive while they so continue. They
would be as scrupulous, lest they should offend God by staying away, as they
seem to be, lest they should offend him by coming to the Communion. For they
would see, that it is very unequal dealing with God and with their own Souls,
to be very nice about the doing that which God has commanded; and to have
little or no scruple about the omission of it. What is this, but to fancy that
when God commands a thing to be done by us, we may safely let it alone, if our
not doing it proceed from a fear of doing it wrong? As if we did not offend
him, by not doing what he bids us, as much as by doing it amiss: and our total
neglect of a duty, were not as great a provocation, as an undue performance.

Do but consider it thoroughly, and you will find there is as much cause to be
solicitous about the one, as about the other. And if all they that are now full
of fears about unworthy receiving, would but be fearful also of continuing
unworthy to receive ( i. e. of sinful neglect of the holy Communion) this equal
fear on both sides, would make them solicitously diligent, in fitting
themselves to be worthy guests at the Lord's Table. That so, they may neither
offend by coming, nor by staying away: but approach in a becoming and
well-prepared manner; and find grace and favor with God to come every day,
more and more prepared.

For by coming, as well prepared as our affairs in this World will admit, with
serious resolutions to amend our lives; we grow still more fit, if we frequent
it, to come better disposed to the Table of the Lord; with stronger
resolutions; and consequently with more fruits meet for repentance of amendment
of life. For by doing our duty, as well as we can, we learn to do it with
greater perfection; especially if we continue to do it, though for the present
with many imperfections.

But alas! will some say, we are not only utterly unfit and unprepared for the
present, but it is not in our power to fit and prepare our selves, in any sort,
to be meet partakers of these holy mysteries for the future.

To which, it is necessary, that I say something before I proceed further:
because, if this be true, all my labor will be lost in persuading men to
dispose themselves for the performance of this holy duty.

1. And here the same question might be asked such persons, which I asked at the
first, how comes it not to be in your power, and whose fault is it, that you
are not able to fit your selves? But I omit this, because it only throws the
guilt upon such complainers, but does not convince them of the falseness of
their Plea. Therefore I rather demand of such men, how they can pretend to
Christianity, and say, that they cannot leave off their habitual course of
sinning?

What? Is there no power in the Christian Religion to alter a man's heart; and
to bring him to repentance and reformation of life? Cannot he, who, by being
made a Christian, is regenerate with the holy Spirit, cease to follow and to be
led by those carnal Lusts and Worldly desires, which at his Baptism he
renounced? Cannot he, for instance, forbear habitual Drunkenness, Swearing,
Extortion, and Profaneness? Is it impossible for him to be at peace with his
Neighbors? to lay aside all wrath, bitterness, and wilful animosities? How is
he then born again of the Spirit? By what power were men changed and renewed in
the beginning of our Religion, which we have not now, since we have the same
Religion? Or to what purpose are we exhorted every day, to beseech God to grant
us true repentance, and his holy spirit, that those things which we do at that
present may please him; and the rest of our life be pure and holy; if no such
thing can be obtained from our Heavenly Father; no, not by importunate Prayers
unto him for it?

Do not, for shame, say any longer you have no power to fit your selves for the
holy Communion, that is, to become better: unless you will renounce
Christianity; and declare there is nothing in it, but vain words, empty shows
and appearances.

2. Which this sort of men I am sure cannot do, having something in them, which
will satisfy them, if they attend unto it, that they do not say true; when they
pretend they cannot leave off those sins, which keep them from the Communion.
For how can they be called sins, if it be impossible to do otherways? And if
they be no sins, how can they hinder you from Communicating? Why do your
Consciences accuse you of doing amiss, if you could not but do as you did? They
never accuse you in other cases, where there is an utter impossibility, under
which you labor. For instance, if a Neighbors House be on fire, you do not
accuse your self for not running to help to quench it; when you lay lame in
Bed, and disabled to move out of it. But if you set the House on fire, you
could not but think you did him a great injury: or if you stood by in perfect
health and soundness, when it took fire, and would not stir hand or foot to
help him; you could not but look upon your self as unneighbourly, unkind, and
cruel. In like manner if it were as impossible to forbear a sin, as it is to
stir when you are bound hand and foot, your Consciences would never accuse you.
But the upbraidings you feel there, the secret checks and remorse, the
suspicions and fears, which your Consciences are troubled withal, plainly
declare, that it was in your power; and that you lie, and do not the truth (as
St. John speaks) when you pretend the contrary.

In short, if you cannot possibly reform those sins, which make you unfit for
the Communion, how come you to charge them upon your selves as sins? If they be
sins, your own Consciences tell you that you can avoid them: and if you can,
why do you not go about it? and by doing this, prepare your selves to do the
other: I mean to receive the holy Communion; for which you will be fit, when
you have quitted those sins wherein you live.

3. For the sins which you say you cannot reform, are either sins of weakness,
or sins of willfulness. If they be only such weaknesses, as can scarce possibly
be avoided, by the care and watchfulness of good men, but they are, upon some
occasions, surprised with them: surely these do not make you unfit for the holy
Communion; for then all men living, for ought we know, must be unfit. If they
be sins of wilfulness, then you do, in these very words, confess that they may
be reformed: For wilful sins, in the judgment of all mankind, are such as by
care and diligence and watchfulness over our selves, may be avoided. As wilful
Drunkenness, is not being intoxicated, with some liquor, of whose strength we
were ignorant; but losing the Government of our selves, when we were aware of
the danger, and could have prevented it.

4. But this, in effect, has been said already: and therefore, to bring this
matter to a speedy issue, let such as say they have no power to prepare
themselves for the Communion, by amending their lives, consider; that every man
has power to do, what he can do. To say otherways, is a contradiction: for it
is to say, he cannot do what he can. Now do what you can, and I will undertake,
God shall not charge you with what you cannot. But if you do not what you are
able; you will be charged both with that, and with the guilt of not doing that,
unto which in time you might have been enabled. For God has promised that they
who seek shall find; that he will open to them that knock, and graciously
answer them that call upon him faithfully. Why then do you not address your
self to the doing that, which you certainly can do? for instance, call upon
God, and earnestly importune him for the help of his grace (which is a thing
you can do:) for, in so doing God will not be wanting to you; but enable you to
that, which, for the present, it may not be in your power to do.

5. Unto which (lastly) let this be added, which is of great moment. You that
say, you cannot prepare your selves for the holy Communion; have you ever
tried? have you gone about the work, and made a serious and hearty attempt
toward the reformation of your selves? If you have not, how come you to be so
bold as to say, you cannot do that, which you have not yet tried and
endeavored to do? what a prevarication is this, with God and your own
Consciences? though I doubt this is the case of most of those men, who plead
inability; when they never in good earnest, made an experiment what might be
done, in the use of such means as God has appointed, and are in our power to
use.

But if you have tried, and miscarried; why did you not try again; and after
that, again and again; and that with greater diligence and care than before?
For this you could have done; and why should it be judged reasonable in our
Worldly affairs, to attempt over and over again the same thing, wherein we have
failed at the first, in hope of better success at last: and not be thought fit,
nay, why should we not be willing to use the same repeated diligence,
notwithstanding such like discouragement, in the weighty concernments of our
Souls?

And since we find by experience we can do the one, for we do it; we ought to
conclude that we can, if we set our selves to it, do the other. For a Soul can
do more for it self, than for any thing else; if it will but consider what a
valuable being it is, and where its true interest lies: in the love and favor
of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

This is the first answer to the pretense of unfitness. And what was last said,
may serve for an answer also to those that complain of hardness of heart, and
want of affection in the performance of this holy duty. Let them do it as well
as they are able; and they will find acceptance with God, and grow more
affected with his love. And for an Answer to those also, that say they are
never the better for coming to this Sacrament. It is certain they were
something the better, by their very coming thither; if they did not come
without a resolution of amendment: for that resolution was a good thing, and
the work of Gods grace. Which though they did not keep, they should not thereby
have been discouraged from coming again, but rather have renewed it; which had
been still a better thing. And they ought not to have given over the attempt,
upon a new miscarriage; but still labored and endeavored to settle this
resolution so steadfastly, by constant renewals of their Covenant with Christ;
that at last it might have stood unmovable, in all those temptations which
were wont to overthrow it.

This is the way of Christ; not to sit down contented with complaints of our
unfitness to have Communion with him; but never to rest satisfied, till by our
earnest and repeated endeavors, we be better disposed.

II. And there is this great reason to enforce such endeavors, which these
complainers would do well to lay to heart: that if they be unfit for this holy
duty, of Commemorating the Death of Christ, and receiving the tokens and
pledges of his love; they have no cause to think themselves fit for other holy
duties, which are confessed by all to be of daily use; viz. for Prayer, for
Thanksgiving, and praising God: Which duties, if men be not fit to perform,
they ought to look upon themselves as not fit to live in the World, or to go
out of it: but if they be not unfit for these, then how can they say, they are
unfit for this; since our part in the holy Communion, is wholly performed by
devout Prayer, and Praise and Thanksgiving, with such Faith and Love and holy
resolutions as ought always to accompany those holy actions? And our part being
thus performed, what reason have we to think that God will not perform his; by
accounting us worthy to receive those blessings, which he there imparts? For he
is always more ready to give, than we are to receive: and we are not unmeet to
receive, when we are thus disposed to ask.

To this purpose you may remember, I alleged St. Chrysostoms words in my
former Discourse. Art thou not worthy to partake of the Sacrifice? then art
thou not worthy neither to pray: but thou ought to depart when the Deacon
cries, Be gone all you, that are in penance, etc. For the holy Communion is a
special way of praying and making Supplication to God, through Christ Jesus:
for which they cannot be unfit, who are fit to pray to God in his name at all.

No, I am apt to think that many men who pretend this, do not really think
themselves unfit; but use it only as a shift to excuse themselves from the
performance of their duty. For should the Minister of God upon this score keep
those from the Communion, who now keep themselves from it; saying to them (as
of old) Be gone, you are not fit to partake with us; they would take it very
hainously at his hands, and be apt to reply; We are as fit as many whom you
admit to partake with you; you do us an injury in thrusting us away from the
Table of the Lord; where we see those entertained that are no better than our
selves.

For which ill resentment, of such a supposed judgment passed upon them, what
reason can be given but this; that they have no such opinion of their own
unfitness? For if they had, they would be pleased rather than angry, that other
men are of their mind: as they desire they should be in other cases. They would
be far from looking upon it as an indignity, to be told they are not fit to
Communicate: it being the thing, which they themselves pretend does keep them
from the Communion. But herein they dissemble with us, and cheat their own
Souls; having no such thoughts of themselves, but are only loath to be at the
pains of thinking seriously what is to be done there, and of raising suitable
affections and purposes in their heart; that they may be acceptable to God our
Savior.

This idle lazy temper frames such excuses, and makes them pretend unfitness;
which they are by no means willing to own, if another charge them with it, but
rather think they are affronted by it. Just like those that pretend to be sick,
and therefore lie in Bed, when they have no mind to make or receive those
Visits to which they are obliged: but would be troubled, if another should tell
them they look very ill, and had best go to Bed, and send for a Physician; for
they fear their case is dangerous.

III. These things seem to me sufficient to take away this exception of
unfitness: but for the further conviction of all such persons, as allege this
for the reason of their not receiving the holy Communion, let it be considered;
that there are other duties of Christianity, which are of indispensable
obligation, if we hope to be saved; and those far more difficult to be
performed, than the duties now mentioned, or this to which I exhort you: for
which if you be not fit, as is pretended, how will you be able to undertake the
other, where you will find much greater hardship and severity?

That is, how will you be able to deny your selves, and take up the Cross, if
it fall in your way; and follow Christ in that bloody path wherein he is gone
before us?

An injury will be intolerable; an indignity insufferable, to pass by affronts
and abuses (which are the smallest parts of the Cross of Christ) will be beyond
your power; if you cannot do so easy a thing as this, which Christ has
commanded in remembrance of his sufferings: whereby you are to prepare, and arm
your selves with resolution to atchieve the other.

This is a thing to be seriously pondered; because it is so necessary to be
able to endure hardship as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, and perform those
difficult tasks when we are tried by them, that otherwise it is in vain to
pretend to the Christian Religion. For our Lord Christ himself has said Matthew.
xvi. 24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross and follow me, etc. Which is often repeated in the Gospel, with
peremptory asseverations; that unless he do this, a man cannot be his Disciple;
and that he who takes not up his Cross and follows after me (as our Saviors
words are, Matthew. x. 38) is not worthy of me.

These sayings of our Savior show that this work of self denial and taking up
the Cross and bearing it, is not more harsh and troublesome to flesh and blood,
than it is necessary to make a man acceptable unto Christ: who will reject
those as unworthy of him, that are not thus disposed. Now how they will be able
to go thorough with this tedious and irksome work, who stick at the sweet and
pleasant labor of making themselves fit to receive the tokens and pledges of
Christ's Everlasting love; whereby they should be encouraged and animated unto
the other, I leave them to judge. For my part, I can see no hope of it; but
look upon their condition as desperate, unless they dispose themselves even for
the suffering of the Cross, by fitting themselves for the devout Commemoration
of the sufferings of Christ upon the Cross.

Which is so easy a duty compared with the other, that I may shame all those
who refuse to perform it, when it is required of them, in such opprobrious
words as Naaman's Servant made bold to reprove him withal, 2 King. v. 13. If
the Prophet had bidden thee do some great thing, would the not have done it?
how much rather then, when he says unto thee, wash and be clean? So say I, if
our Lord should now require you to conflict with the greatest hardships, would
you not obey, rather than perish? How much rather then, when he says unto you,
do this in remembrance of me? Which is so easy to be done, that there is no
trouble in it; but all pleasure, all comfort, and joy, to think what Christ
has done for us, and intends to do. All the trouble and the pains is, only to
fit and dispose our selves to partake of this high pleasure and satisfaction;
of being assured that we are beloved by him, and that he will love us for ever,
if we continue in his love by keeping his Commandments.

IV. Which small pains, if men will not undertake, but having passed this
judgment on themselves that they are unmeet to receive the holy Communion,
continue so to be; I do not understand why they should not, withal, judge
themselves not to be Christians.

For all Christians are Members of Christ, a part of his Body: but how can any
man be a member of the Body, and not be in Communion with the head? and how is
it possible to be in Communion with the head, and yet unfit to Communicate with
him? These things cannot stand together; but overthrow one the other.

For they that are members of Christ, are united to him: and they that are
united to him are in Communion with him, and derive continual influences from
him: and they that are in such Conjunction and Communion with him, must be fit
to Communicate with him at his Table. Else they are not his Friends: and if not
Friends, then Strangers, or Enemies. For what medium is there between these? Or
how can men pretend to be Friends to Christ, by being in Covenant with him; and
refuse to commemorate his Death, which seals that Covenant, because they are
unfit, always unfit to make that Commemoration?

These things are utterly inconsistent. Either we must confess we are not in
Covenant with him; or we must not affirm, that we are altogether unfit, to
commemorate that Death, which confirms and seals that Covenant.

V. It will be much to the same purpose, if I add, that he who is not in some
measure fit for this holy Sacrament, cannot be in any measure fit for the
Kingdom of Heaven; and Eternal Life with our blessed Savior. But it may be fit
to press this a little; because the same thing, in effect, represented after
diverse manners, becomes the more apt to meet with, and affect all sorts of
people.

Consider then, in what disposition do you think you stand for Society with
Christ in Eternal Life and Bliss, in the Heavens; if you are not disposed to
have Communion with him in this holy Sacrament here upon Earth? What likelihood
can you fancy of having His Company there, if He cannot have your Company here?

That which keeps you from the one, will exclude you from the other. I mean,
those things, whatsoever they be, that make you unmeet to partake of his Table
at present, will make you unmeet to feast with him in his Heavenly Kingdom
hereafter. The terms of admission unto both are the same (for he that duly
partakes of the holy Communion, has an earnest given him of Everlasting Bliss)
and therefore there cannot be different terms of exclusion; but the very same
also.

That is, those sins which exclude men from the Kingdom of Heaven, are they
which exclude them from the pledge and earnest of it, in this holy Sacrament.
And those sins which do not shut the gate of the Heavenly Kingdom against them;
cannot be a bar to their receiving the Sacrament: Satisfy your selves what
those sins are of both sorts, and you will withal satisfy your selves that you
are not unfit to come to the holy Communion, unless you be unfit to enter into
Heaven: and if you be unfit for that, I do not see how you can rest satisfied,
if you have any care of your Souls, till by becoming capable to be received
thither, you become capable to be entertained at the Lords Table.

For which every sudden passion, every rash word, every sin that is committed
by surprise, against the settled purpose of our Souls and serious endeavors,
will not make us utterly unfit; because such things will not shut us out of
Heaven. But those gross, those deliberate and habitual sins, that bar the Door
of Heaven against us, are the same that put a bar against our coming to the
Lord's Table: and the same that keep us from partaking of that, are they that
will keep us from being partakers of the other.

And therefore resolve, what it is fit for you to do; the matter being come to
this short issue, that if you are not fit for the Lord's Table, neither are you
fit for Heaven: if you hope you are so fit for Heaven that you shall not be
thrust out of it, then are you not unfit for the Lord's Table. Why then do you
not come thither; when you cannot stay away, without acknowledging that you
have no interest in Christ and his Eternal Love?

So the ancient Doctrine was, as we learn from St. Austin, who (in his first
Book concerning the deserts and remission of sins, Cap. 24.) tells us, that in
his Country they called Baptism SALVATION, and the Sacrament of Christ's Body by
no other name than LIFE: from an ancient and Apostolical Tradition, as he
thinks; whereby the Churches of Christ hold for certain, that no body can
attain either Salvation or Life in the Kingdom of God, without Baptism, and the
participation of the Table of the Lord.

Which none can gainsay is thus far true, that we know of no other gates but
these; Christ has appointed no other, to let us into his Kingdom: and that
they who are unworthy to partake of the holy mysteries of his Kingdom, cannot
be worthy to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven it self.

VI. If obstinacy (as he speaks a little before in that Book) did not knit its
stubborn sinews, against the force of evident truth, I might here make an end.
But some still persist in their exceptions and say; if we be not unfit, yet we
fear we are: and how shall we free our selves from these fears and jealousies,
which extremely disturb our minds, and put us into such disorder; that we
cannot compose our selves for the holy Communion?

In the last place therefore, I answer to this by asking a few plain and easy
questions: upon which, if you will Examine your selves, you will soon arrive at
satisfaction.

Do you not make profession of Christianity?

Do you not believe what that Religion teaches?

Do you not endeavor impartially to practice according to that belief?

Do you not discern or distinguish the Lord's Body? that is, make a difference
between this holy food, and other meat and drink?

Do you not understand the ends for which it was appointed?

What can hinder you then from partaking of the Lords Body, if therein you
intend those ends?

Here is a sure and infallible Test, unto which, if you bring your selves, you
may try thereby, whether you be fit or no to have Communion with Christ in this
holy Sacrament: and determine the case with such certainty, as to be no longer
perplexed with doubts and fears about it.

1. The first of these questions, need not be long considered, for by receiving
Baptism, and being present at the Prayers, where the Creeds are openly owned,
you make a profession of Christianity: and therefore you are thus far fit, and
have a right and title to come and make this profession still more solemnly at
the Table of the Lord.

2. The second also is soon resolved, whether you believe with your heart, what
you profess with your mouth? For these doubts and fears, which you have, lest
you should receive the Communion unworthily, and thereby incur the divine
displeasure, suppose Faith in Christ, as the Lord and Judge of the World: and
that you look upon this as one part of a Christians Duty, which ought to be
performed with care and great circumspection.

3. The third also need not cost you much labor; for by reading over the rules
of life delivered in the Gospel, and comparing your manner of life with them;
you may be satisfied, whether you impartially endeavor to practice according
to your belief? That is, do you not willingly rest under any habit of sin,
which excludes from this Sacrament, as they do from Heaven: but make it your
serious business to break them all? Then you ought to use this means among
others, which God has appointed, and call upon him for his aid (without which
nothing can be effected) in this sort of Supplication: for weaknesses bewailed,
and endeavored daily to be reformed, do not exclude us from either of them.
But they rather require our diligence and constancy in the receiving this holy
Sacrament; that we may grow strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.
Which we therefore want, because we neglect this means of obtaining it; or are
possessed with such vain fears, as quite damp that Faith which should be
exercised in the use of it.

4. For which fears there is no cause, when you are thus qualified; provided
also you discern the Lords Body in the holy Communion: that is, consider what
that Bread and Wine imports, which you see upon the Table of the Lord; what
they signify and represent unto you; and what spiritual grace is imparted to
you by their means: which your very Catechism teaches you, is the Body and
Blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful
in the Lords Supper.

5. Of this therefore you cannot be ignorant: and if you believe it, and expect
it; understanding also what your eating and drinking of that Bread and Wine
means; and for what end you come to the holy Table; what can there remain to be
done, to make you know certainly whether you may partake thereof safely, nay
profitably or no, but only the last thing I mentioned?

6. Whether you intend to do there, what the Lord Commands; and to receive
those benefits which he there imparts? Not eating and drinking, that is, as at
a common Table, to satisfy your hunger, and quench your thirst; not receiving
with the same common spirit, and the same unattentiveness, wherewith you
receive other food: but composing your self seriously, as at the Lords Table,
in a holy place, where he is present, thankfully to Commemorate his Death; to
partake of that Sacrifice which he offered for us on the Cross; to give up your
selves, Souls and Bodies unto him; and to thank him that you have the honor to
be his Servants, and that he has purchased you at so dear a rate, as with the
price of his own most precious blood; to implore the continuance of his
gracious and ready help upon all occasions, etc. If, I say, with this Spirit,
and for these and such like ends, you approach to this holy Communion, you need
not have the least fear of being rejected as unworthy Guests, but ought to be
confident that you shall be welcome to that holy Feast, as those that are
faithful unto Christ. For wanting none of these conditions, which are all that
can be thought requisite; you want nothing to make you fit and prepared to have
Communion with Christ, in the merits of his Death, which is there commemorated.

Yes, will some perhaps further object, there may be something still wanting:
For how came the Corinthians to be so severely punished, as we read they were,
for their unworthy receiving the Communion, if these things be sufficient to
make men meet partakers of it? Do you not think that they had all the
forementioned qualifications; and yet they did eat and drink their own
Damnation?

I answer, No; it is most manifest, from the very words which mention their
Damnation, that they were not thus prepared.

1. For first, they proceeding to partake of these Holy Mysteries, at the end
of their Feasts of Charity (which was a common meal, where they eat and drank
all together for the maintaining Brotherly kindness among them) they so
perfectly confounded and blended these two (the Holy Feast on Christ's
Sacrifice, and the common Feast on ordinary food) one with the other; that they
made not the least distinction: but did eat this holy Bread, and drink this
holy Wine, as they did common meat and liquors; not discerning the Lords Body,
as you read v. 29. of this Chapter. This was one horrid sin which they
committed; not to consider what they were doing: for they went to the Lord's
Table, as if it had been still their own Table; and did not distinguish between
this Sacred and their ordinary food.

2. One cause of which undiscerning spirit (which would not let them see the
difference) was their riot and drunkenness at that Feast of Charity; which
ought to have been only a sober refreshment. They revelled upon that good
cheer, which should only have filled their hearts with love to God, the Giver
of all good things, and to their Christian Brethren; and thereby have prepared
them to be partakers of a diviner food, which followed the other. This was
another fearful sin, of which you read, v. 21. where the Apostle says, that as
some were hungry at that Feast of Love and Friendship, so others were drunken.

3. Which leads me to take notice of a third Crime; that the rich despised the
poor; and that in so vile a manner, as not to suffer them to feast with them,
but to separate from them, and to eat and drink by themselves: and also to eat
and drink up all the provision; leaving the poor little or nothing. For in
eating ( viz. at the Feast of Charity) every one takes before, his own Supper:
and so it came to pass, that one was hungry and another drunken.

4. Which suggest this further crime consequent upon the former, that they
turned a common Feast into a private; the rich looking upon what they had
brought to it as their own: Whereas, in truth, they had no longer any propriety
therein; now that they were come together into one and the same place, ver. 20.
Where there ought to have been no difference made between one man and another;
nor any part of the provision looked upon as continuing any man's own proper
food, after it was brought thither for the entertainment of all.

5. And that was another aggravation of their guilt, that they committed all
these crimes, in that holy place, where they assembled for the most holy action
of their Religion; to commemorate the Death of Christ, ver. 22. What, have ye
not Houses to eat and drink in? or despise ye the Church of God, etc. Which
question supposes, that they might in their own private Houses, have eaten
their own Supper, alone by themselves, or with whom it pleased them to invite:
but in the House of God, and in his divine presence, it was intolerable;
because there they met upon no private but a public account, to thank God for
his love in Christ, and to testify their mutual love to each other.

6. Which they were so far from doing, that they did the quite contrary. For
true love delights to keep others in countenance; but they put such to the
blush, as were in a poor and mean condition, and could bring nothing to the
common Table but themselves. Who were by the Laws of the Feast, and by the
rules of Charity, to have feasted at the charge of the rich; and with as much
freedom and confidence, as if they had brought the provision themselves: but
were looked upon with such scorn, that it made them sneak; like wretched
Beggars, that were to be content with the scraps which the rich would leave
them. That Is the meaning of the last words of that Exprobration, ver. 22. and
shame them that have not: that is, are not able to bring any thing to eat and
drink at the Feast of Charity.

These were the grievous scandals committed in that Church; some of them in the
very act of holy Communion; and all of them in their preparation to it; and in
the holy place, where they were assembled to worship Christ, with mutual
affection one to another. Which therefore brought down heavy judgments upon
them, as you read, ver. 29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation (or judgment, as the margin of the Bible has it) to
himself, not discerning the Lords body. Which that it is spoken of the Church
of Corinth, the next words show; which inform us also, what this judgment,
(that is, grievous punishment) was. For this cause many are weak, and sickly
among you, and many sleep.

Now what is all this to you, who are not guilty of any such crimes? For no
such scandals as these, are committed among us, now adays any where. And
therefore why should you fear so much as the judgment, or sentence, to suffer
the grievous punishments now mentioned; seeing you are not guilty of their
faults? Which I have purposely represented, as they are set down by the
Apostle; that finding your selves free from them, you may not fright your
selves away from the Communion, by a dread of that damnation which fell upon
them. But will not fall upon you; who cannot be accused of their Crimes, nor of
any other like to them: if you discern the Lords body; and in a solemn manner
come to commemorate his Death and Passion; renouncing all your evil ways, and
being in perfect Charity with all men.

Upon such God will pour down his blessings; and not plague them with Diseases,
Sickness, and untimely Death: much less with Eternal Damnation, to suffer the
punishment of Everlasting Fire. Which as it is not meant in the Apostles words
(as I have shown elsewhere) so will not be the portion of those, who come thus
prepared to the Table of the Lord: but rather of those who stay away, out of a
pretense of unworthiness; when the true reason is, because they will not be at
the pains to prepare themselves to partake of it. Or if it be timorousness of
spirit, and a scrupulous fearfulness that keeps them from it; let them
seriously weigh what has been proved in this Discourse, that they have the
same reason to be fearful they shall not enter into Eternal Life; For they that
are not fit to have Communion with him in these Types and Figures of him: how
can they be presumed to be fit to have the immediate sight and enjoyment of his
Divine Majesty?

And what serious Christian is there, that can live with any comfort, who has
no hope of that? How can he be quiet, or take any rest, till he has rid
himself of every thing which he thinks makes him unmeet to have fellowship with
Christ, in the Sacrament of his Body and Blood; that so partaking of it
religiously, he may have no cause, not to look upon himself, as an heir through
hope of Gods Everlasting Kingdom, by the merits of the most precious death and
passion of his dear Son.

Who invites all those to come and feast with him, that abide in no habitual
sin (such as shuts out of the Heavenly Kingdom:) and they ought to come without
any fear of provoking his Majesty, without any apprehension of danger to
themselves thereby: nay, draw near with faith, and take this holy Sacrament to
their comfort, and high satisfaction; and to the joy of the Church of Christ:
which is highly honored, by having abundance of worthy persons in it, fit to
communicate with their Lord at his Table.

Such worthy Communicants let us all, for our parts, study to be: by resolving
now, and endeavoring ever hereafter, to quit all known sins, and to live
suteably to our Christian profession and Belief.

Then let nothing hinder you, from taking frequent occasions, of presenting
your selves to the Lord at his Table.

Let no scruples, fears, and doubts, that stick in your mind, hinder you; but
rather get them pulled out by some skilful hand. Do not believe you are
religious, because you are scrupulous; but rather suspect your selves not to be
so, because you neglect the great duty of Religion. And of this be scrupulous,
above all other things, lest you offend God by not coming to the Communion, or
rather, do not dare to be so bold and fearless, in a matter of such great
danger.

Let not the fault of others who communicate, be a stop to your performance of
that duty. That is, if they sin one way, let not that tempt you to a sin of
another kind: If they go wrong on the right hand; be not you moved thereby to
turn too much to the left.

Let not the danger of unworthy receiving, deter you from receiving; but only
from receiving unworthily. Of which there is the less danger, if you be really
afraid of it; for that will move you to be careful to prevent it. And remember,
that nothing will make you more unworthy, than neglect of it.

And therefore let not the thoughts of your imperfections hinder you; for they
will always hinder: and staying from the holy Communion is not the way to be
more perfect; but coming to it.

Nay, let not the breach of your resolutions, by relapsing into sin, after you
have communicated, keep you from communicating again: but rather come the
sooner, and take the first opportunity that is presented you, to renew your
Covenant with God, to strengthen your Christian resolutions, to fortify your
selves against temptations, and to obtain assurance of a pardon for the
unfaithfulness to your Savior. To fall is not so dangerous, as not to rise
again presently after we are fallen.

Much less let business hinder: for if you be honestly employed in honest
business, it is part of your preparation for the holy Communion.

And let no man say he wants time to fit himself to receive it; for this, is in
effect, to say he wants time to live well: Of which if you take a constant
care, that is the main preparation. And for the composing your mind, and
considering the ends for which you go to the Lords Table; take as much time as
your condition of life, and the circumstances of your condition will allow: and
that is sufficient.

Be not hindered from the Heavenly Comforts, of which you may there partake, by
an opinion of the necessity of a long examination of your selves beforehand:
for that necessity arises only from long neglect of the Communion.

Receive frequently, as the first Christians did; and then you will be as ready
for this, on all occasions, as you are for other duties of holy Worship. For
you will be well acquainted with the state of your own Souls, and with the
nature and end of this part of your Religion: especially, if you take some
account of your selves every day; which will make your account short and easy
before the Communion.

And let not dullness and indisposition be thought a reason why you should
forbear to receive it: but rather come thither, to be quickened. And if you
continue dull there; yet beli^ve you have pleased God, by doing as he
commanded, though not so lively as you desired.

Let us not hear any man say, I have not profited thereby; and therefore had as
good stay away. For it is very profitable to do our duty constantly, to express
our gratitude to God, to receive the tokens of his Love, to tie our selves
faster to him in renewed resolutions of holy obedience, to be put in fear of
offending him, and in hope of his favor: and there is no man that with any
kind of care partakes of the holy Communion, but receives more or less such
benefit as this by it.

Let no fancy therefore of this nature hinder you: but oppose to them all, the
necessity of doing your duty, as well as you are able. Some for instance
complain of hardness of heart, and therefore dare not come: but let such
understand, that it is yielding and compliance, to do what Christ has
commanded; and not to do it, is that very hardness which they bemoan.

And if any quarrel or contention happen among Neighbors, let not that hinder
neither: but rather let them come to the Communion and there be reconciled. It
is too much that w^ have fallen out one with another; let us not fall out with
our God too.

If these contentions have risen up to heats, and anger, nay wrath and evil
speaking: do not continue them by refraining holy Communion; but, repenting of
the evil, extinguish all by renewing your Fellowship with God, and one with
another. It has staid too long if one Sun has gone down upon your wrath: be
afraid to let it rest a whole Week, till another Communion day be come and gone.

And suppose this wrath improves into hatreds and enmities, which you think you
discern in some hearts against you; let not that hinder you (though it do them)
but come rather and testify you bear no hatred toward them, but are in charity
with all men. To love an Enemy, is the highest proof of our love to God our
Savior.

And if you be at any time engaged in a Suit of Law, let not that hinder your
performance of this duty: For Suits at Law, to recover or defend that which you
judge your right, are not sinful; nor is it difficult to manage them without
sin, with a Friendly and Christian mind: both parties referring themselves to
an indifferent judge, and resolving to acquiesce, as common reason directs, in
his sentence; for there would be no end of contention, if every man should be a
judge for himself.

And do not say, it is too great presumption, want of humility and modesty, to
be seen often at the Lords Table: For it can be no presumption to love him very
much; and to accept of the honor he does us, in inviting, nay commanding us
there to attend him: it will rather be rudeness, and careless neglect of him,
if we do not frequent it.

And as for other hindrances, if we have some Relation or Friend that is sick,
or we our selves are something out of order; or we have been in a Journey; or
had a Visit to make which could not well be avoided; or had a Friend came to
see us the day before the Communion (with whom we could not but in civility,
spend a good deal of time) these, and such like, I am ashamed to do more than
mention; they are so trivial: and by no understanding Christian can be thought
a reasonable cause for putting by the intention, we have at any time of
receiving this holy Sacrament.

I shall only add therefore, that the want of something to offer at the
Communion (which the poor and needy may make an exception against coming to it
frequently) is no reason to keep any body away from it. For God who accepted of
the Widow, that cast a mite into the Treasury, would have accepted her, if she
had not had a mite to give: she having a willing mind, to give him, even all
she had.

Some must receive relief out of the oblations, and it is not required, that
such should make any, but only the oblation of themselves. Or if out of the
abundance of their Love and Devotion, they do as the poor Widow did, offer all
they have; they may, and ought, to receive back again, out of the offerings,
much more than they gave.

Let not these therefore, nor any other exceptions, keep us any longer from
this holy duty. The ends of which, if we often call to mind, or rather
constantly keep in mind; with a resolution frequently to come to the Table of
the Lord, and there to snow the affection we have to him, and the earnest
desire of our Souls to partake more and more of his grace; that we may be
enabled to live better and better, and get a more absolute conquest over all
those evil lusts and affections, which struggle for the Mastery in us (and by
persuading us to neglect the holy Communion, get a great advantage of us) we
shall be well enough disposed to partake of it, with great fruit and profit,
and no less comfort and joy in God: And that at any time, when an opportunity
presents it self; though we have no notice, till it comes, of the opportunity.
Suppose it be, when we go to see a sick Friend or Neighbor, who is desirous to
receive the Communion; or when we come, upon occasion, into a Church, where we
are Strangers, and did not know it would be there at that time administered: I
make no question, it will be far more acceptable to our Lord Christ, if with no
other preparation than I have now mentioned, we take the boldness to approach
to his Table; than if, out of a mistaken humility and caution, we turn our
backs of it, and go away, because we had not so much time, as we desired, to
dispose our selves for it.

For the Lords sake, let us root out those false notions, whereby we are
prejudiced against our certain duty, and be at the pains to settle true
Christian Principles in our minds; with a steadfast purpose to grow in grace and
in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: and then we shall find
no cause at any time to refuse holy Communion with him; but rather be stirred
up to embrace the occasion, with ardent love and devotion. Which, the more it
burns in our hearts, the fewer scruples we shall have in our minds. And those
few, if there be any, that remain, will soon be overcome; when we feel what
mischief they do us, by keeping us from the most advantageous means of being
eternally happy: Nay, from that present happiness, which the sweet tastes of His
love, and of the benefits He has purchased by his Death and Passion, impart
unto those Souls, which devoutly partake of the holy Mysteries of Salvation.
Which were ordained by our Lord, says Theodoret (upon Hebr. viii. 4.) for this
very end; that beholding the type of them, we may call to mind the sufferings
themselves he endured for us; and may thereby have our love inflamed toward
our Benefactor; and expect the enjoyment of the good things, which are to come
hereafter.

Conclusion.
THus, I hope, I have cleared the way to the Table of the Lord, so that there
is no obstacle left in it, to hinder your cheerful approach unto it; if you
have any will to partake of it. And the consideration, of what I have
represented in my First Discourse, has, I trust, formed such a will in you: as
the second cannot but dispose all those who seriously weigh it, to have a will
to do it frequently.

Unto which I shall press you by these two Arguments, and so conclude.

I. The first is the great concern we have made show of about our Religion, and
the fears we have pretended, lest we should be so unhappy as to lose it. If we
be in good earnest concerned for it, why then, I beseech you, do we not take
care to keep it, by being truly Religious? Is there any reason to think, that
they are troubled with fears of losing one half of the Communion, who can be
content with none at all? Or with what Conscience do they find fault with the
Church of Rome for taking away the Cup from the People; when they themselves
live as if the whole Sacrament were unnecessary?

It is a false zeal, which declaims against the Priests receiving alone; and
does not bring men to receive with him, when they may: but suffers him still to
remain at the Altar, with a very small Company.

In these things we accuse and reproach our selves; demonstrating we are not
led by Religion, but by humor, Worldly Interest or Faction. For no man can be
thought to be truly solicitous for the preservation of Religion; when he makes
no use of it, nor receives any benefit by it. Cannot he live without the name,
who lives without the thing?

It we be unseignedly desirous to maintain the estate of Religion here
established; let us seriously comply with its Institutions; and serve God duly
in all its Offices: being afraid of this above all other things, lest God
should therefore remove our Candlestick out of its place, because we will not
walk in the light thereof; therefore deprive us of the opportunities of the
Holy Communion, because we have no list to Communicate.

Unto which duty let us stir up our selves, that it may stir us up to all
other. For what other way do we know like this; nay, what other way but this,
for our preservation.

II. That Is the second thing; We of the Church of England profess to depend
wholly upon Heaven, in the use of spiritual Weapons alone, for our protection
in times of danger: disclaiming the Lawfulness of taking up Arms to resist the
Supreme Power, upon the account of Religion. Are we not strangely forgetful
then, if we accustom not our selves to the use of these spiritual means, for
our safety and security: especially this, of which I may say, as David of the
Sword of Goliath, there is none like it?

What account can we give of such foul neglect of him, unto whom we say every
day, there is none that fights for us, but only thou, O God? Is not this to
expose our selves to be a prey unto our Enemies, if ever they have as much
power, as will to devour us? For we openly declare, by not seeking aid
continually from above, in that way wherein we are more likely to obtain it,
that we depend upon nothing at all; but are the most defenseless of all Mankind.

So they would have thought, in ancient days; when they looked upon those, as
left unarmed and naked, who were not fortified with the protection of the body
and blood of Christ. Which are the words of St. Cyprian who argues thus (in his
57. Epistle) since the Eucharist is made on purpose, that it may be a defense
and safeguard, unto those who receive it; let us arm those whom we would have
to be safe against the Adversary (speaking of the fight of affliction they were
to encounter) with the munition of the Lords plenteous fullness. For how can we
teach, or provoke them to shed their blood for the Confession of his Name; if
entering the Combat we deny them the blood of Christ? Or how shall we make them
fit for the Cup of Martyrdom, if we admit them not first to drink in the
Church, the Cup of the Lord?

Consider, I beseech you, how we in this Church profess to lean only upon the
hope of his heavenly grace: which is so necessary for us, that we acknowledge
in another Collect, that the Church cannot continue in safety without his
succor; and therefore pray him, to preserve it by his help and goodness. Shall
we not then seek this succor most solicitously? shall we not implore this
Heavenly Grace, with ardent cries; especially in this powerful way of
prevailing with him, by representing to him, what Christ has done and suffered
for his Church, which he purchased with his own most precious blood? We abandon
all care of our selves, when we thus forsake the only help we have to rest
upon. Nay, it is to contradict our Prayers; when we say we have no other Hope,
and yet do not flee to him, our refuge and strength, a very present help in
trouble. It is, at least, a vain and senseless leaning on him, which makes us
neglect him; and lay aside, the principal support which he has left us, for
our encouragement and comfort in all our distresses.

If we really depend on him alone; we had need apply our selves unto him, with
warmth of affection, and great diligence. If we rely on his help and goodness,
let us take care to please him in all things: that so we may obtain the favor,
either to have the evils turned away from us which we have deserved; or to be
fortified against them with such a pious constancy, that they may be steadfastly
endured.

If we do not thus study to approve our selves his faithful Servants, we
foolishly confide in him; against his own express Declarations, that he will
not patronize us in Irreligion, and contempt of his Authority.

But if we faithfully obey him; then we surely trusting in his Defense, need
not fear the power of any Adversaries: but rest assured, that he will keep his
Church and Household continually in his true Religion; that they who do lean
only upon the hope of his heavenly grace, may evermore be defended by his
mighty power, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Written by the Reverend Dr Patrick, and sold by Richard Royston.
THE Christian Sacrifice: A Treatise showing the Necessity, End, and Manner of
Receiving the Holy Communion: together with suitable Prayers and Meditations for
every Month in the Year; and for the Principal Festivals in Memory of our
Blessed Savior: The Sixth Edition. The Devout Christian instructed how to pray
and give thanks to God: or a Book of Devotion for Families, and particular
persons, in most of the concerns of Humane Life. The Fifth Edition in Twelves.
An Advice to a Friend. The Fourth Edition, in Twelves. Jesus and the
Resurrection justified by Witnesses in Heaven and in Earth. In two Parts, in
Octavo. The Book of Job Paraphrased, in Octavo, New. The Book of Psalms, In two
Parts, Paraphrased, in Octavo. The Proverbs of Solomon Paraphrased, with the
Arguments of each Chapter, which supply the place of Commenting. A Paraphrase
upon the Books of Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Solomon. With Arguments to each
Chapter, and Annotations thereupon, in Octavo, New. The truth of Christian
Religion, in Octavo, New. The Glorious Epiphany, with the devout Christians
love to it, in Octavo. A Book for Beginners, or, a Help to young Communicants;
that they may be fitted for the Holy Communion, and receive it with profit, The
Sixth Edition.
The Works of Dr Hammond, in Four large Volumes, viz.
Vol. I. A Collection of Discourses chiefly Practical. Vol. II. A Collection of
Discourses in Defense of the Church of England, 1. Against the Romanists. 2.
Against other Adversaries. Vol. III. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the
Books of the New Testament. Vol. IV. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon the
Books of the Psalms. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon [the ten first Chapters
of] the Proverbs, MS. Thirty one Sermons Preached upon several Occasions. With
an Appendix to Vol. 2.


