A SERMON PREACHED In the Chapel of St. James's, Before His HIGHNESS the
Prince of Orange, The 20th of January, 1688.

By SIMON PATRICK, D. D. Dean of Peterborough.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

ISAIAH XI. 6. The Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall
lie down with the Kid; and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fatling
together; and a little Child shall lead them, etc.
THIS Chapter contains such an Illustrious Prophecy of Christ, and of the
Splendour and Amplitude of his Kingdom; that the greatest Enemies of our blessed
Savior have not been able to shut their eyes against it. They all confess it
is their great King, the Son of David, who, the Prophet says, shall come forth
as a rod out of the stem of Jesse, etc. (V. I.) upon whom the Spirit of the
Lord shall rest, in the greatest plenty and variety of heavenly Gifts, (as it
there follows) to whose Standart the Gentiles shall resort (v. 10.) and his
rest be glorious.

Of this there is no question made; but they take exception to our Lord and
Savior, and will not allow him to be the King that is here foretold: because
the whole Prophecy, they fancy, was not fulfilled in him. For we do not see,
say they, the Wolf dwelling with the Lamb, the Leopard lying down with the Kid,
the Lion eating straw like an Ox, and the Sucking-child playing upon the hole
of the Asp, etc. as the Prophet tells us they shall do in the days of the
Messiah: and therefore he, whom you worship, is not that King of Israel unto
whom we ought to yield obedience.

Unto this Exception I shall endeavor, at this time, to give full
satisfaction, and withal to explain the nature of Christ's Kingdom: by showing,
first, the meaning of this Prophecy; and secondly, the truth of it; or that it
was exactly fulfilled in our Blessed Lord and Savior: who came to work, and
did effect this mavelous change in the World.

I.
And for the understanding of the sense of the Prophecy, two things are
necessary to be done.

First, To show what is meant by the Wolf, the Leopard, and the rest of the
Creatures here mentioned.

Secondly, What it is for them to dwell, and lie down together.

The sottisher sort of Jews, who had rather any thing should be altered, than
themselves; I.
have taken these words according to the very gross letter of them: and
imagined that all the Ravenous Creatures shall change their Natures when Christ
comes.

But the sober men among them are sensible that the Prophet, by a Parable of
Wolves and Lambs, Leopards and Kids, Lions and Oxen, describes, as in a
Picture, such men, as, in their qualities and dispositions, are like unto these
Creatures. Which is a scheme of speech no less familiar in the sacred Books,
than in other Authors.

Jacob, for instance, when he solemnly blesses his twelve Sons (Genesis XLIX.)
calls Judah a Lion's whelp, because of the strength and fortitude, the courage
and valor, which he foresaw would be in that Tribe. And Dan he calls a Serpent
and an Adder in the path; because of their subtilty and craft. And, to name no
more, he says, Issachar is a strong Ass, couching down between two burdens, v.
14. because of their patience in labor; and suffering the heaviest loads of
oppression to lie upon them, rather than stir to discompose their rest and
quiet in that plentiful Country, which fell to their lot in the division of
the Land of Canaan.

But, though they are content this Prophecy should be a description of Mankind;
who, they see, are represented by such Creatures, as are here mentioned: yet
their pride and vain opinion of themselves, makes them to mistake the Persons.
For their conceit is, that they themselves are the Lambs, the Kids, and Oxen,
and we Gentiles the Wolves, Leopards, and Lions: Which, if it were exactly
true, would afford (as you shall hear anon) a most excellent sense of this
Prophecy.

But it is contrary to their own Scriptures; in which we find the greatest
Persons among them, their Princes and Judges (that is, the Men of the great
Sanhedrim, and they that judged in inferior Courts) compared, too often, unto
the most rapacious Creatures. They ought indeed to have been as gentle as
Lambs, as harmless as young Kids, as innocent as a sucking Child: But the
Prophet Zephany says in his days their Princes were roaring Lions, and their
Judges evening Wolves, (the greediest of all others) who after they had eaten
the Flesh, presently gnawed the Bones also, Zeph. III. 3. that is, they raked
the very poorest of the people, who were already so bare, that they were stripped
to their Skins, nay to the very Bones.

And after him Ezekiel makes the same complaint of their unrelenting Cruelty,
c. XXII. 27. Her Princes in the midst thereof are like Wolves ravening the
prey, to shed blood, and to destroy souls, and get dishonest gain. And both
these Prophets, it is probable, borrowed this resemblance from the wise King of
Israel, one of whose Aphorisms is this, XXVIII. Prove. 25. As a roaring Lion,
and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over a poor People.

In this condition our Lord Christ found the Jewish Nation at his coming, as he
plainly enough intimates, when sending forth his XII Apostles to preach unto
them, and them only, X. Matthew. 5. he says, v. 16. Behold, I send you forth as
Sheep (or, as St. Luke has it, as Lambs) in the midst of Wolves.

Under that Character he represents those who had obtained the greatest
Reputation for Sanctity among them; telling the Scribes and Pharisees, XXIII.
Matthew. 25, 33. they were Serpents, a generation of Vipers, who made a fair
appearance without, but within were full of Extortion and Excess, or, (as St.
Luke expresses it) of Ravening and Wickedness; had a Wolfish appetite, that is,
being so ravenous, that they devoured even Widows Houses, and never thought
they had enough.

By this it is apparent, that, though the Gentiles were generally more Savage
than the Jews, yet they too often imitated their Cruelty; and, notwithstanding
their wholesome Laws, which taught them better, were as oppressive and
hard-hearted as the most barbarous Nations. And therefore it is most reasonable
by Wolves, Leopards, Lions, Asps, and suchlike Creatures, to understand all
Men, of what Nation soever, who are of a fierce and rapacious, a cruel and
implacable Nature: and by Lambs, Kids, Calves, and others of that kind, all
those who are of a more mild and gentle, tender and merciful disposition; that
have no Enmity to others, and do no hurt, but are useful to their Neighbors,
and inclined to do good to all.

This being very evident, there is no difficulty in the Second thing to be
explained; but we may easily tell what it is for these persons to dwell, and
lie down together.

Cohabitation, and resting in the same place, signifies friendliness, love, and
constant kindness; the effect of which is, mutual help, assistance, and
comfort. And so the meaning of the Prophet is, that such persons as were so
full of hatred before our Savior's coming, that they did not only contend and
quarrel, but also worry and devour one another; should, in the days of Christ
become new Creatures; and, laying aside their Enmities and Oppositions, their
Variance and Emulation, their Bloody Strife and Contention; live in such Love
and Peace together, as they are wont to do who dwell in the same House; that
is, as Brethren and Sisters; or who lie in the same Bed, that is, as Husband
and Wife, between whom there is the strongest and dearest league of Friendship.

This, I doubt not, is the general sense of the words: If there be any
particular rank of persons designed by these several sorts of Creatures, I can
make no more of them than this; That by Lions, in the better sense of the word,
(as in the Blessing of Judah) may be meant Princely persons, (as Epiphanius
himself interprets that place Haeres 77. numb. 33. (...)
) and by the Fatlings their Wealthy and Happy Subjects; by the Wolf and the
Leopard, the Strong and the Mighty; and by the Lambs and Kids, the Weak and
Infirm: by the Bear, such as are fierce, rough, and warlike; and by the Cow,
the gentle, tame, and peaceable People: and lastly, by the Asp and the
Cockatrice (which are mentioned in the Verses following my Text) the angry and
envenomed Spirits, and by the sucking Children, all meek and good-natured
persons.

And so the meaning may be, that Christ shall come to make the World so happy,
that Princes and People, the mighty and the meaner sort; the violent, and they
that have no power, or no will to resist; the Soldier, and the peaceable
Countryman; the Waspish people, and they that are of a sweet Disposition,
shall all be brought under the same Discipline, and submit to the same Laws;
not to hurt or molest one another, but to promote the Common Good of the whole
body to which they belong. For they shall be conducted by the most
tenderhearted, peaceable and gentle Guides; who perhaps are meant in the
latter end of my Text, and a little child shall lead them. By this name of his
Children, our Lord calls his Apostles, whom he sent to gather and feed his
Flock; and both they and their Successors are called in the Holy Language,
(...), the Leaders of his People, to Guide and Conduct them into the way of
truth and peace.

Thus far none can make any difficulty to yield their Assent, but will easily
grant this Prophecy sets forth the happy days under Christ's Kingdom and
Government, in such words as the very Heathen Poets (or Prophets, as they
called them, 1. Tit. 12.) were wont to use, when they would represent the like
peace and prosperity under their Kings and Princes. For Virgil congratulates to
Pollio the Birth of his Son, and pretends to presage the Happiness which should
be in his time, in words as like to these of Isaiah, as if he had borrowed them
from his Writings. And to ingratiate himself with Augustus, he speaks in the
same Style concerning Julius Caesar, as all know, who are acquainted with his
Poems. Erlog. IV. and V.


The Greatest Difficulty will be to show the Truth of what the Prophet here
writes; and to make his Words applicable to our Blessed Savior.

For when were there such Happy Times, may some say? Did we ever yet see the
Enmities of Mankind laid aside, or so much as laid asleep? Has not even the
Christian World been ever full of Strife and Contention, of Hatred and bitter
Opposition, of Violence and Oppression, nay, of Wars and Bloodshed; which
besmears the Face of Christ's Flock, as well as other people? Do not our Eyes
still see men devouring and destroying one another? Are not our Ears filled
with the doleful Complaints and Lamentations of miserable wretches? The Mighty
in many places (even in neighboring Countries, not far off from us). roaring
like Lions for their prey, and poor harmless people trembling before them, like
so many Lambs that have no helper? Nay, are not the meaner sort engaged in
perpetual brawls and endless janglings? Are they not fraught with envy, wrath
and malice? Do they not sting one another (and perhaps their betters) with
bitter words, as if the poison of Asps were under their lips? And more than
this, are they not ready to sheath their Swords in one another's Bowels, with
such a furious zeal; as if to kill their opposites were to do our Lord good
service?

How can all this be denied? and, if it cannot, what appearance of truth is
there, that Jesus is that Christ, under whose Government the Prophet says,
there shall be a most blessed accord?

I answer; all this is true: and yet it is as true, that our Lord Jesus is the
Christ; the Son of God, and the Savior of the World. Which is the Second and
the principal part of my Discourse: wherein I undertook to demonstrate, That
this Prophecy was exactly fulfilled in him: as will be confessed if I make good
these three things.

II.
First, That it was the apparent design of our Savior's coming, to make such
an happy accord among men; as the Prophet here describes.

Secondly, That the nature of his Religion is such, as is apt to produce this
effect which he designed.

Thirdly, That this effect was actually produced in those that heartily
embraced his Religion.

I.
The first of these is so unquestionable, that I may be excused if I wholly
omit it, for fear of being tedious. Or it may be sufficient to say, that as he
was called by this Prophet, chapter IX. v. 6. the Prince of peace long before he
was born; so at his birth the Angels tell us plainly enough what his business
was, when they welcomed him into the World with this joyful Hymn; Glory be to
God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward, or among, men, Luke
II. 14.

And when he was to enter upon his Office, John Baptist was sent before him to
prepare his way, by turning the hearts of the fathers to the children (so the
same Angel describes his Commission) i. e. to make them all of one mind: and
the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, Luke I. 17. Which Wisdom you know
is, pure and peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, without hypocrisy, as it is described by one of
the Apostles of our Lord, Jam. III. 17.

Whose whole Conversation in the world, was such a rare Pattern of meekness and
peacebleness, that he did not strive nor cry, neither did any man hear his
voice in the streets (as St. Matthew observes, chapter XII. 19. out of this
Prophet) that is, he would not contend with those that opposed and provoked
him; nor make a clamorous noise when he was abused; nor move the smallest
disturbance, how ill soever he was treated: No, not so much as break a bruised
reed, nor quench the smoking flax; i. e. dishearten, or utterly deject those
of whom there was any hope; tho for the present they were his Enemies, and
sought to destroy him. But he persuaded all, in the most gracious manner, to
become new Creatures; and sent his Apostles abroad also upon this errand, with
peace in their mouths, unto every House into which they entered.

And if you would know what kind of Creatures he intended to make them, you may
learn that even from the names he commonly bestows upon his Disciples: whom he
calls his Sheep, and his Lambs, and little Children (the very terms wherein the
Prophet here speaks) unto whom he gave this new Commandment, That they should
love one another, even as he had loved them; that is, with the most ardent
love, and sincerest affection. Which his beloved Apostle repeats so often, and
in the very same language, calling those to whom he writes, My little Cheldren;
as if he thought this was the whole business of Christianity, That we should
believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave
us commandment, 1 John III. 23.

But I Will spend no more time in this, nor stay to give an account of one place
in the Gospel, which seems to contradict it, (Mat. X. 34. 35.) because,
whatsoever the Event was by accident, in the attempt of so great a Change as
our Savior came to make; the Nature and Genius of the Religion which he taught
is such, that, as he could have no other design, so it is apt in it self to
make Men the most peaceable Creatures, though never so disagreeing in their
Natural Tempers and Dispositions.

That Is the next thing to be considered, in this matter.

II.
three Things.

First, The Principles of his Religion, or the Doctrines he taught Men to
believe; together with the way and means whereby these Principles were
established in Men's Minds.

Secondly, The Precepts of his Religion, or the Things he taught them to
practice.

Thirdly, The Obligations he laid upon Men to receive these Principles, and
observe these Precepts.

All of which are very powerful to make Men of a loving, gracious Disposition,
and perfectly to reconcile them one to another.

First, As to the Principles of his Religion, and the Means he used to settle
them in Men's Minds. He,

1. Taught them, first of all, that there is but one God. The Disbelief of
which, as it had set the World at such enmities one with another, as they
confessed was among their Deities; so the planting this Faith in Men's Hearts,
any one may discern at the first sight, must needs be an apt means to breed
such Love among Men, as is between the Children of one and the same common
Parent of them all.

2. And that is very considerable; as he declared one God to Men, so he revealed
him as his and their Father, full of Kindness and Goodwill to all his Children,
having a tender and affectionate Care of their Immortal Happiness. Which St.
Paul thought a Bond so strong, and a Motive so very efficacious, that it
concludes the great heap of Arguments, whereby he persuades Christians to Unity
of Spirit and Peace; Ephesians. iv. 6. There is one God and Father of all, who is
above all, and through all, and in you all; that is, is the Supreme Lord of us
all, diffusing his careful and paternal Providence through the whole Body of
this vast Empire, and more particularly resides among Christian People.

3. Who are taught (which is the next thing) to worship this one God, by one
Mediator alone; which is both another Bond of Union, (as the Apostle there
teaches, when he says there is one Lord, V. 4.) and likewise gives very great
assurance of God's tender Love to all Mankind, as he discourses in another
Epistle, 1 Timothy ii. 4, 5. where he proves that God would have all Men to be
saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth, from this Principle; for there
is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, who
gave himself a Ransom for all.

4. Which appears by this further care he has taken of us all, that he sent
his Apostles to baptize all Nations into one simple Faith (for next to one
Lord, the Apostle mentions one Faith and one Baptism) which is this, That there
is one God, the Creator of all, who is to be worshipped and served by one
Mediator, his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, who offered one Sacrifice, that
is, himself, for the Sins of the whole World, rose again from the Dead,
ascended into Heaven, and from thence sent the Holy Ghost, to testify that he
is Lord of all, and will come again in Glory to judge the Quick and the Dead.
This was easily and quickly learned; and this they taught every where; that
Christians might be perfectly joined together in the same Mind, and in the same
Judgment, 1 Cor. 1. 10.

5. In order to which they further declared the whole World, should be governed
and judged by one common Law; and that, not the Law of Moses, but the plain
Rules of Righteousness, Sobriety, and Godliness. For our Blessed Savior being
made Lord of all, abolished by his Authority the Ordinances of Moses; and
thereby took away the Distinction which had continued for a great many Ages,
between the Gentiles and the Jews: whose Law was in the very Intention of it, a
Law of Division and Separation; whereby God designed to sever them from the
familiar Society and Conversation of the rest of the Nations in the World: Who,
while that Law remained in force, were kept at a distance from the Jews; but by
the removal of it, were no longer Strangers and Foreigners, but fellow-Citizens
with the Saints, and of the Household of God, Ephesians. ii. 19. Upon which account
the Apostle tells the Ephesians a little before, v. 14. that Christ was their
Peace, who had made both one, by breaking down the middle Wall of Partition,
which was between them and the Jews; that is, as he explains himself in the
next Verse, The Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, i. e. the Ritual
Constitutions of Moses, which he calls the Enmity, because they had been the
cause of Enmity and Hatred between Jews and Gentiles; and were therefore
abolished by the Death of Christ, for to make in himself of twain, one new Man,
so making Peace: That they, he means, who had stood divided by vastly
different, nay opposite Rites of Worship and other Customs, might meet and join
together in his Religion; and so becoming one new Body or Society under the
Government of his Laws, there might be an happy Accord and Agreement between
them, as Members of one and the same holy Catholic Church: the Jews no longer
looking upon the Gentiles as profane; nor the Gentiles looking upon the Jews
as an unsociable People.

6. Now for the settling this Belief in Men's Minds, that they were all under
the care of one and the same God, and of the same Mediator, and were become one
Corporation, by submitting to the same Laws; They were all both Jews and
Gentiles indifferently endued with one and the same Spirit.

This St. Paul frequently inculcates, especially in the forenamed Epistle to
the Ephesians; where you read presently after the words now mentioned, v. 18.
that through Christ, they both had access by one Spirit unto the Father. And
again, v. 22. Ye also are built together in him for an Habitation of God,
through the Spirit. The Holy Ghost, that is, falling down in great variety of
wonderful Gifts upon the Gentiles as well as the Jews, was an undoubted
Testimony of the same Divine Favor toward them both alike, an evident Token
that the same Divine Presence was among the Gentiles, which had been among his
ancient People; and was likewise the Bond of Union, whereby they were knit
together, without any distinction between them, unto one God, in the same
Religion of Jesus Christ. So the Apostle tells them, Chap. iv. where he
requires them (v. 3, 4.) to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace,
because there is one Body, and one Spirit. They were all made Members, that is,
of the same Society; and one Spirit moved and wrought in them all, which could
not but dispose and incline them unto Love and Kindness, unto Peaceableness and
the stricctest Friendship imaginable.

Of this alone, it would not be hard to make an entire Discourse, and to show
withal that by the Power of this Spirit only, and not by armed Force and
Violence, his Religion was propagated and advanced in the World, in a very
quiet and peaceable manner. But my design is merely to represent what effectual
means our Lord employed, had they been observed and pursued to bring about his
end, and to fulfill this Prophecy.

Which will further appear, if you cast your Eyes a while upon his Precepts,
which is the second thing I propounded to be considered under this Head.



First, Exact Justice; all the Duties of which he has comprised in so few, but
very forcible words, that as in an instant they enter into our Minds, and gain
our Assent, and recommend themselves to our best Affections, so they are easily
remembered and preserved in Mind. For all things whatsoever ye would that Men
should do unto you, do ye even so to them, (Mat. vii. 12.) is a Rule so
pregnant, that it comprehends in it the Wisdom of all Laws; and so equitable,
that it makes every Man's own Desires to be the measure of his Actions toward
others; and so powerful, that this alone, were it observed, would turn the
whole Earth into a Paradise; in which the Lions should be as tame as Lambs, and
no body destroy or hurt, or so much as molest others any more.

2. For this Rule comprehends in it Mercy also; which is another Lesson our
Savior has taught us, no less than Justice. Which if Men would exercise, as
they desire it should be shown to them in their Necessities, they would not
merely cease to be hurtful to their Neighbors, but become helpful and
beneficial; and that in an extraordinary measure, for our Lord has raised this
Virtue to the sublimest pitch, by requiring all his Disciples to be merciful,
as their Heavenly Father is merciful.

3. But suppose some to be so far from doing Good, that they do nothing but
Mischief; and continue to be as unruly as the Bears, and as spiteful as the
Asps, of which the Prophet speaks in the next Verses: In this Case our Lord
has taught us Meekness and Patience, and would have us to suppress those angry
and furious Motions which are apt, on such Occasions, to rise and boil up in
our Hearts. So that, notwithstanding the brutish Nature of some, if the rest
were generally possessed with the Christian Spirit, the World might see more
happy Days than now it does.

4. For he requires us also, not only to pass by and forgive those Wrongs and
Affronts we receive from our Enemies, but to bless them and to do them Good.
Which has a strange Power in it to charm and conquer even the most fierce and
barbarous Natures; and to reconcile them to the Love of that Virtue, which
makes Men requite Injuries with Courtesies, even when it is in their Power to
take a terrible Revenge.

5. Nay, further, he would have us contented with such things as we have: which
evidently destroys that envy, emulation, and ambition, from whence no small
stirs and confusions arise in the World.

6. In questions also and disputes about matters of Liberty, he charges those
that are satisfied, not to despise such as are not; and those that are not
satisfied, he commands not to judge those that are, Romans XIV. 3.

7. Nay, in all manner of differences which are apt to arise among us, he would
have the peace of God rule in our hearts, (Coll. III. 16.) so that this having
the Umpire there, and all being referred to its judgment, we should rest in the
determination of what will make most for peace.

8. He instructs likewise our behavior in our several Relations, teaching
Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Pastors and
People, to demean themselves so to their mutual satisfaction, as to take away
the cause of all discord, not only in Families and Parishes, but in the larger
Societies of Church and State. When the Flock, for instance, know those which
labor among them, (as St. Paul discourses 1 Thessalonians. V. 12.) that is, have a
great respect to their Spiritual Pastors and Instructors, whose faithful
discharge of their Office, in laboring among their Flock, presiding over them
in the Lord, and admonishing them, procures a great regard to them, and
inclines the People to esteem them very highly in love for their works-sake;
they cannot well miss of that Blessing which there immediately follows, to be
at peace among themselves. For from wise and faithful Instructions on the one
hand, and affectionate Regard to holy Counsels on the other, there cannot but
issue such an Accord, as will make them no less happy, than by their Divisions
they make themselves unquiet and miserable.

For, lastly, the Root and Foundation of all these, our Lord has laid in much
Humility and Charity; which, as they are the very Soul and Spirit of
Christianity, and utterly destroy that Selfishness, which is the great
Makebate among men; so they are of such a sweet and obliging Nature, that did
they universally prevail, there would be an end of all Impatience and Wrath,
Jars and Contentions, Injustice and Violence, Cruelty and hard Dealing; all
Factions in the State, and all Schisms in the Church, would either be
prevented, or presently quasht, and gently healed.

I need not distrust the evidence of these things so much as to add one word
more about them.

Faith, and these Duties, our Lord has bound upon us by such strong
Obligations of his exceeding great and precious Promises, and of his most
dreadful Threatenings (which were confirmed also after a wonderful manner) that
if we laid them to heart, they could not fail to draw us as irresistibly to the
Belief of his Doctrine, and to the observation of his Precepts, as our
Obedience to them, it is certain, would make us all more happy than either
these words of the Prophet, or any other can express.

Herein chiefly his Doctrine excels that of the best Philosophers, who taught
many excellent Lessons, but could not enforce them with such an assured hope of
Immortal Life, or fear of Eternal Death, as our Savior and his Apostles have
done; who thunder this in our Ears, Follow Peace with all men, and Holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord, Hebr. XII. 14. To be where our Lord
is, and behold his Glory, is the great Hope of Christians, John XVII. 24. It is
the very Joy that is set before them. But they are out of the way to that high
and holy place where our Lord is, and shall never come thither, who do not
study to be pure and undefiled, and whose Purity does not make them peaceable;
nay, Followers of Peace, and that with all men.

This is as sure as that Christ is in Heaven; and we have as good security of
that, as can be given us; by the coming of the Holy Ghost from thence, in
wonderful plenty of miraculous Gifts; which declared him to have all Power in
Heaven and in Earth, and puts it out of all doubt, that he is able to give to
all them, who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory and Honor,
and Immortality, eternal Life: But to them that are contentious, and do not
obey the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness, Indignation and Wrath; Tribulation
and Anguish upon every Soul of man that does evil, Romans II. 7, 8.

And now I hope no man will question the Application of this Prophecy to our
Savior, merely because he does not behold such happy days as are here
described: since things are so ordered, I have demonstrated, that we may see
them if we will.

It is senseless to think that God intended to force Mankind to agree together,
and to be quiet, as if they were indeed a company of such Beasts, as the
Prophet here mentions, and not merely induced with such qualities. The Prophet
explains his own meaning, when in the Conclusion of this Description of the
peaceable Reign of Christ, he assigns this cause of it, v. 9. They shall not
hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain; for the Earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea.

This Felicity was to be the effect of abundance of Divine Knowledge, which in
its own Nature is apt to produce it. But as no Knowledge can be acquired
without diligent Studies, so when we have it, it can do us no service, unless
we will be governed by it. And therefore if men either will not entertain this
heavenly Wisdom, or having entertained it, do imprison and smother it, they
deprive themselves of the Blessing of Peace: But they cannot make this Word of
God of none effect, because he never intended to bestow this Happiness upon the
Ignorant and the Negligent, but upon those who receive and improve the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

So much the sober Jews themselves confess, particularly Maimonides More,
Nevoch. Par. III. c. XI.
in these remarkable words: The Evils which men create one to another, flow
from their different Opinions, Persuasions, Affections, Wills, and Studies; and
all these spring from Ignorance and want of Wisdom. As a blind man not only
stumbles himself, but runs upon others, because he sees not his way; so in
every Sect of men, they who are wedded to it, do one another a world of
Mischiefs, by reason of their blind Ignorance: All which would be remedied, if
they had Wisdom, which is to a man's Soul what the faculty of Seeing is to his
Body. When the Truth is known, then Hatred, Envy, Contention, whereby men tear
one another in pieces, is at an end; which God himself teaches us by his
Prophet, who after he had first said, The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, etc.
then subjoyns the cause, which should take awaythis Enmity; and that is the
Knowledge of God the Creator, wherein men ought to be instructed. They shall
not hurt, nor destroy, etc. for the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the
Lord, etc.

But the time calls me to hasten to the third and last General Head, which is
this;

III.
That the knowledge of our Lord was so fitted, and so sufficient to make men
thus happy, that there was actually to be seen such brotherly Love and Peace,
as is here foretold, among the first Converts to his Religion, who embraced
each other with such an hearty and servent Affection, that what one shall
rarely find an instance of between two single persons, might have been beheld
in some thousands of Men and Women, who had but one Heart and one Soul in so
many several Bodies (Act. IV. 37.) that is, were perfect Friends, who had their
Possessions so common, that no man called ought of the things he had, his own.

And if we list, by these wild Creatures in my Text, to understand the
Gentiles, it is evident they were in a little time brought to live in such
Unity, Love, and Peace with the Jews, that they maintained the Communion of the
Saints in the most proper sense thereof: For they communicated their Goods to
them most freely and liberally, when they were reduced to great straits in
Judea; contributing to the Relief of their Necessities, not only to their
Power, but in some places beyond their Power; praying St. Paul with much
entreaty, that he would receive their Gift, and take upon him the Fellowship of
ministering to the Saints, 2 Cor. VIII. 3, 4.

Many Instances might be given of their frankness in their Hospitality to
Strangers, whom they readily entertained, though they had never seen them
before, merely because they belonged to the same Body of Christ with
themselves, and they looked upon them as their Brethren. But I should
transgress my bounds, if I should pursue such like things any further, which
deserve a Discourse by themselves. And I have said enough to my present
Purpose, which was to show how completely this Prophecy was fulfilled in the
actual effecting of that which our Savior designed, and for the producing of
which, he employed the most proper means.

From all which, it would not be hard to find, had I time to make the Enquiry,
Why those happy days in the beginning of our Religion (WHen the multitude of
them that believed, were of one Heart, and of one Soul) were of so short
continuance; and the days are, long ago, become exceeding evil. It is to be
imputed, in great part, to the Corruption of Christian Doctrine, and the
Imposition of new Articles of Faith; or to the over zealous espousal of such
Opinions as are no essential parts of it, (whereby men's minds have been
diverted from the study of serious Piety and Virtue) about which most of the
Heats and Quarrels in Christendom have arose, and not about the Substance of
Christianity it self.

But it is to be hoped, that the time is coming apace, when Christianity will
end, as it began, in abundance of Truth and Peace, by a right understanding of
the Will of God, and an hearty Submission thereunto; in zealous Love unto God
our Savior, and unto one another. Or to speak in the Prophets Language, the
Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord (in the highest and largest
sense of those words) as the Waters cover the Sea.

I have not room to lay before you the grounds of this Hope out of the holy
Oracles; but that wonderful Work which God has wrought in our days, and before
our Eyes, by that great Prince, whose Spirit he has stirred up to undertake
our Deliverance from Popish Tyranny, and whose Proceedings he has blessed with
amazing Success, may well awaken the minds of considering Persons to expect
greater things he is about to do in the World, which groaneth (as the Apostle
says the whole Creation did in their days) to be delivered into the glorious
Liberty of the Children of God.

Here at least, in these Kingdoms and Churches, it would be very strange, if we
should defeat the design of Gods gracious Providence: by continuing our old
differences and enmities, our unchristian roughness and severities; frowardly
refusing to close together, in such an happy settlement, as may give security
to our Religion, and safety to all our other concerns.

This would set an Eternal brand of infamy upon us, if, having all agreed so
far with a common consent, as, once more, to shake off the Roman Yoke which was
about to be put upon our Necks, and to preserve the liberty of our Country and
of our Religion in its purity and simplicity; we should now fall out about
other matters: And suffer the few things wherein we differ, to have a greater
power to divide us; than the many, nay, the most things wherein we agree, have
to unite us.

God forbid we should prove so ungrateful unto Him, and unto the blessed
Instrument of his Providence: Which has given us a New opportunity after our
shameful abuse of a former, to make our selves happy; by being like minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind: Not looking every Man
on his own things, but every Man also on the things of others, as the Apostle
Writes, II Philip. 2. 4.

Unto this let every one, who loves the Lord Jesus in sincerity, who has any
love to his Religion, and its Honor, or loves his country, that is, his own
ease and safety, and the welfare of his Posterity, bend his serious study and
most earnest endeavors. Let every Soul of us do his part, that the place where
he lives may be in peace: And not only wish but labor, that the blessed times
which we look for (when our Lord shall take to himself his great power and
shall Reign, XI. Rev. 17.) may begin here in these Churches and Kingdoms: Where
there never was greater need, nor greater reason for Unity, than at this
present.

Princes and Governors should study this, by making just, reasonable, and
merciful Laws; and the people should study it, by a humble submission to them,
and careful observance of them.

The Ministers of the Gospel should seek this, by being the Ambassadors of
Peace and Love, by speaking all the same thing; that is, Preaching only the
undoubted Truths of the Gospel: That so they may be one (according to Christ's
Prayer for his Apostles) even as the Father and our Savior were one; and
thereby persuade Men more effectually of the certainty of their Doctrine. And
all their hearers should study to Adorn this Gospel of Peace; by learning of
them in humility, and receiving the ingrafted Word with meekness: By setting
themselves to the serious practice of plain and unquestionable Precepts; and
not quarrelling about Doctrines, that are uncertain and obscure.

They who are in Office should endeavor this, by faithful execution of the
known Laws, by maintaining good Order, by taking up petty differences among
Neighbors; which should be the Work of every honest Man, as far as it lies in
his power.

The Great, and the Rich should labor to bring on these happy days, by
countenancing True Piety, by comforting the poor and indigent, by all other
Acts of Mercy and kindness unto those who are below them; that they may not be
tempted to envy their prosperity, or murmur at their fullness and abundance;
but be the better contented in their poor condition.

In like manner, all other Estates and Conditions of Men are obliged to
discharge their several Duties conscientiously; that they may contribute to the
peace and quietness, the Prosperity and Happiness of the Society whereof they
are Members.

For as there is no greater Scandal than this among Christians; nothing more
destructive to Religion among our selves, or a greater hindrance to its
propagation among Strangers, than the perpetual differences and feuds, hatreds
and enmities, of which Christians themselves are the Authors: So there is
nothing more pernicious and deadly, unto those who are embroiled in them.

If they have no greater respect to the credit of their Religion, than to
continue still such animosities; they shall have this just punishment from God,
that they shall thereby make one another, so much the more miserable.

For when Religion, according to its Nature and design, does not unite and bind
Men fast together; it makes them so much the sorer enemies one to another.

No differences so sharp as those among Men of the same profession: None so
cruel and outrageous, as those whom Religion sets a quarrelling.

And therefore let us heartily apply our selves to the diligent study of that
Universal Christian Piety, which will make us as innocent as Lambs, as gentle
as the young Kids; as humble, void of Malice, Covetousness, ambition, or
worldly designs, as the little sucking Children. For this is the very intention
of it. The Kingdom of God, i. e. the Christian Religion, is not meat and drink
(does not consist in those things about which Men quarrel) but Righteousness,
and Peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. And therefore let us (as the Apostle
there exhorts, XIV Romans 17, 19.) follow after the things which make for Peace;
and things wherewith one may edify another.

Unto which give me leave to propound a few Motives, not of my own; but out of
one of the Greek Fathers, who presses this, upon the people of Constantinople,
when miserably divided, Greg. Nazianz. O. rat. 12. p. 108. etc.
with equal Zeal and Eloquence.

First, says he, look up unto Almighty God, the highest and most excellent of
all Beings: Who delights in the Name of the God of Peace, and has taught his
Apostles to tell us, that God is Love, (...) for there is no commotion, nor
stirs in the Godhead: but a perfect Unity in that Blessed Trinity.

And next unto God are the Angelical Powers, who are the first Rays from the
first Light; and sparkle in no property so much as this: Settled quietness, and
freedom from Contention and Disturbance.

As for those Angels who would needs raise a Sedition, by their discontent and
ambition, they are fallen from their happy estate; and condemned to Eternal
darkness instead of Light: The rest remaining still in their Ancient dignity:
the principal Glory of which is, Peaceableness and unmovable Love.

It follows therefore, that all they who embrace Peace, and hate Discord and
Contention, with all the causes of them, are (...) nigh unto God, and unto
Divine Beings.

On the contrary, they who are quarrelsom and Turbulent, the Authors of
Division and Makers of parties, glory in their Shame; and are on the Devils
side: Who is always unquiet and uneasy in himself, and being from the
beginning, a Murderer, and a hater of that which is good, Labors to engage
Mankind in the like pernicious ways: Hiding himself in the midst of Contention
and Strife, and endeavoring (as an Army is wont to do, when a few are entered)
by a little breach among us, to get in his whole Body.

But let us come down from these heights, and cast our eyes a while upon the
whole Visible world, the heavens, the earth, and every thing therein: And take
notice what a lovely sight it is, when every Creature keeps its place, and
observes its usual motions. Then it is a World indeed, according to its Name,
and an incomparable beauty.

I will not proceed in his description of it, but only add, as he does, that
when the earth quakes and is rent in pieces; when the Sea breaks its banks, or
the heavens power down immoderate showers: how sad and dismal does the face of
all things appear? into what astonishment does it cast us? But this proclaims
Peace and Unity unto Mankind: who ought to be affrighted, by these disastrous
accidents, from Tumults and Consusions.

He desires them also to consider how all Societies great and small are
preserved and made happy by Unity: And by Division utterly destroyed.

And particularly propounds to them the Example of the Jews: who brought upon
themselves all those calamities, which are unexpressible, by their mutinous and
seditious courses.

And Lastly, he desires them to learn by their own dear-bought experience:
which is a Mistress that teaches even fools to be wiser. There being no greater
shame, nothing moresottish, then for them to embroil themselves again; who are
but newly escaped out of the flames, wherein they were almost consumed.

And he subjoynes these two memorable Observations; with which I shall conclude.

1. They are not the empty headed people, as they are vulgarly esteemed, who
continue constantly settled, in one ill State: But they who are ever changing
like the inconstant air; rolling like the waves of the Sea backward and
forward, never knowing when they are well, nor where to fix, and how to settle
themselves. Such men have no reason to expect ever to be happy: as they who
continue in one bad condition, it is possible may.

2. For that is his next Observation; that even they who have been long in a
State of Faction and confusion, have the hopes of agreement and peace left to
comfort them (for this is the Support of the miserable, that better times may
come at last.) But they who being often brought to an accord, are so restless
and unquiet that they fall out again; are deprived, together with the rest of
their happiness even of all hopes of agreeing in any Settlement': dreading
concord, as much as they do commotion: trusting to neither, because of their
fickle and discontented Spirit in both.

From which wretched temper of mind, and forlorn condition, the God of Peace
and Love, of his infinite Mercy, deliver every one of us; for the Sake of
Christ Jesus, who is our Peace. Amen.
FINIS.

