The Three Grand CORRVPTIONS of the Eucharist.

THE THREE GRAND CORRVPTIONS OF The Eucharist IN THE CHURCH of ROME.

VIZ. The Adoration of the Host, The Communion in one kind, The Sacrifice of
the Mass.


In Three Discourses.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil, MDCLXXXVIII.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the ADORATION OF THE HOST, As it is Taught and
Practiced in the CHURCH of ROME.

Wherein an Answer is given to T. G. on that Subject, And to Monsieur Boileau's
late book De Adoratione Eucharistiae. Paris 1685.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons, against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1685.

(...) right Charge of the Church of England, of which no honest man can be a
Member, and a Minister, who does not make and believe it. I might give several
Instances to show this; but shall only mention one, wherein I have undertaken
to defend our Church in its charge of Idolatry upon the Papists, in their
Adoration of the Host, which is in its Declaration about Kneeling at the
Sacrament after the Office of the Communion, in which are these remarkable
words, It is hereby declared, that no Adoration is intended, or ought to be
done either unto the sacramental Bread and Ware there bodily received, or unto
any corporal presence of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood; for the sacramental
Bread and Wine remain still in their natural substances, and therefore may not
be adored, for that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians.
Here it most plainly declares its mind against that, which is the Ground and
Foundation of their Worshipping the Host, That the Elements do not remain in
their natural Substances after Consecration; if they do remain, as we and all
Protestants hold, even the Lutherans, then in Worshipping the consecrated
Elements, they worship mere Creatures, and are by their own Confession guilty
of Idolatry, as I shall show by and by; and if Christ's natural Flesh and Blood
be not corporally present there, neither with the Substance, nor Signs of the
Elements, then the Adoring what is there, must be the Adoring some things else
than Christ's body; and if Bread only be there, and they adore that which is
there, they must surely adore the Bread it self, in the opinion of our Church;
but I shall afterward state the Controversy more exactly between us. Our
Church has here taken notice of the true Issue of it, and declared that to be
false, and that it is both Unfit and Idolatrous too, to Worship the Elements
upon any account after Consecration, and it continued of the same mind, and
expressed it as particularly, and directly in the Canons of 1640, where it says
Canon 7. 1640. about placing the Communion Table under this head, A Declaration
about some Rites and Ceremonies.
, That for the cause of the Idolatry committed in the Mass, all Popish Altars
were demolisht; so that none can more fully charge them with Idolatry in this
point, than our Church has done.

It recommends at the same time, but with great Temper and Moderation, the
religious Gesture of bowing toward the Altar, both before and out of the time
of Celebration of the Holy Eucharist, and in it, and in neither Ib. Cans 7.
1640.
, Upon any opinion of a corporal presence of Christ on the Holy Table, or in
the mystical Elements; but only to give outward and bodily, as well as inward
Worship to the Divine Majesty; and it commands all Persons to receive the
Sacrament Kneeling Rubric at Communion.
, in a posture of Adoration, as the Primitive Church used to do, with the
greatest Expression of Reverence and Humility, (...), as St. Cyrill of
Jerusalem speaks Cyril. Hierosolym. Catech. Mystag. 5.
, and as I shall show, is the meaning of the greatest Authorities they produce
out of the Ancients for Adoration not to, but at the Sacrament; so far are we
from any unbecoming, or irreverent usage of that Mystery, as Bellarmine
Controv. de Eucharist.
, when he is angry with those, who will not Worship it, tells them out of
Optatus, that the Donatists gave it to Dogs; and out of Victor Vticensis, that
the Arrians trod it under their Feet; that we should abhor any such disrespect
shown to the sacred Symbols of our Saviors Body, as is used by them, in
throwing it into the Flames to quench a Fire, or into the Air, or Water to stop
a Tempest, or Inundation, or keep themselves from drowning, or any the like
mischief (to prevent which they will throw away even the God they Worship) or
the putting it to any the like undecent Superstitions. It Is out of the great
Honor and Respect that we bear to the Sacrament, that we are against the
carrying it up and down as a show, and the Exposing and Prostituting it to so
shameful and Abuse, and so gross an Idolatry. We give very great Respect and
Reverence to all things that relate to God, and are set apart to his Worship
and Service; to the Temple where God is said himself to dwell, and to be more
immediately present; to the Altar whereon the Mysteries of Christ's Body and
Blood are solemnly celebrated; to the Holy Vessels, that are always used in
those Administrations; to the Holy Bible, which is the Word of God, and the New
Testament of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as the Sacrament is his Body,
and the New Testament in his Blood; to the Font, which is the Laver of
Regeneration, wherein we put on Christ, as well as we eat him in the Eucharist;
and if we would strain things, and pick out of the Ancient and Devout
Christians what is said of all these, it would go as far, and look as like to
adoring them, as what with all their care they collect and produce for adoring
the Sacrament, as I shall afterward make appear, in Answer to what the Jacob.
Boileau Paris. De Adoratione Eucharistiae. Paris. 1685.
latest Defender of the Adoration of the Eucharist, has culled, or rather raked
together out of the Fathers.

It seems from that Declaration of our Church, that some were either so silly,
or so spiteful, as to suppose that by our Kneeling at the Sacrament, we gave
Worship to the Elements; and that learned man is willing to have it believed,
that we do thereby, externe Eucharistiam colere Boil. p. 145.
, outwardly Worship the Sacrament, and he blames us for not doing it inwardly
in our minds, as well as outwardly with our Bodies; so willing are these men to
join with our wildest Dissenters in their unreasonable Charges against our
Church, and use any crutches that may help their own weak Cause, or be made use
of to strike at us; but it may as well be said, that the Dissenters Worship
their Cushions, or their Seats, when they kneel before them; the roof of the
Church, or the crowns of their Hats, when they fix their Eyes upon them, at the
same time they are at Prayers upon their Knees; or that the Papists worship the
Priest himself, before whom they Kneel in their Confessions; or that on
Ashwednesday they adore the holy Ashes as they call them, and on Palmsunday the
holy Boughs, which they do not pretend to do, because they Kneel when they are
given them; as well as that we Worship the Eucharist, or the Mystical Elements,
when we receive them Kneeling, and disavow any such thing, and declare it to be
Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians.

But is it Idolatry to Worship Christ? Or to Worship the Body of Christ, tho
not for it self, yet for the sake of the Divine Nature, to which it is always
hypostatically united? No, by no means; I know no Heretics, tho they denied
Christ's Divinity, but yet were for Worshipping him; the old Arrians, and the
late Socinians; but how justifiably, when they believe him but a mere man, or
only a more excellent Creature; they and the Church of Rome are both concerned
to defend, and to clear it, if they can of Idolatry. As to the Worship of the
Flesh, tho Nestorius could not do this according to his Principles, as St.
Cyrill and the Council of Ephesus argue against him; nor could the Ebionites,
nor (...) of old; yet I know none but some of their Schoolmen dispute now of
Adoring the Flesh or Humane Nature of Christ, which however it be in our minds,
is never in truth abstracted from his Divinity. But we will not at all trouble
our selves with those parts of the Science of controversy; nor shall we stand
upon any of those things. Well then, why may not Christ and his Body be adored
in the Sacrament, if they are proper Objects of Adorations. No doubt but they
may be adored in this Sacrament, in the Sacrament of Baptism too, and in all
the Offices of the Christian Religion, wherein we pray to Christ, and Kneel
before him, and exercise the devout acts of the mind toward him, put our trust
and hope in him, and expect Salvation from him, and devote our selves in all
Subjection to him, and bow both our Souls and our Bodies, and give all, both
internal and external Worship to him; this Adoration we give to Christ, who is
God blessed for ever, and who sits at the right hand of God the Father. And the
very same the Papists give to the Sacrament, to the Host, and the consecrated
Elements, the most Sovereign, and Absolute, and highest Degree of Religious
Worship that is due to God, whose creatures those Elements are; or to Christ
himself, who commanded us to receive them in remembrance of him. But it is only
Christ, say they, whom we Worship in the Sacrament, whom we adore as being
present there with his Body in the Host, and not the Host or the Sacrament it
self; so a great many of them would fain bring off the matter, or at least
color and disguise it; Bellarmine Lib. 4. de Eucharist c. 29. Quicquid sit de
modo loquendi, status quaestionis non est, nisi an Christus in Eucharistia sit
adorandus cultu latriae.
, when he had entangled himself with the distinctions of Worshipping the
Sacrament, whether formally or materially; would extricate himself, by thus
stating the matter, and reducing it to this question, Whether Christ be to be
adored in the Eucharist? And St. Clara St. Clara Deus, Natura, Gratia, p. 308.
Nota been, non dicit Concilium Tridentinum, Sacramentum, sed Christum in
Sacramento, latria adorandum.
would reconcile the dispute with this Observation, Nota been, Mark this, the
Council of Trent does not say, that the Sacrament is to be adored, but Christ
in the Sacrament. I wonder so great a man as Cassander Adoratio non ad exterius
signune quod exterius videtur, sed ad ipsam rem and veritatem quae interius
creditur referenda, Cassand. Consult. de Adorat. Euchar.
, should say, Unless, with a design to condemn the thing, That the Adoration is
not to be given to the outward sign which is seen; but is to be referred to the
thing it self, and to that which is truly and inwardly believed. But
Reconcilers, who will attempt the vain project of Accommodation, must do with
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as Apelles did with Antigonus his face,
they must draw but one part, but half of it, that so they may Artificially
conceal its deformed, and its blind side. That all these do so, I shall show by
stating the Controversy carefully and truly, which is the chiefest thing in
this dispute; for they love to hide their own Doctrines as much as they can;
and they cunningly contrive most of them with a back door, to slip out at
privately and upon occasion. The Council of Trent has in this, as in other
things, used art, and not spoke out in one place, as it does in another; that
so we may mistake half its words for its full meaning, as Bellarmine and others
were willing to do, or at least to have others do so. In its sixth Canon on the
Eucharist it only says Council. Trident. Can. 6. De Euchar. si quis dixerit in
sancto Eucharistiae Sacramento Christum Vnigenitum Dei filium non esse cultu
Latriae etiam externo adorandum, anathema sit.
, If any one shall say, that Christ the only begotten Son of God is not to be
adored with the external Worship of Latria, in the holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist, let him be accursed. Who will not say in those general words, that
Christ is to be adored with outward and inward Worship both, not only in the
Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, but of Baptism too, and in every Christian
Office, and in every Prayer, and solemn Invocation of him, either public or
private? But they mean a great deal more than all this, by Worshipping Christ
in the Sacrament, and in as plain words they say Ib. 13. Sess. c. 5.
, That the Sacrament it self is to be adored; that, whatever it be which is
something besides Christ, even according to them, which is placed in the Patin,
and upon the Altar, which the Priest holds in his hands, and lifts up to be
seen, this very thing is to be adored; There is no doubt, says the Council Ib.
Nullus dubitandi locus relinquitur quin omnes Christi fideles pro more in
Catholica Ecclesia semper recepto, latriae custum qui vero Deo debetur, huic
sanctissimo Sacramento in Veneratione adhibeant; neque enim minus est adorandum
quod fuerit a Christo Domino ut sumatur, institutum.
, but that all faithful Christians, according to the custom always received in
the Catholic Church, ought to give Supreme and Sovereign Worship, which is due
to God himself, to the most Holy Sacrament in their Worship of it; for it is
never the less to be adored, tho it was instituted of Christ to be received.
That which is to be received, which is to be put into the Peoples Mouths by the
Priest (for since they have made a God of the Sacrament, they will not trust
the People to feed themselves with it, nor take it into their hands; and they
may with as much reason in time not think fit that they should eat it) this
which was appointed of Christ to be taken and eaten as a Sacrament; this is now
to serve for another use, to be adored as a God; and it would be as true
heresy in the Church of Rome, not to say, that the Sacrament of the Altar is
to be adored, as not to say, that Christ himself is to be adored. But what
according to them is this Sacrament? It is the remaining Species of Bread and
Wine, and the natural Body and Blood of Christ, invisibly, yet carnally present
under them; and these together make up one entire Object of their Adoration,
which they call Sacramentum; for Christ's body without those Species, and
Accidents at least of Bread and Wine, would not according to them be a
Sacrament; they being the outward and visible part, are, according to their
Schoolmen, properly and strictly called the Sacramentum, and the other the res
Sacramenti; Lombard. sent^li 4. did. 19.
and to this external part of the Sacrament, as well as to the internal, they
give (...) and Adoration; to these remaining Species, which be they what they
will, are but Creatures; religious Worship is given together with Christ's Body,
and they with that, are the whole formal Object of their Adoration. Non solum
Christum sed Totum visibile Sacramentum, unico cultu adorari, says Suarez In
Th. Quaest. 79. disp.
, quia est unum constans ex Christo and Speciebus; Not only Christ, but the
whole visible Sacrament (which must be something besides Christ's invisible
Body) is to be adored with one and the same Worship, because it is one thing
(or one Object) consisting of Christ and the Species. So another of their
learned men Henriquez. Moral, l. 8. c. 32.
, Speciebus Eucharistiae datur Latria propter Christum quem continent; The
highest Worship is given to the Species of the Eucharist, because of Christ,
whom they contain. Now Christ, whom they contain, must be something else than
the Species that contain him. Let him be present never so truly and
substantially in the Sacrament, or under the Species, he cannot be said to be
the same thing with that in which he is said to be present; and as subtle as
they are, and as thin and subtle as these Species are, they can never get off
from Idolatry upon their own Principles in their Worshipping of them; and they
can never be left out, but must be part of the whole which is to be adored,
totum illud quod simul adoratur, de Euch. l. 4. c. 30.
as Bellarmine calls it, must include these as well as Christ's Body.
Adorationem, says Bellarmine Bellarmine de Euch. l. 4. c. 29.
, ad Symbola etiam panis and vini pertinere, ut quod unum cum ipso Christo quem
continent, Adoration belongs even to the Symbols of Bread and Wine, as they are
apprehended to be one with Christ whom they contain; and so make up one entire
Object of Worship with him, and may be Worshipped together with Christ, as T. G.
Cathol. no Idolaters, p. 268.
owns in his Answer to his most learned Adversary; and are the very term of
Adoration, as Gregory de Valentia De Idol. l. 2. c. 5.
says, who further adds, that they who think this Worship does not at all
belong to the Species, in that heretically oppose the perpetual customand fence
of the Church. Qui censeunt nullo modo ad Species ipsus eam Venerationem
pertinere, in eo Haeretice pugnare contra perpetuum usum and sensum Ecclesiae:
de Venerati one Sacram. ad Artic. Thom. 5.


Indeed they say, That these Species or Accidents, are not to be Worshipped for
themselves, or upon their own account, but because Christ is present in them,
and under them; and so they may be Worshipped as T. G. says Ib.
, with Christ in like manner, as his Garments were Worshipped together with him
upon Earth; which is a similitude taken out of Bellarmine, the Magazine not
only of Arguments and Authorities, but of Similitudes too, it seems, which are
to Defend that Church; Quemadmodum says he de Euch. Venerat.
, qui Christum in terris vestitum adorabant, non ipsum solum sed etiam vestes
quodam modo adorabant. And are Christ's Garments then to be Worshipped with
Latria, as well as Christ himself, or as the Sacrament? I think they will not
say this of any of the Relics they have of Christ, or his clothes: Did they,
who Worshipped Christ when he was upon the Earth, worship his clothes too? Did
the Wise men worship the blankets, the clouts, and the swadling-cloths, as well
as the blessed Babe lying in the Manger? Might it not as well be supposed that
the People worshipped the Ass, upon which Christ rode; not for himself, but for
the sake, and upon the account of Christ, who was upon him; as that they
worshipped his clothes, or his Sandals on which he trod, or the Garments which he
wore? Bellarmines quodammodo adorabant, shows his heart misgave him, and that
he was sensible the Similitude would not do, when he used it; but T. G. is a
man of more heart and courage, or front at least, and he found the cause was in
great need of it, and so he says boldly, without any trembling quodammodo,
that they worshipped his Garments.

The humane Nature it self of Christ, considered alone, and being a mere
Creature, is not an object of Worship, as St. Augustine says St. Aug. Sermon. 58.
De verbis Dom. Si natura Deus non est filius sed Creatura, nec colendus est
omnino nec ut Deus Adorandus. Ego Dominicam carnem, imo perfectam in Christo
humanitatem propterea adoro, quod a divinitate suscepta, atque Deitati unita
est, -- Denique si hominem separaveris a Deo, ut Photinus, vel Paulus
Samosatenus, illi ego nunquam credo nec servio.
, but only as it is hypostatically united to the Divine Nature, i. e. so
intimately and vitally united to it, as to make one Person with it, with God
himself, one (...), and so one Object of Worship; and if the Sacramental
Symbols or Species, are to be adored with true latria, not per se, or upon
their own account, but by reason of the intimate Union and Conjunction which
they have with Christ, as they say, not only with Christ's body, for that alone
is not to be worshipped much less another thing that is united to it; but with
Christ's Person, and then there must be as many Persons of Christ, as there are
consecrated Wafers; then these Species being thus worshipped upon the same
account that Christ's humanity is, as Gregory de Valentia owns they must, [ This
Worship, says he, belongs after a certain manner to the species, as when the
Divine (...) is worshipped in the humanity which he assumed, the Divine Worship
belongs also to the created Humanity. Pertinet per accidens suo quodam modo ea
veneratio ad Species, quemadmodum suo modo, etiam hoc ipso quod adoratur
Divinum verbum in humanitate assumpta pertinet ejusmodi Divinus cultus, ad
illam humanitatem creatam secundario, neque in hoc est aliqua Idololatria,]
must be also united to Christ, Valentia, Disput. 6. Quaest. 11. de ritu and
oblat. Eucharist.
the same way that his Humanity is united to his Divinity, so as to become with
that, one entire object of Worship, as the Species are, according to them, with
Christ in the Eucharist; that is, they must become one suppositum, or one
Person with Christ. This is so weighty a difficulty, as makes the greatest
Atlas's of the Roman Church not only sweat, but sink under it. Valentia De
Idol. l. 2. c. 5.
owns the wonderful Conjunction the Species have with Christ, but denies their
being hypostatically united to him; but then, how are they to be worshipped?
Since it is owned by him and the Schoolmen, that the very Humanity of Christ is
to be worshipped only upon the account of its hypostatical Union; and tho God be
very nearly and intimately present in other Creatures, yet they are not to be
worshipped, notwithstanding that presence, because they do not make one
suppositum or hypostasis with him, or are not hypostatically united to him.
Bellarmine being pincht on this side, removes the burden to the other, that is as
sore, and can as little bear it; Christ, says he, Long aliter est Christus in
Eucharistia, and in aliis rebus Deus; Nam in Eucharistia unum tantum Suppositum
est, idque Divinum, caeteraque omnia ad illud pertinent, and cum illo unum quid
faciunt, licet non eodem modo, Bellar. de Euch. l. 4. c. 30.
is much otherwise in the Eucharist, than God is in other things; for in the
Eucharist, there is but one only suppositum, and that Divine; all other things
there present belong to, and make one thing with that. If they do so, then sure
they are hypostatically united with Christ, as T. G's. learned Adversary
charges upon Bellarmine from this place; if they make but one suppositum with
him, and but one with him, let it be in what manner it will, they must be
hypostatically united to him. Bellarmines Licet non eodem modo, tho not after
the same manner, is both unintelligible, and will not at all help the matter;
it is only a Confession from him, that at the same time that he says they are
hypostatically united to Christ, and make one suppositum with him, and one
object of Worship, that he does not know how this can be, and that his thoughts
are in a great straight about it, so that he doubts they are not hypostatically
united at the same time that he yet says they are so; for this is no way
imposed upon him, as T. G. says, notwithstanding his non eodem modo. If in the
Incarnation of Christ, one should say, That the Soul and Body of Christ are
both united to his Divinity, but that both were not united after the same
manner; but the Soul in such a manner, as being a Spirit, and the Body in
another; yet so, that both made but one Suppositum with it, and that Divine;
and that all his humane Nature belonged to that, and made one with that, tho
not after the same manner; would not this be still an owning the hypostatical
Union between Christ's Divinity, and his Soul and Body? and so must the other be
between Christ's Divinity, and his Body, and the Species; if they make one
Suppositum, and are, as they hold, to be worshipped as such.

Thus I have taken care to give you their Doctrine, and state the Case with
some exactness; tho I am sensible, with too much length; but that is the way to
shorten the Controversy; and by this means I have cut off their common
retreats, and stopped up those little lurking holes they generally run to, and in
which they are wont to Earth themselves. As, that they worship only Christ in
the Sacrament, or Christ under the accidents of Bread and Wine; and that it is
only Christ, or the Body of Christ with which his Divinity is always present,
is the formal object of their Adoration in the Sacrament, and that their
Worship is given to that, and not to the consecrated Elements, or to the
remaining Species of Bread and Wine; it appears from their own Doctrine and
Principles to be quite otherwise; and if we take them at their own words, they
are sufficient to bear witness against them, and condemn them of Idolatry; but
this will be found to be much greater and grosser, when the whole foundation of
this Doctrine of theirs of the Worship of the Host, proves upon Examination to
be false, and one of the most thick and unreasonable Errors in the World, to
wit, the belief of Transubstantiation, or that the Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, are converted into the natural and substantial Body and Blood of
Christ, so that there remains nothing of the substance of the Bread and Wine
after Consecration, but only the Flesh and Blood of Christ corporally present,
under the Species and Accidents of Bread and Wine. If this Doctrine be true, it
will in great measure discharge them from the guilt of Idolatry; for then their
only fault will be their joining the Species, which how thin and ghostly soever
they be, yet are Creatures, together with Christ, as one Object of Worship; and
unless they alter their Doctrine on this point, from what it is now, I see not
how they can justify their worshipping with (...), or the Worship due only to
God, not only the adorable substance of Christ's Body, but the very Veils and
Symbols under which they suppose that to lie; and yet when they teach, as they
do, the adoring of the Sacrament, they must adore the visible and outward part
of it, as well as the invisible Body of Christ; for without the remaining
Species, it would not, according to them, be a Sacrament; and they have not
gone so far yet, I think, as to deny that there are any remaining Species, and
that our senses do so far wholly deceive us, that when we see something, there
is really nothing of a visible Object. And the same Object which is visible, is
adorable too, according to them: If Christ's Body were substantially present in
the Sacrament, tho it were lawful to adore it as there present; but by no
means, either the substance or Species of Bread with it; yet it is much to be
doubted, whether it were a duty, or necessary to do so. It would be present so
like a Prince in Incognito, that he would seem not to require that Honor which
we ought to give him under a more public appearance. God we know is present in
all his Creatures, but yet we are not to Worship him as present in any of them;
unless, where he makes a sensible Manifestation of himself, and appears by his
Shechinah, or his Glory, as to Moses in the burning Bush, and to others in like
manners: and it would be very strange to make the Bread in the Eucharist a
Shechinah of God, which appears without any Alteration just as it was before it
was made such; and especially, to make it such a continuing Shechinah as the
Papists do, that Christ is present in it, not only in the action and solemn
Celebration, but extra usum, as they speak, and permanenter, even after the
whole Solemnity and Use is over; that he should continue there, as a praesens
Numen, as Boileau expressly calls it de Eucharistiae Adorat. p. 140.
, and be showed and carried about and honored as such, and dwell in the
Species as long as they continue, as truly as he dwelt in the Flesh, before
that was crucified; this is strange and monstrous even to those who think
Christ is present in the Sacrament, but not so as the Papists believe, nor so
as to be worshipped. I mean the Lutherans. But to bring the matter to a closer
issue; the Papists themselves are forced to confess, that if the Bread remain
after Consecration, and be still Bread, and be not Transubstantiated into the
Body of Christ, that they are then Idolaters. So Fisher against Oecclampadius,
l. 1. c. 2. in express words. So Coster in his Enchiridion de Euch. c. 8. In
tali errore atque Idololatria, qualis in orb terrarum nunquam vel visus vel
auditus fuit. Tolerabilior est enim error eorum qui pro Deo colunt Statuam
auream aut argenteam, aut alterius materiae imaginem, quomodo Gentiles Deos
suos venerabantur, vel panum rubrum in hastam elevatum quod narratur de Lappis,
vel viva animalia ut quondam Aegyptii, quam eorum qui frustum panis. Coster
Ench. c. 8. S. 10. Long potiori ratione excusandi essent infideles Idololatrae
qui Statuas adoraverunt, Ib.
If the true Body of Christ be not present in the Sacrament, then they are left
in such an Error and Idolatry, as was never seen or heard; for that of the
Heathens would be more tolerable, who Worship a golden or silver Statue for
God, or any other Image, or even a red Cloth, as the Laplanders are said to do,
or living Animals, as the Egyptians, than of those who worship a piece of
Bread. And again, Those Infidel Idolaters would be more excusable, who worshipped
their Statues. To whom I shall add Bellarmine Sacramentarii omnes negant
Sacramentum Adorandum and Idololatriam appellant ejusmodi Adorationem; neque id
mirum videri debet, cum ipsi non credant Christum reipsa esse praesentem, and
panem Eucharistiae reipsa nihil esse nisi panem ex furno, Bellarm. de Euch. l.
4. c. 29.
, who says, It does not seem strange, that they call the Adoration of the
Sacrament Idolatry, who do not believe that Christ is there truly present, but
that the Bread is still true Bread.

If then the Bread do still remain Bread in the Host, and the Elements in the
Eucharist are not substantially changed into the natural and substantial Body
and Blood of Christ, then it is confessed Idolatry, and it is not strange
according to Bellarmine, that it should be so; and then sure it will be true
(...), or Bread-worship too, if that be Bread which they Worship, and be not
the natural Body of Christ; that which is there present, that they adore; and
if that be only Bread, then they adore Bread. And here I should enter that
controversy, which has given rise to most of their abominable Abuses and
Errors about the Eucharist; the making both a God of it, and also a true
Sacrifice of this God instead of a Sacrament, which Christ intended it, and
that is their Doctrine of Transubstantiation; but a great man has spared me
this trouble, by his late excellent Discourse against it, to which I shall
wholly refer this part of our present Controversy, and shall take it for
granted, as any one must, who reads that, that (unless in Boileau's Phrase Homo
opiniosus cui tenacitas Erroris sensum communem abstulit, Boil. p. 159.
, he be such a Bigot, whose tenaciousness of his Error, has quite bereaved him
of common Sense, which is an unlucky Character of his own Friends) that
Doctrine is false; and therefore, that the charge of Idolatry in this matter,
is by their own Confession true. But there are some more cautious and wary men
amongst them, who out of very just and reasonable Fears and Suspicions, that
Transubstantion should not prove true, and that they may happen to be mistaken
in that, have thought of another way, to cover and excuse their Idolatry; and
that is, not from the Truth, but merely from the Belief of Transubstantiation.
As long, say they, as we believe Transubstantiation to be true, and do really
think that the Bread and Wine are converted into the substance of Christ's Body
and Blood, and so Worship the Sacrament upon that account, tho we should be
mistaken in this our belief; yet as long as we think that Christ is there
present, and design only to Worship him, and not the Bread, which we believe to
be done away; this were enough to free us from the charge of Idolatry. To
which, because it is the greatest, and the best Plea they have, and they that
make it have some misgivings, I doubt not, that Transustantiation will not
hold; I shall therefore give a full Answer to it, in the following Particulars.

1. All Idolatry does proceed from a mistaken belief, and a false supposal of
the mind, which being gross and unreasonable, will not at all excuse those who
are guilty of it; there were never any Idolaters, but might plead the excuse of
a mistake, and that not much more culpable and notorious, one would think, than
the mistake of those who think a bit of Bread, or a Wafer, is turned by a few
words into a God. They all thought, however blindly and foolishly, that
whatever it was they worshipped, ought to be worshipped upon some account or other;
that it was a true and fit Object, and that Adoration rightly belonged to it.
Idolatry, tho it be a great Sin, and a great injury and affront to God, yet
arises not so much from the malice of the will, as the blindness and darkness
of the understanding; there were hardly ever any such Idolaters as maliciously,
and designedly intended to affront the true God, by worshipping false Gods or
Creatures; as if a Subject should pass by his Prince out of ill will, and a
purpose to affront and defy him, and give the Reverence and Homage that was
due to him, to a Rebel or fellow Subject standing by him; but they did this,
because they mistook the person, and thought this to be the Prince that was
not, or that he was there where he was not, or that that which was there, ought
to be worshipped for his sake; still falsely supposing that they ought to worship
that wrong Object, which they took to be right; or in that false manner which
they took to be true; for if a mistake will excuse, it will excuse in one as
well as another.

2. Tho they do not only think and believe that which they worship, to be a
true Divine Object; but it really be so in it self, and that which they have in
their Thoughts and intentions to worship, be right; yet they may still be
guilty of Idolatry; for so were the Jews in the Idolatry of the golden Calf,
whereby they intended not to throw off the Worship of the true God, The God of
Israel, Exodus 32.4, 5.
who brought them out of the land of Egypt; for they appointed the Feast to him
under that Title, and under the Name of Jehovah at the same time; and so in the
Idolatry of the Calves set up by Jeroboam; 1 K. 12.27, 28.
they were not designed to draw off the people from worshipping the same God,
who was worshipped at Jerusalem, but only to do it in another place, and after
another manner; but still as T. G. Cath. no Idol. p. 330.
says of the Roman Idolaters, so it may be said of these Jewish, That what they
had in their Minds and Intentions to Worship, was the true God; and whatever
was the material object of their Worship, he was the formal; for they did no
more think the Gold, than the Papists think the Bread to be God. So the
Manichees in their Idolatry, which St. Austin often mentions Contra Faustum
Manicheum, l. 1. c. 3. Tom. 1. de Genesi contra Manich. l. 2. c. 25. Tom. 2.
Epist. 74. ad Deuterium, Solemn etiam and Lunam adorant and colunt.
, of adoring the Sun and Moon, the Object which they had in their Minds, and
Thoughts, and Purposes to Worship, was Christ, as much as the Papists have him
in the Eucharist. I would only ask, if a persons having a right Object in his
mind, in his thoughts and purposes to adore, which T. G. Catholics no
Idolaters, p. 329, 330.
so often pretends, would excuse him from Idolatry; then suppose a person
should before Consecration, Worship the Sacramental Elements, to prevent which
they generally keep them from being seen; yet in the Thoughts, and Intentions,
and Purposes of his mind, design to worship Christ then supposed, tho falsely,
to be there, as they Worship him afterward; whether this would be Idolatry in
him or no? If not, then they may worship the unconsecrated Elements, as well as
consecrated, even whilst they believe they are Bread; if it be, then having a
right Object in our Thoughts, and Purposes, and Intentions, will not excuse
from Idolatry.

3. Whatever was the material Object of Idolatrous worship, it was not worshipped
for it self, no more than the Bread or its Accidents are by the Papists in the
Eucharist; but as they say of the Host, because they believed that the true
Object of worship was really present in it, or in an extraordinary manner
united to it Deos relictis sedibus propriis non recusare nec fugere,
habitaculainire terrena, quinimo jure dedicationis impulsos simulachrorum
coalescere inunctioni, Arnob. contra gent. l. 6.
; so did the Gentiles, who thought the Gods themselves, or at least a Divine
Power, was brought into their Images, by their Consecrations, and that it
resided and dwelt there, and they worshipped their Images only upon this
account Deos per simulachra Veneramur, Ib.
. Now if they had thought this of the true God himself, that it was he, and not
any false God that was thus present in their Images, this would have been
nevertheless Idolatry. Thus the Manichees, who worshipped the Sun, did not
worship it for it self, but because they believed Christ had placed his
Tabernacle in the Sun; so the more Philosophical Idolaters among the Heathens,
See Voss. de Idolol. l. 8. c. 1.
who worshipped the several Things of Nature, as parts, they thought, of the
Great and Omnipresent God; they did not worship them purely for themselves, but
as God was in them, and they were as St. Austin speaks, Aut parts ejus aut
membra ejus, aut aliquid substantiae ipsius August. l. 24. contra Faustum.
. Either parts of him, or Members of him, or something of his substance, as the
Papists believe the Sacrament to be his Body. Thus they deified the things of
Nature, tho they thought there was but one Supreme God, whom they worshipped in
them, as Eusebius says of them; they believe (...). Eusebius. Praepar. Evangel. l.
3. c. 13.
, That one God fills all things with his various power, and pervades all
things, and that he is to be worshipped in, and by all visible things; but yet
they denied that those visible things were to be worshipped for themselves, but
for the sake of God, and those invisible Powers of God, which were in them, as
appears from the same place (...).
, They do not, they say, make Gods of the visible Bodies of the Sun, Moon and
Stars, or the other sensible parts of the World; but they worship those
invisible Powers that are in them of that God, who is God over all. Nay the
Egyptians themselves, did not as Celsus pleads even for those Idolaters,
worship their brute Animals, but only as they were Spmbols of God (...), Orig.
contra Cel. l. 3.
.

4. Yet notwithstanding this Plea of Idolaters, they may justly be charged with
worshipping those material Objects, which they say, as the Papists, when we
charge them with Bread worship, that they do not Worship. So the Egyptians
might be charged with brute worship, the Heathens with the Worship of the Sun
and Moon; and the Scripture Isa. 44.17.
expressly Reproaches and Accuses the Idolaters with worshipping a Stock or
Stone, or a piece of Wood; tho it was the constant Plea and Pretense of the
Heathens, that they did no more worship those material Objects, than the
Papists do Bread. Non ego illum lapidem colo nec illud simulachrum quod est
sine sensu, Aug. in Psalm. 69.
I do not Worship the senseless Stone or Image, which has Eyes and sees not,
Ears and hears not, says the Heathen in St. Austin; and in Arnobius, We do not
worship the Brass, or the Gold, or Silver, or any of the matter of which our
Images are made Nos nequeaera, neque auri argentique materias neque alias
quibus signa consiciunt eas esse per se Religiosa decern^mus numina, sed eos in
his colimus eosque veneramur quos dedicatio infert Sacra Arnobius contra Gentes.
; and in St. Austin, again, Do ye think we or our Forefathers were such Fools
as to take these for Gods Vsque adeone Majores nostros insipientes fuisse
credendum est ut Deos --
? No, they would disown it as much as Boil au does, With his, who shall say we
adore the Bread or Wine? Quis nos adorare panem and vinum? Boileau, p. 160.
or T. G's. pretending that we run upon that false ground, that Catholics
believe the Bread to be God. And yet, I see not why there may not be good
reason to charge the one, as well as the other.

5. If those other Idolaters had been so foolish and absurd, as to believe and
think, that those things which they worshipped were their very Gods themselves,
substantially present, and that the visible substance of their Idols, had been
converted and turned into the substance of their Gods; this would have made
their Idolatry only more horribly sottish and ridiculous, but would not in the
least have made it more excusable. If the Jews had thought that by the powerful
words of Consecration, pronounced by Aaron their High Priest, the Calf had been
turned into the very sustance of God, and that, tho the Figure and Shape of the
Calf had remained, and the Accidents and Species of Gold, which appeared to
their sight; yet that the substance of it had been perfectly done away, and
that only God himself, had been there under those appearing Species of a golden
Calf; would this have mended the matter, or better excused their Idolatry,
because they had been so extremely sottish, That they conceived the Gold not to
be there at all, but in the place thereof, the only true and eternal God; and
so, although the Object (or rather Subject) materially present in such a case
would have been the golden Calf; yet their Act of Adoration would not have been
terminated formally upon that, but only upon God, as T. G. says of the Bread,
p. 329. Or if the Manichees had thought the Body of the Sun had been converted
into the glorious Body of Jesus Christ, would this have signified any thing to
bring them of; if their mistake had been, as T. G. says, p. 327. theirs is
concerning the Bread, that they believed the Sun not to be there at all, and
therefore, what they would have in their minds would not, or could not be the
Sun, but the only true and eternal Son of God. Indeed they had as it appears
from St. Austin Eum (sc. Christum) navim quandam esse dicitis, eum triangulum
esse perhibetis, id est, per quandam triangulam caeli Fenestram lucem istam
mundo terrisque radiare. August. contra Faustum Manichaeum, l. 20. c. 6. Nescio
quam navim per foramen Triangulum micantem atque lucentem, quam confictam
cogitatis, adoretis Ibid.
, some such absurd Imagination; they did think that it was not the material
Sun, which appeared to their senses; but a certain Navis, which was the
substance of Christ, that did radiate, through the triangular Fenestra in the
Heavens to the World, and to the Earth. These wretched Figments of theirs,
whereby they made the Father the Light, that was inaccessible, and placed
Christ in the Sun and Moon, and the Holy Ghost in the Air Trinitati loca tria
datis; patri unum i. e. lumen in accessibile, filio duo Solemn and Lunam,
spiritui sancto rursus unum, Aeris hunc omnem ambitum, Ibid. c. 7.
, and called these the Seals of their substance Seeds ejusdem substantiae
dicatis, Ibid. c. 8.
; these made them indeed as he says, worship only the Figments of their own
crazy heads, and things that were not In iis non quod sunt, sed quod vobis
dementissime fingitis adoratis, Ib. c. 9. Vos autem colitis ea quae nec dii nec
aliquid sunt quoniam prorsus nulla sunt, Ib. c. 9.
; but yet this madness and extravagance did not excuse them from Idolatry,
which he still charges them withal. They worshipped that in the Sun, which was
not there, as the Papists do in the Sacrament, to wit, Christ's natural Body,
let it be Fantastic or not; and they endeavored to turn away the Senses of
men, as he says Sensus Simplicium conantur avertere, and nonnullorum avertunt.
Id. Enarrat in Psalm. 10.
, from that visible Sun, and persuade them that it was Christ himself. So that
as T. G. says of their mistake concerning the Bread, They did not in their
minds, affirm the Sun to be, but not to be, p. 330. and so it could not
according to him, be the Object of their worship, because whatever is so, the
understanding must affirm (either truly or falsely) to be, p. 329.

There was an Idolatry among the Persians, which Xenophon Cyrop. l. 8.
, and Quintus Curtius l. 3.
give an account of, in their worship of Fire, and carrying it about with the
most stately Pomp and Solemnity upon silver Altars, and a great Train of
Priests and others; which does the most resemble the carrying about the Host in
Procession of any thing I have met with, as it is described by Curtius. Here
the sacred Fire as they called it, which no doubt was consecrated by some
Religious Ceremonies, and was no more counted ignis ex culina, than the holy
Bread is panis ex furno; if they had supposed it by the magical Charms of the
Priests to have been turned into some other substance than common Fire, and had
thought it to have become the most noble Symbol of the great God, or the
illustrious Veil, under which lay the Divinity of the great Lord of the World,
and that all the substance of common Fire was quite changed, and done away in
this sacred and eternal Fire, as they accounted it Ignis quem ipsi sacrum and
aeternum vocabant, argenetis altaribus perferebatur, Curt. Ib.
, this would not sure have made them to be no Idolaters. T. G. will make
himself a very great Patron of dolaters, if with this Art and Sophistry of his
he can bring them off, as he would the Worshippers of the Host, by the mere
adding of more thick Grosness, and more Absurdities to their other mistakes. He
will have P. 322.
the Israelites to take the golden Calf for God, and the Egyptians the Sun to
be God, and perhaps some of the most stupid Heathens did take their very Images
for Gods, and by his way, these were the most excusable, because they were the
most mistaken. These mistakes would after this rate do great and extraordinary
things for Idolaters, and would be much better security for the Roman Church,
than her pretended Infallibility; and indeed it is these must bring off her, and
her Members from the guilt, tho not from the Acts of Idolatry, as well as from
other things, or else she and they are in a very sad and desperate Condition.

But now I dare appeal to any man, who shall take in all those Considerations I
have mentioned together, whether the Papist's adoring the Host, upon the
supposal and belief of Transubstantiation, if that be not true, will excuse
them from Idolatry, and whither if a mistake in this Case, will excuse them, it
will not excuse the grossest Idolatry in the World? Notwitstanding all the
little Shifts and Evasions, that T. G. uses to wriggle himself out of this
straight and difficulty, into which his learned Adversary had driven him.

HAving considered the Adoration of the Host, as it is Taught in the Church of
Rome, I shall now consider the Practice of it, which is more plain and evident,
and notorious to all the World; however they would palliate and disguise their
Doctrine. According to their Missal, which is wholly different in this, as well
as other things from the old Lyturgic, and Eucharistic forms, as I shall show
by and by, the Priest Celebrans hostiam inter pollices tenens -- genuflexus eam
adorat tum usque in terram genuflexus hostiam ipsam veneratur -- sic de calice,
reponit calicem super corporale and genuflexus sanguinem reverenter adorat
illum populo ostendens adorandum Sacramentum genuflexus veneratur in Canon.
Miss. genuflexus reverentiam facit Sacramento.
in every Mass, as soon as he has consecrated the Bread and Wine, with bended
Knees, he adores the Sacrament Missale Romanum c. 9. Sacramentum genuflexus
adorat Capite inclinato versus Sacramentum dicit Intelligibili voce Agnus Dei
qui tollis peccati mundi miserere nobis, Da nobis pacem.
, that which he has consecrated, that very thing which is before him, upon the
Paten, and in the Chalice, and gives the same Worship and Subjection, both of
Body and Mind to it, as he could to God or Christ himself; for with his Head,
and his Soul, bowing toward it, and his Eyes and Thoughts fixed upon it, and
directed to it, he prays to it, as to Christ himself: Lamb of God that take
away the Sins of the World, have Mercy upon us, Grant us Peace and the like;
then the Priest rising up after he has thus adored it himself, he lifts it up
as high as conveniently he can above his head, and with Eyes fixed upon it, he
shows it to be devoutly adored by the People Sacerdos postquam ipse hostiam
genuflexus adoravit, continuo se erigens quantum commode potest, elevat in
altum and intentis in eam oculis populo reverenter ostendit adorandam.
, who having notice also, by ringing the Mass Bell, as soon as they see it,
fall down in the humblest Adorations to it, as if it were the very appearance
of God himself, and if Christ himself were visibly present before them, they
could not show more acts of Reverence and Devotion, and Worship to him, than
they do to the Host; they Pray to it, and use the very Forms of Petition and
Invocation to that, as to Christ himself; such as these, O saving Host, or
blessed Sacrament which openest the door of Heaven, give me strength and and
power against dangers, and against all my Enemies O salutaris Hostia, quae
caeli pandis ostium, bella premunt hostilia, Da robur, fer auxilium. Hymnus in
Festo corporis Christi in Breviar. Romans
. Adoro te devote latens Deitas, quae sub his figuris vere latitas, tibi se cor
meum subjicit, Deum meum te confiteor. Fac me tibi magis credere, in te spem
habere, te deligere, praesta menti de te vivere and te illi semper dulce
sapere, Rythmus, St. Thom. ad Eucharist in Missal.


Make me always mere to believe, to hope in thee, to love thee; Grant that my
Soul may always live upon thee, and that thou may always taste sweet unto it.
Thus both the Priest, and the People are several times to Adore and Worship
both the Host and the Cup in the Celebration of the Eucharist, and they will
not disown, nor cannot, their directing and terminating their Devotions and
Prayers upon the Sacrament, which is before them; Prayers, they call them to
the Eucharist Ad Sacram. Eucharistiam Rythmus Romans breviar.
; and it is become a common form of Doxology amongst them, instead of saying,
Praise be given to God, to say, Praise be given to the most holy Sacrament Laus
sacrati^^imo Sacramento.
; as it is in one of their Authors, instead of, ye shall pray to God, ye shall
pray to the Body of Christ, i. e. to the Sacrament Orlandinus hist.
. Sanders in his Book of the Supper of the Lord Corpori and sanguini Christi
sub Speciebus panis and vim omnis honor, Laus and Gratiarum actio in secula
seculorum. Sanderus de caena Dom.
, instead of Glory be to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, turns it thus, To the
Body and Blood of our Savior, under the Species of Bread and Wine, be all
Honor and Praise, and Thanksgiving for evermore, as if it were another Person
of the blessed Godhead.

This Adoration is not only in the time of Communion, when it is properly the
Lords Supper and Sacrament; but at other times out of it, whenever it is set
upon the Altar with the Candles burning, and the Incense smoking before it, or
hung up in its rich Shrine and Tabernacle, with a Canopy of State over it. And
not only in the Church which is sanctified, they say, by this Sacrament, as by
the Presence of God himself Bellarm. de sanct. c. 5.
, but when it is carried through the Sreets in a solemn and pompous Procession,
as it is before the Pope, when he goes abroad, just as the Persian fire was
before the Emperor Curt. l. 3. S. 3.
, merely by way of state, or for a superstitious end, that he may better the be
Guarded and Defended by the company of his God Ad capitis illius sacri
custodiam praesidialem and patronalem. Perron. de Euch. l. 3. c. 19.
. In all these times it is to worshipped and adored by all persons as it
passes by, as if it were the Glory of God which passed by. They are like
Moses, to make have and bow their heads to the Earth and worship Exodus 34.8.
; but above all, upon that high day, which they have dedicated to this
Sacrament, as if it were some new Deity, the Festum Dei, as they call it, the
Feast of God, or the Festum Corporis Christi, the Feast of the Body of Christ;
for to call the Sacrament God, is a general Expression among them, as when they
have received the Sacrament, to say, I have received my Maker to day; and the
Person who in great Churches, is to carry the Sacrament to the numerous
Communicants, is called, Bajulus Dei, the Porter or Carrier of God; and they
always account it, and so always reverence it, as Boileau falsely says
Eucharistiam pro praesente numine semper habuisse Veteres.
, the Ancients did, as a present Numen and Deity. This Feast was appointed by
Pope Urban the 4th, about the middle of the twelfth Century; and again by
Clement the fifth in the beginning of the 13th, as is owned by themselves, upon
the occasion of a Vision to one Juliana, who saw a crack in the Moon, that
signified, it seems, a great defect in the Church for want of this Solemnity:
such was the rise of this great Festival Bzovii Annal. in Contin. Baron. Anno
Dom. 1230.
, and so late was its Institution in the Roman Church, in which alone, and in
no other Christian Church of the World, it is observed to this day. And that
the whole practice of the Adoration to the Host is Novel, and unknown to the
primitive Church, and to the Ancient Writers, I shall endeavor to make evident
against that bold and impudent Canon of the Council of Trent, which is the
first Council that commanded it in these words Si quis dixerit, non esse hoc
Sacramentum peculiari festivia celebritate venerandum, neque in processionibus
secundum laudabilem and Universalem Ecclesiae sanctae ritum and consuetudinem,
solenniter circumgestandum, vel non public ut adoretur, populo proponendum,
and ejus Adoratores esse Idololatras anathema sit. Council. Trident. Can. 6.
Sess. 13.
, If any one shall say that the Sacrament is not to be worshipped by a peculiar
Festival, nor to be solemnly carried about in Processions according to the
laudable and universal manner and custom of the Holy Church, nor to be
publicly proposed to the People that it may be adored by them, and that the
Worshippers of it are Idolaters, let him be accursed. To confront this insolent
pretense of theirs, that it was an universal custom of the Church, thus to
carry the Sacrament in Processions, the ingenuous confession of their own
Cassander is sufficient, The custom, says he Consuetudo qua panis Eucharistiae
in publica pompa conspicuus circumfertur ac passim omnium oculis ingeritur,
praeter veterum morem ac mentem haud ita longo tempore inducta and recepta
videtur. Illi enim hoc mysterium in tanta religione ac veneratione habuerunt,
ut non modo ad ejus perceptionem, sed ne inspectionem quidem admitterent, nisi
fideles, quos Christi membra and tanta participatione dignos esse existimarent,
quare ante Consecrationem Catechumeni Energumeni, paenitentes, denique non
Communicantes Diaconi voce and Ostiariorum Ministerio secludebantur, Cassand.
Consult.
, of carrying about the Sacramental Bread in public pomp, to be seen and
exposed to all eyes, is contrary to the mind and custom of the Ancients, and
seems to be lately brought in and received; for they had this mystery in such
religious Veneration, that they would not admit any, not only to the partaking,
but not to the sight of it, but the Faithful, whom they accounted members of
Christ, and worthy to partake of such a Mystery. Wherefore all those who were
but Catechumens, or were Energumeni or Penitents, and not Communicants, were
always put out and dismissed at the Celebration of it. Whether they be Idolaters
for adoring the Sacrament, I have considered already, and their practice joined
with their Doctrine, makes it more evident. I shall now prove that this
Adoration of theirs, was neither commanded nor used by Christ, or the Apostles,
nor by the Primitive Church, nor is truly meant and designed by any of those
Authorities of the Fathers, which they produce for it; and upon a general view
of the whole matter, That it is a very absurd and ridiculous thing that tends
most shamefully to reproach, and expose Christianity.

1. That it was not used or commanded by Christ or the Apostles, is plain from
the account that all the Evangelists give us of Christ's celebrating this
Sacrament with his Apostles, where is only mention of their taking and eating
the Bread, and drinking the Wine, after it was blessed by him, but not the
least tittle of their adoring it; so far from it, that they were not then in a
posture of Adoration, which they should have been in, if they had inwardly
adored it, which makes this not only a Negative Argument, as Boileau De Adorat.
Euch. l. 2. c. 1.
would have it, but a positive one. To take off this argument from the no
mention of any such command or practice of Adoration to the Sacrament in the
Gospel; he says, Neither is the Adoration of Christ, prescribed in express
words Nullo exiis loco conceptis verbis praescriptam fuisse Adorationem, (sc.
Christi) p. 27.
, nor that of the Holy Ghost, either commanded or performed Nullibi praeceptam
ejus Adorationem aut confestim peractam conceptis intelligamus, p. 98.
. But I hope all those places of Scripture, that so fully tell us, that both
Christ and the Holy Ghost are God, do sufficiently command us to worship them,
by bidding us worship God; and if it had told us that the Sacrament is as much
God as they, it had then commanded us to adore it. There are sufficient
instances of Christ's being adored, when he appeared upon Earth, and had the
other Divine Persons assumed a bodily Shape; those who had seen and known it,
would have particularly adored it, and so would the Apostles, no doubt, have
done the Sacrament, if they had thought that, when it was before them, an
object of worship. St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. c.
when he wrote to the Corinthians of their very great Irreverence in receiving
the Lords Supper, had very good occasion to have put them in mind of adoring
it, had that been their Duty; this then would have been a proper means to have
brought them to the highest reverence of it; but he never intimates any thing
of worshipping it, when he delivers to them, the full account of its
institution, and its design; nor never reproves them among all their other
unworthy abuses of it, for their not adoring it; and it is a very strange fetch
in Boileau Ib. p. 103. l. 2.
, that he would draw St. Paul's command of examining our selves before we eat,
to mean our adoring when, or what we eat; and that not discerning the Lords
body, and being guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, is the not worshipping
the Sacrament, which he never so much as touches upon among all their other
faults. Are there not many other ways of abusing the Sacrament, besides the not
worshipping it? this is like his first Argument out of Ignatius his Epistles l.
1. c. 2. (...), Ep. ad Smyr. at ipsemet nos docet nihil nos diligere debere
praeter Solum Deum.
, that because he says, the Sacrament ought to be loved, therefore he meant
that it ought to be adored. At which rate I should be afraid to love this
Gentleman however taking he was, lest I should consequently adore him, or
because I am not to abuse him, therefore it would follow, that I must worship
him.

2. This Adoration was not in use in the Primitive Church, as I shall show, 1.
From those Writers who give us an account of the manner of celebrating the
Eucharist among the Ancient Christians. 2. From the oldest Liturgies and
Eucharistick forms. 3. From some very ancient Customs.


1. Those most ancient Writers, 1. Justin Martyr. 2. Justin Marty. 2. Apolog.
versus finem. Apostol. Constitut. l. 8. c. 11, 12, 13, 14. 3. Cyril Hierosol.
Cateches. mystagog c 5.
The Author of the Apostolic Constitutions: And 3. St. Cyril of Jerusalem,
who acquaint us with the manner how they celebrated the Eucharist, which was
generally then one constant part of their public worship; they give no account
of any Adoration given to the Sacrament, or to the consecrated Elements, tho
they are very particular and exact in mentioning other less considerable things
that were then in use, the Kiss of Charity, in token of their mutual Love and
Reconcilliation; this Justin Martyr mentions as the first thing just before the
Sacrament (...). Justin Martyr, Apol. 2.
. In St. Cyril's time Catech. mystagog. 5. Apostol. Constit. l. 8. c. 11.
, the first thing was the bringing of Water by the Deacon, and the Priests
washing their hands in it, to denote that purity with which they were to
compass Gods Altar; and then the Deacon spoke to the people, to give the holy
Kiss; then Bread was brought to the Bishop or Priest, and (...). Just. Martyr.
Wine mixed with Water in those hot Countries, and after Prayers and
Thanksgivings by the Priest, to which the people to joined their Amen. (...),
Just. Martyr, Ib.
The Deacons gave every one present, of the blessed Bread, and Wine, and Water;
and to those that were not present, they carried it home; this, says Justin
Martyr, we account not common Bread, or common Drink, but the Body and Blood of
Christ (...). Ib.
, the blessed Food, by which our Flesh and Blood is nourisht, that is, being
turned into it, which could not be said of Christ's natural Body; nor is there
the least mention of any worship given to that, as there present, or to any of
the blessed Elements. The others are longer and much later, and speak of the
particular Prayers and Thanksgivings that were then used by the Church, of the
Sursum Corda, lift up your heart; which St. Cyril Hierosol. mystagog. Cat. 5.
Cyril says, followed after the Kiss of Charity; of the Sancta Sanctis, things
holy belong to those that are holy; then they describe how they came to
Communicate, how they held their hand (...), Ib.
when they received the Elements; how careful they were that none of them
should fall upon the Ground; but among all these most minute and particular
Descriptions of their way and manner of receiving the Sacrament, no account is
there of their adoring it, which surely there would have been, had there been
any such in the Primitive Church, as now is in the Roman.

We own indeed, as Boileau objects to us L. 2. P. 106.
, that from these it appears, that some things were then in use, which we
observe not now; neither do the Church of Rome all of them, for they are not
essential, but indifferent matters, as mixing Water with Wine, the Priest's
washing, the Kiss of Charity, and sending the Sacrament to the absent; but the
Church may alter these upon good reasons according to its prudence and
discretion; but Adoration to the Sacrament, if it be ever a Duty, is always so,
and never ought upon any account to be omitted; nor would have been so by the
Primitive Christians, had they had the same Opinion of it, that the Papists
have now.

2. From the oldest Lyturgies, and the Eucharistick Forms; in them it appears
that there was no such Adoration to the Sacrament, till of late; for in none of
them is there any such mention, either by the Priest or the People, as in the
Roman Missal and Ritual, nor any such Forms of Prayer to it, as in their
Breviary. Cassander Cassandri Lyturgic.
has collected together most of the old Liturgies, and Endeavors, as far as he
can, to show their agreement; with that of the Roman Church; but neither in the
old Greek, nor in the old Latin ones, is there any instance to be produced of
the Priests or the Peoples adoring the Sacrament, as soon as he had consecrated
it; but this was perfectly added, and brought in a new into the Roman Lyturgy,
after the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was established in that Church, which
has altered not only their Lyturgy, but even their Religion in good part, and
made a new sort of Worship unknown, not only in the first and best times of the
Church, but for above a thousand years after Christ; Boileau finding this, tho
a negative Argument, press very hard upon them; and sure it cannot but satissie
any reasonable man, that there is no Direction in the ancient Lyturgies for
adoring the Sacrament; and it is very hard to require us to produce a Rubric
against it, when no body thought of that which after-Superstition brought in;
He would fain therefore find something in an old Liturgy that should look like
that of their own; and no doubt but he might have easily met with abundant
places for their worshipping and adoring God and Christ at that solemn Office
of the Christian worship, the blessed Sacrament; and therefore out of the
Liturgy called St. Chrysostomes, which he owns to be two hundred years later
then St. Chrysostom, he produces a place Boil. l. 2. p. 74. ex Chrysostom.
Liturg. (...).
, wherein it is said, That the Priest and the Deacon worship in the place they
are in, and likewise the people; but do they worship the Sacrament? Is that, or
only God and Christ the object of their worship there? Is there any such thing
to determine this as they have taken care there should be in their Missal?
where it is expressly several times, they shall worship the Sacrament
Sacramentum Adorare, Romans missal. Cooperto calice Sacramentum adorare, and
genuflexus Sacramentum adorare.
; but here in St. Chrysos. Liturgy, it is God, who is to be worshipped, God be
merciful to me a Sinner (...), Chrysostom. Lyturg.
; but in the Roman, it is the Sacrament is prayed to Stans oculis ad Sacramentum
intentis precari.
, and they would reckon and account it as true Irreligion, not to worship and
pray to that, as not to worship God and Christ. So in the Lyturgy, that goes
under the name of St. James, the Worship is only before the Holy Table (...).
Lyturg. St. Jacobi.
, as it is in the Church of England; and I hope Boileau will not pretend that
this is to the Holy Table it self. If whatever we worship before, is the very
Object of our Worship, then the Priest is so, as well as the Table; but it is
neither he, nor the Table, nor the Sacrament, but only Christ himself, to whom
this Worship is, or ought to be given at the Celebration of the Eucharist; and
therefore this Adoration was as well before as after the Consecration of the
Sacramental Elements, and so could not be supposed to be given to them.

3. There were several very ancient Customs relating to the Sacrament, which
are no ways consistent with the Opinion the Papists have of it now, and with
the worship of it as a God. It was very old, and very usual for Christians to
reserve and keep by them, some of the Elements; the Bread especially, which
they had received at the Sacrament, as is evident from Tertullian De Orat. c.
14. Accepto ^orpore Domini and reservato.
, and from St. Cyprian De Lapsis.
, who reports a very strong think that happened to a Woman, and also to a Man,
who had unduly gone to the Sacrament, and brought some part of it home with
them. I shall not enquire whither this Custom had not something of Superstition
in it; whither in those times of Danger and Persecution, it were not of use;
but had the Church then thought of it, as the Papists do now, they would not
have suffered private Christians to have done this; nay they would not have
suffered them hardly to have touched and handled, that which they had believed
to be a God, no more than the Church of Rome will now, which is so far from
allowing this private Reservation of the Elements, that out of profound
Veneration, as they pretend to them, they wholly deny one part of them, the Cup
to the Laity, and the other part, the Bread they will not, as the primitive
Church, put into their hands, but the Priest must inject it into their Mouths.

The sending the Eucharist not only to the Sick and Infirm, and to the
Penitents, who were this way to be admitted to the Communion of the Church, in
articulo mortis, as is plain from the known Story of Serapion Eusebius. Eccles.
Hist. l. 6. c. 34.
; but the Bishops of several Churches sending it to one another, as a token and
pledge of their Communion with each other; and Iren. apud Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24.
it being sent also to private Christians, who lived remote in the Country and
private Places, which custom was abolisht by the Council of Laodicea; these all
show, that tho the Christians always thought the Sacrament a Symbol of Love,
and Friendship, and Communion with the Church, so that by partaking of this one
Bread they were all made as St. Paul says, One Bread, and one Body; yet they
could not think this to be a God, or the very natural Body of their Savior,
which they sent thus commonly up and down, without that Pomp and Solemnity,
that is now used in the Church of Rome, and without which I own it is not fit a
Deity should be treated. But above all, what can they think of those, who
anciently used to burn the Elements that remained after the Communion, as
Hesychius In Levit. 8.32.
testifies, was the custom of the Church of Jerusalem, according to the Law of
Moses in Leviticus, of burning what remained of the Flesh of the Sacrifice,
that was not eaten; but however this was done out of some respect, that what
was thus sacred might not otherwise be profaned; yet they could not sure
account that to be a God, or to be the very natural and substantial Body of
Christ, which they thus burnt and threw into the Fire.

So great an honor and regard had the Primitive Church for the Sacrament, that
as they accounted it the highest Mystery and Solemnest part of their Worship,
so they would not admit any of the Penitents, who had been guilty of any great
and notorious Sin, nor the Catechumens, nor the Possessed, and Energumeni, so
much as to the sight of it; the (...), and the Participation of this Mystery,
used always in those times to go together as Cassander Consult. de Circumgest.
Sacram.
owns, and Albaspinaeus L'ancienne Police de l'Eglise sur l'administration de
l'Eucharistie. liver prem. Chap. 15, 16, 17.
proves in his Book of the Eucharist. And therefore, as it is plainly contrary
to the Primitive practice, to carry the Sacrament up and down, and expose it to
the Eyes of all Persons; so the reason of doing it, that it may be worshipped by
all, and that those, who do not partake of it, may yet adore it; was, it is
plain, never thought of in the primitive Church; for then they would have seen
and worshipped it, tho they had not thought fit that they should have partaken
of it. But he that will see how widely the Church of Rome differs from the
ancient Church in this, and other matters relating to the Eucharist, let him
read the learned Dallee his two Books of the Object of religious Worship.

I shall now give an Answer to the Authorities which they produce out of the
Fathers, and which Monsieur Boileau has, he tells us, been a whole year a
gleaning out of them Annuae vellicationis litirariae ratiocinium reddo. Praef.
ad Lect. Boileau de Adorat. Euchar.
, if he has not rather picked from the Sheaves of Bellarmine and Perrone. But
all their Evidences out of Antiquity, as they are produced by him, and bound up
together in one Bundle in his Book, I shall Examine and Answer too, I doubt
not, in a much less time. They are the only Argument he pretends to for this
Adoration; and when Scripture and all other Reasons fail them, as they
generally do, then they fly to the Fathers; as those who are sensible their
forces are too weak to keep the open Field, fly to the Woods, or the Mountains,
where they know but very few can follow them. I take it to be sufficient, that
in any necessary Article of Faith, or Essential part of Christian Worship,
(which this of the Sacrament must be, if it be any part at all,) it is
sufficient that we have the Scripture for us, or that the Scripture is silent,
and speaks of no more than what we own and admit. In other external and
indifferent Matters relating merely to the Circumstances of Worship, the Church
may for outward Order and Decency, appoint what the Scripture does not. But as
to what we are to believe, and what we are to Worship the most positive
Argument from any humane Authority is of no weight, where there is but a
Negative from Scripture. But we have such a due regard to Antiquity, and are so
well assured of our cause, were it to be tried only by that, and not by
Scripture, which the Church of Rome generally demurs to; that we shall not fear
to allow them to bring all the Fathers they can for their Witnesses in this
matter, and we shall not in the least decline their Testimony. Boileau Musters
up a great many, some of which are wholly impertinent and insignisicant to the
matter in hand, and none of them speak home to the business he brings them for.
He was to prove, that they Taught that the Sacrament was to be adored, as it is
in the Church of Rome; but they only Teach as we do, That it is to be had in
great reverence and respect, as all other things relating to the Divine
Worship; that it is to be received with great Devotion, both of Body and Soul,
and in such a Posture, as is to express this, A Posture of Adoration; that
Christ is then to be worshipped by us in this Office especially, as well as he
is in all other Offices of our Religion; that his Body, and his Flesh, which is
united to his Divinity, and which he offered up to his Father as a Sacrifice
for all Mankind, and by which we are Redeemed, and which we do spiritually
partake of in the Sacrament, that this is to be adored by us; but not as being
corporally present there, or that the Sacrament is to be worshipped with that, or
for the sake of that, or that which the Priest holds up in his Hands, or lies
upon the Altar, is to be the Object of our Adoration, but only Christ and his
blessed Body, which is in Heaven.

To these four Heads, I shall reduce the Authori^ies which Boileau produces for
the Adoration of the Host, and which seem to speak any thing to his purpose;
and no wonder that among so many Devout Persons that speak as great things as
can be of the Sacrament, and used, and persuaded the greatest Devotion, as is
certainly our Duty, in the receiving it; there should be something that may
seem to look that way to those, who are very willing it should, or that may by
a little stretching be drawn further than their true and genuine meaning, which
was not to Worship the Sacrament it self, or the consecrated Elements, but
either

1. To Worship Christ, who is to be adored by us in all places, and at all
times, but especially in the places set apart for his Worship, and at those
times we are performing them in the Church, and upon the Altar, in Mysteriis,
as St. Ambrose speaks, De Spir. St. l. 3. c. 12.
in the Mysteries, both of Baptism and the Lords Supper, and in all the Offices
of Christian Worship, as Nazianzen Orat. 11. de Gorgon. (...).
said of his Sister Gorgonia, that She called upon him, who is honored upon
the the Altar. That Christ is to be honored upon the Altar, where we see the
great and honorable work of men's Redemption as 'twas performed by his Death,
represented to us, is not at all strange; if it had been another, and more full
word, that he was to be worshipped there, it is no more than what is very
allowable, tho it had not been in a Rhetorical Oration; it is no more than to
say, That the God of Israel was worshipped upon the Jewish Altar, or upon this
Mountain. For it is plain, She did not mean to worship the Sacrament, as if that
were Christ or God, for She made an ointment of it, and mixed it with her tears,
and anointed her Body with it, as a Medicine to recover her Health, which she
did miraculously upon it. Now, sure it is a very strange thing that she should
use that as a Plaster, which She thought to be a God; but She still took it
for Bread and Wine, that had extraordinary Virtue in it, and it is so called
there by Nazianzen, the Antitypes (...). Ib.
of Christ's Body and Blood, which shows they were not thought to be the
substance of it; and she had all these about her, and in her own keeping, as
many private Christians had in those times; and there was no Host then upon the
Altar, when she worshipped Christ upon it, for it was in the night (...). Ib.
, she went thus to the Church. So St. Chrysostom Vid. Boileau, c. 7. l. 1. ex
Chrysostom.
in all the places quoted out of him, only recommends the worshipping of Christ
our blessed Savior, and our coming to the Sacrament with all Humility and
Reverence, like humble Supplicants upon our Knees, and with Tears in our Eyes,
and all Expressions of Sorrow for our Sins, and Love, and Honor to our
Savior, whom we are to meet there, and whom we do, as it were, (...), Chrysostom.
in 1. Ep. Cor. 10. c.
see upon upon the Altar, which is the great stress of all that is produced out
of him. That we do not truly see him upon the Altar, the Papists must own, tho
they believe him there; but not so as to be visible to our Senses; and he is no
more to be truly adored as corporally present, than he is visibly present. St.
Ambrose In Sermon 56 Stephanus in terris positus Christum tangit in caelo.
says of St. Stephen, that he being on Earth, touches Christ in Heaven; just
as St. Chrysostom says, Thou see him on the Altar; and as he and any one that
will not resolve to strain an easy figurative Expression, must mean, not by a
bodily touch, or sight, but by Faith Non corporali tactu, sed fide.
, and by that we own, that we see Christ there, and that he is there present.

2. Adoring the Flesh and Body of Christ, which tho considered without his
Divinity, it would be worshipping a Creature as St. Cyril of Alexandria says In
actis Council. Ephesians. (...).
, yet as it is always united to his Divinity, it is a true object of Worship,
and ought to be so to us, who are to expect Salvation by it, (...). Chrysostom.
Homil. 108.
even from the Blood, and the Body, and Flesh of Christ; and therefore, as we
inwardly trust in it, so we ought to adore it, as no doubt the Angels do in
Heaven, and as we are to do in all the Offices of our Religion; tho that be in
Heaven, yet we are to worship it upon Earth, and especially, when it is brought
to our minds and thought, by that which is appointed by Christ himself to be
the Figure and Memorial of it, the blessed Sacrament, there and in Baptism
especially, when we put on Christ, and have his Death, and Rising again
represented to us, and have such great benefits of his Death and Incarnation
bestowed upon us; in these Mysteries we are, as St. Ambrose Caro Christi, quam
hodie in Mysteriis adoramus, Ambros. l. 3. de Sp. San. c. 12. apud Boil. p. 32.
says, to Adore the Body and the Flesh of Christ, to which we immediately and
particularly owe them, and which we may truly call our Savior. St. Ambrose,
and St. Austin August: Enar. in Ps. 98.
his Scholar after him, supposing that there was a great difficulty in that
passage of the Psalms, worship his footstool, for so it is in the Latin Adorate
scabellum pedum ejus.
, without the Preposition at his footstool, they labored to reconcile this
with that command of Worshipping and Serving God alone; and to give an account
how the Earth, which was Gods footstool, could be worshipped; and the way they
take, was this, to make Christ's Flesh, which he took of the Earth, to be meant
by that Earth which was Gods footstool Invenio quomodo sine Impietate adoretur
terra, scabellum pedum ejus; suscepit enim de terra terram, quia caro de terra
est, and de carne Mariae carnem accepit, August. Ib.
; and this, say they, we ought to worship; his Apostles did so whilst he was
upon Earth, and we do so now, whilst he is in Heaven. We worship the Flesh of
Christ, which was crucified for us, and by the benefit of which we hope for
Pardon and Salvation, we worship that, tho it be now in Heaven; we worship it
in the Solemn Offices of our Religion Ipsam carnem nobis manducandam ad falutem
dedit (nemo autem illam carnem manducat, nisi prius adoraverit) Aug. Ib.
, that Flesh which he gave to be eaten by us for our Salvation, that we
worship, for none eats that Flesh, but he first worships: Worships that, if
they please; tho St. Austin do not expressly say that; but we will own, and we
will be always ready to Worship the Flesh of Christ, by which we are saved, and
we will do this especially at the Sacrament; and that more truly and properly,
than they themselves will own, that we eat and manducate it, as St. Austin
says, not with our Teeth, as we do the Bread, but eat it, and worship it too,
as it is Heaven. St Hierome Epist. ad Marcel. Ibant Christiani Hierosolymam ut
Christum in illis adorarent locis, in quibus primum Evangelium de patibulo
coruscaverat.
says of some devout Christians, That they went to Jerusalem, that they might
adore Christ in those places, where the Gospel first shone from the Cross. They
went, that they might adore Christ in those places; not that they believed him
to be corporally present in those places; much less, that they worshipped the
places themselves; but they made a more lively impression of Christ upon them,
and made them remember him with more Passion and Devotion; and so does the
blessed Sacrament upon us, and we therefore worship Christ, whom we believe to
be in Heaven in the Sacrament, as they worshipped him in those places, where they
were especially put in mind of him. Thus St. Hierome says, He worshipped Christ
in the Grave, and that Paula worshipped him in the Stall Ad Paul. and Eustoch.
, and so we may be said to worship him on the Cross, or on the Altar, or in the
Sacrament, and yet not to worship the Cross, or the Altar, or the Sacrament it
self.

3. Other places out of the Fathers brought by him for the Adoration of the
Host, mean only, that the Sacrament is to be had in great reverence and esteem
by us, as all things sacred and set apart to religious uses are; that a
singular Veneration is due to the Eucharist, as St. Austin says Eucharistiae
deberi singularem venerationem, Epist. 118. c. 3.
, and as is to Baptism also, of which he uses the same word, We venerate
Baptism Baptismum, ubicunque est, veneramur, Id Epist. 146.
, as we ought to do all the Rites and Ordinances of our Religion; this is meant
by Origin in that first place of him produced by Boileau De Euch. Ador. p. 10.
ex Orig. Homil. 13. Nostis qui Divinis mysteriis interesse consuestis, quomodo
cum suscipitis corpus Domini, cum omni cautela and veneratione servatis, ne ex
eo parum quid decidat, ne consecrati muneris aliquid dilabatur. Reos enim vos
creditis and recte creditis, siquid inde per negligentiam decidat.
, Ye that are wont to be present at the Divine Mysteries, know how, when ye
receive the Body of Christ, ye keep it with all Caution and Veneration, that no
part of the consecrated gift be let fall; for ye think, and that rightly, that
ye should be guilty of a fault, if any of it should be let fall through your
negligence. And Christans have this Care and Veneration of those consecrated
Symbols of the Body and Blood of their Savior, of these wonderful Pledges of
his Love, that they would not willingly spill them, or let them fall to the
ground, through their carelessness and neglect; they that have that due regard
to the Holy Bible which they ought, would not trample it under their feet, or
show any such disrespect to it; it was this, which Origin was recommending in
that place from that example of their care and respect to the Sacrament
Elements, that they should give it also to the Word of God Quod si circa corpus
ejus tanta urimini cantela, and merito utimini; quomodo putatis minoris esse
piaculi Verbum Dei neglexisse quam Corpus ejus. Ib.
, But if ye use such care, and that very deservedly about keeping his Body, how
do ye think it to be a less fault to neglect the word of God, than to neglect
his Body. The Comparison here made between the Word of God, and the Sacrament,
so plainly shows that he no way meant its Adoration, that I wonder this Person
was not ashamed to pretend just before it, that he Alienum esse ab institutis
meis ullum in medium adducere patrem quin conceptis verbis propitium, Boil. p.
10.
would bring no Authority, but what was expressly for his Opinion, and use none
but Animo decreverim argumenta invictissima concludere.
invincible Arguments; but Roman Faith must be defended with Roman courage and
confidence, which is the only invincible thing they have.

The words of Theodoret are a great deal more plausible, and seem at the first
glance, to look more fairly, than any for their purpose. The Elements are
understood to be what they are made, and they are believed and reverenced, as
those things which they are believed (...). Theod. Dialog. (...). apud Boil. p.
64.
. Here our Faith makes the Sacrament to be what it signifies, to become to us
the res Sacramenti, as well as a sign and Representation of it, and that thing
is to be adored by us, in the use of the Sacrament, which is the true sense of
Theodorets words; and that he cannot mean in the Roman sense, that the Elements
are converted into another substance, the substance of Christ's Body, is plain
from what immediately goes before, and utterly destroys what they would catch
from half his words; for he says, That the Elements, or the mystical Signs do
not after sanctification recede from their own, but remain in their former
substance (...). Ib.
. Thus their best Witness, that seems to speak the most for them, yet speaks
that against them, which destroys their whole cause, as he must own, whoever
reads the Dialogue, and considers the design of it, which was to answer the
pretense of those, who said that the Body of Christ was after his Ascension,
turned into a Divine substance, and lost the true nature of Body (...).
, as the Symbols of Christ's Body and Blood are changed, say those Heretics,
into what they were not before, Yes says he, Now ye are taken in your own net;
for they remain in their former nature and substance afterward, and so does
Christ's Body. If then the change of these sacred Elements be only as to their
use and virtue, but not as to their substance, according to Theodoret, then he
could not mean that they should be adored, but only reverenced by the word
(...), just as the Holy Bible (...). Liturg. Chrysostom. (...). Acta Council.
Ephesians.
, is said to be reverenced, and the Priest themselves, by the very same word z.

4. Some of the Fathers words imply, that when we come to the Sacrament, it
should be with the greatest lowliness, both of Body and Mind; and as the
Primitive Church used to do, and as the Church of England does, in a posture of
Worship and Adoration, in the form and manner of Worship, as St. Cyril of
Hieros. speaks (...). Catech. Mist. 5.
, or as St. Chrysostom, In the form of Supplicants and Worshippers (...),
Chrysostom. Homil. 7. in Matthew. (...). Ibid. (...). Homil. de Phil. (...). Homil.
in c. 10. Ep. 1. ad Cor.
of Christ, as the Magi were, when they came to bring their presents to him; do
thou then present him with humility, and a lowly and submissive heart, and be
not like Herod, who pretended he would come to worship him, but it was to
murder him; but rather imitate the Magi, and come with greater fear and
reverence to thy Savior than they did. This is the whole design and substance
of what is produced out of St. Chrysostom Boil. c. 7. l 1.
, And this is the plain meaning of Origin Hom. 5. in N. T. Tunc Dominus sub
tectum tuum ingreditur; tu ergo humilians teipsum imitare hunc Centurionem and
dicito, Domine non sum dignus ut intres sub tectum menm.
, that when we come to receive Christ in the Sacrament, we should do it with
all Humility; for consider, says he, That then the Lord enters under thy roof;
do thou therefore humble thy self, and imitate the Centurion, and say, Lord I
am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof. When the Fathers would
give us the Picture of a devout Communicant, they draw him in the greatest
Posture of Humility and Reverence, looking upon and (...), Chrysostom in Sermon.
31. in natal Dom. (...). Johan. Hieros. apud Chrysostom. and apud Boil. p. 44.
(...), Chrysostom. Ibid.
adoring his Savior, who died for him upon the Cross, prostrating his Soul,
and his Body before him, and exercising the highest acts of Devotion to him,
and with Tears in his Eyes and Sorrow in his heart, standing like a Penitent
before him, trembling and afraid, as sensible of his own guilt; with his Eyes
cast down, and with dejected Looks considering that he is but Dust and Ashes,
who is vouchsafed to this Honor, and inwardly Groaning, and Sighing, and
Panting in his Soul, saying, Lord I am not worthy, that thou should enter
under my roof; and the like. And thus they may find all devout Communicants in
our Church behaving themselves, during the whole Solemnity and Celebration of
that blessed Sacrament, in which Mystery they always adore Christ, and that
Flesh of Christ which was crucified; for then as St. Ambrose, and St. Austin
speak, when their minds are all the while inflamed with the most devout
Affections, and they are performing all the inward and outward Acts of the
highest Devotion to God and their Savior, then they are upon their Knees,
offering up most ardent Prayers and Thanksgivings; but not to the sacred
Symbols which are before them, or the Sacrament it self as the object to which,
but as the Circumstance, at and in which all this Devotion and Worship is
performed. And there is a great deal of difference from all this in the Church
of Rome, when they direct all this to the Sacrament it self, and to the
consecrated Elements, when they terminate their Worship upon what is before
them, and direct their Intentions to that as an Object; and therefore, whenever
they have this Object appear to them, they immediately fall down and worship
it, not only in the time of the Communion, when it finds them at their
Devotion, but at all other times, when they are standing or walking in the
Streets, and are in no present Temper or Posture of Devotion; yet all of a
sudden, as soon as they see the Host coming by, they must put themselves into
one, and Adore that very Object, that appears to them.

The Fathers always speak of Persons as coming to the Sacrament, and partaking
of it, and worshipping Christ, and the Body of Christ in the Celebration of
those Divine Mysteries; but it never entered into their minds or thoughts, to
persuade or encourage their hearers in their most devout Discourses, to Adore
the Host, as the Church of Rome does, either in, or especially out of the time
of that sacred Solemnity; and tho it be very easy to make a Book out of the
Fathers, and to heap Authorities out of them to little purpose; yet, it is
imposible to prove by all the places produced out of them, by T. G. Chap. 1. Of
the Adoration of the blessed Sacrament.
, or more largely by Boileau, that they meant any more than what we are very
willing to join with them in, that Christ is to be worshipped in the Sacrament,
as in Baptism, and the other Offices of our Religion; and that his Body and
Flesh, which he offered for us, and by which we expect Salvation, is also to be
adored, as being always united to his Divine Nature; and that the Sacrament it
self, as representing the great Mystery of our Redemption is to be highly
reverenced by us, and that we should come to receive it with all Humility, and
in the most decent Posture of Worship and Adoration, as the Primitive
Christians did. But that the Sacrament it self is to be adored, as well as
Christ; that which the Priest holds in his hands, or lies upon the Altar before
us, that this is to be the Object of our Worship, and to have all manner of
Latria, both of Body and Soul directed to that, as to God himself; that the
consecrated Elements, or the sacred Symbols of Christ's Body and Blood are to be
worshipped by us, when we receive them, or when without receiving them we see
them set upon the Altar, or carried about in Procession; this, which is the
Controversy between us, not one Father says, but above three hundred of them
together in a Council say Council. Sept. Constant. Act. 6. (...).
, That to prevent Idolatry, Christ appointed an excellent Image and
Representation of himself in the Sacrament, without any manner of humane shape,
even the plain and simple substance of Bread. But they resolve that Idolatry
shall not be prevented, but they will be so sottish as to commit it with that,
which was designed to prevent it, and which one would think, should not in the
least tempt any man to it, with a bit of Bread.

The Absurdities of which, upon a general view of the whole, I shall now for a
Conclusion represent and offer as the last Argument against it, and tho that
alone might be sufficient, since God never imposes any thing that is really
foolish and ridiculous, to be believed or practiced by his Creatures; yet I
thought it the fittest to be produced after we are well assured, that neither
Scripture nor Antiquity have required any such thing. And however unwilling
Bellarmine Bell. de Sacram. Euchar. l. 3. c. 10.
is to admit of Arguments of this nature, from the Absurdity of the thing, as
knowing how very liable the Church of Rome was to them; and tho it is the most
unjust Reflection upon Christianity to say, that any thing that is a part of
that is so, which they are too ready to insinuate, and so bring a reproach upon
the common Christianity, rather than part with their own ridiculous Opinions;
yet after we have thoroughly imformed our selves, that there is nothing of a
Divine Authority, as one can hardly think there should be for what is so absurd
in it self, then an Argument from the folly and unreasonableness of the thing,
must be allowed to be very proper; and till men have lost all their Reason, it
will always be very cogent; and here it is so very strong, and presses so hard
upon their Adoration of the Host, that it is no wonder that they love to set by,
and except against reason, whenever this matter is to be tried: but it is most
sad to consider, that they should have so little regard and concern for the
Credit and Reputation of the Christian Religion, as by this means so shamefully
and notoriously to expose it to the Reproach and Contempt of the wisest Men.
How must a Jew or a Turk, who are great enemies to all Idolatry, be prejudiced
against Christianity, when he sees those who profess it, fall down and worship
a Wafer, and make an Idol of a bit of Bread? When he lives in those places,
where he sees it carried about with Candles and Torches before it, in most
Solemn and Pompous Processions, and all Persons as it goes by, falling upon
their Knees, and saying their prayers, and using all acts of Devotion to it;
would he not wonder what strange and new God, that no History ever mentioned,
the Christians adored?

Mankind indeed, when very ignorant, used to worship a great many Creatures
that were very useful to them, and when they were very hungry, if they lighted
upon Bread, it was no great wonder; but sure it can be no more sit to be
worshipped by those who better know God, than any of his other Creatures, or any
of the most dumb and senseless, and pitiful Images, for which the Christians so
often, and so justly laughed at the Idolatrous Heathens; especially, those of
them, who were so foolish, and such true belly-Gods, as to eat and feed upon
what they worshipped and deified. This the first and most learned Christians
charged, as the highest degree of folly in the Egyptians, to eat the same
Animals, whom they worshipped (...). Orig. contra Celsum, l. 4. (...). Tatian.
Orat. contra Graec. Apim bovem adoratis and pascitis Minut. Octav. p. 94.
; And a wise Heathen could not think any would be so mad as to think that to be
a God, with which he was fed Ecquem tam amentem esse putas, ut illud quo
vescatur, Deum esse credat? Tully de natura Deorum.
. It was the ingenious Opinion of a very learned Father, that God made the
difference between the clean and unclean Beast, to prevent this Egyptian and
Brutish folly in the Israelites, who lived among them; Because, says he, by
their abominating the unclean, they would not deifie them; and by eating the
clean, they would be secured from ever worshipping them; for it must be the
extremest madness to worship what they eat (...). Theodoret. in Quaest. in
Genes.
. How did the Ancient Apologists for Christianity with great wit and smartness,
ridicule the other Idols of the Heathens, as being the works at first of the
Carver, or the Painter, and particularly for being such Gods as were baked at
first in the Furnace Incoctos fornacibus figulinis Arnob. contra Gent. l. 6.
of the Potter (and it had been much the same, had it been in the Oven of the
Baker) for being Gods of Brass, or of Silver Deus aereus vel argenteus, Minut.
Octav. p. 74.
? And yet they counted the Silver or the Brass no more a God Nos neque aeris
neque auri argentique materias, Arnob. ut supra.
than others do the Bread, as I have shown above. How at other times did they
think fit to expose their impotent and senseless Deities, because they could
not preserve themselves from Thieves Deos vestros plerumque in praedam furibus
cedere Lactant. Institut. l. 2. c. 4.
, nor yet from rotteness; but the Worms would still gnaw, and the Vermin
deface them, and the Birds would defile them with their excrements even in
their own Temples Quanto verius de diis vestris animalia muta naturaliter
judicant, mures, hirundines, milvi; non sentire eos sciunt, rodunt, insultant,
insident, ac nisi abigatis, in ipso Dei vestri ore nidificant; Araneae vero
faciem ejus intexunt, Minut. Octav. p. 75.
? And could not this be said of a breaden Deity? is not that as subject to all
these mischances, and therefore as liable to all those Reproaches? will not a
Mouse or Rat run away with it? tho if it do so, they have taken care, if they
can catch the sacrilegious Thief, to have the Sacrament drawn out of its
entrails, and religiously disposed of Antonin. de defect. Miss. in Bishop
Jewels reply.
; but however, if no such misfortune come to it, it will in a little time, if
it be kept, prove sour, and grow moldy; and when it does so, what should then
thrust out the Deity, and bring in again the substance of the Bread that was
quite gone before, is an unaccountable Miracle; and that which is taken of it
into our Bodies, is not like one would think to have any better, or more
becoming treatment there, than by the other ways; so that upon all these
accounts, this which is worshipped by Christians, is in as ill Condition as
that which was worshipped by Heathens; and those witty Adversaries, Celsus, and
Porphyry, and Julian would have thrown all that the Christians had said against
the Heathen Idols, back upon themselves, and have improved them with as great
Advantage, and retorted them with as much force, had the Christians in those
times worshipped the Host, or the Sacramental Elements, as the Papists do now;
and it is more than a Presumption, no less than a Demonstration that the
Christians did not, because none of these things that were so obnoxious, and so
obvious, were ever in the least mentioned by the Heathens, or made matter of
Reflection upon them, when they picked up all other things, let them be true or
false, that they could make any use of to object against them. But the
Primitive Christians gave them no such occasion; which was the only Reason they
did not take it. As soon as the Church of Rome did so, by setting up the
worship of the Host Apud Dionys. Carthus in 4. did. Nullam se sectam
Christiana deteriorem aut ineptiorem reperire. Quem colunt Deum, dentibus ipsi
suis discerpunt ac devorant.
. Averroes the Arabian Philosopher, in the 13th Century, gave this Character of
Christians, that he had found no Sect more foolish, or worse than they, in all
his Travels and Observations, upon this very account, For they eat the God whom
they worship; and Bullaeus Gultius in Itin. Mange Dieu.
a later Historian and Traveller tells us, that it is a common Reproach in the
Mouths of the Turks and Mahumetans, to call the Christians Devourers of their
God; and a Jew, in a Book Printed at Amsterdam in the year 1662, among other
Questions put to Christians, asks this shrewd one, If the Host be a God, why
does it corrupt and grow covered with Mold? and why is it gnawn by Mice or
other Animals Si Hostia Deus est cur situ obducta corrumpitur? curagliribus and
umribus correditur? Lib. quaest. and Resp.
?

The only way the Papists have to bring themselves off from these manifest
Absurdities, is only a running farther into greater; and their little Shifts
and Evasions, are so thin and subtle Sophistry, or rather such gross and thick
falsehoods, that it could not be imagined that the Heathen Advertaries could
ever know them, and therefore be so civil as Boileau would make them Cap. 10.
l. 2. de ador. Euch.
, as not to lay those charges upon them, as others do; nor can any reasonable
and impartial man ever believe them; for they are plainly these two; That they
do not worship what all the World sees they worship; And that they do not eat
what they take into their Mouths and swallow down: Which is in plain words an
open Confession, that they are ashamed to own what they plainly do; We do not
worship the Bread, say they, for that we believe is done away, and turned into
the natural Body of Christ, and so we cannot be charged with Bread-worship. But
do ye not worship that which ye see, and which ye have before ye, and which is
carried about? And would not any man that sees what that is, think ye worship
Bread or Wafer? And could you ever persuade him, that it was any thing else?
And if notwithstanding what you think of it against all Sense and Reason, it be
still Bread; then I hope it is Bread that ye worship; and till others think as
wildly as ye do, ye must give them leave to think and charge ye thus. But if it
were true, that ye did not worship the Bread, yet ye must and do own, that ye
worship the Species of the Bread; and how ye should do that, without being
guilty of another very gross Absurdity, ye do not know your selves; for ye must
make them so united to Christ, as to make one Suppositum, and so one Object of
Worship, as his Humanity and Godhead are; and then according to this way of
yours, Christ may as well be said to be Impanated and United to Bread, or its
Species, as Incarnated and United to Flesh, as some of you have taught Bellarm.
de Ruperto Abbate Tuitiensi, l. 3. de Euch. c. 11.
that the Bread in the Eucharist is assumed by the (...), as the humine Nature
was. But not to mention these, which wheresoever ye turn ye, state ye full in
the face, and should make ye blush, one would think, had ye not put off all
shame, as well as all sense in this matter; grant ye what ye would have, that
it is not Bread, but the substantial Body, Flesh and Blood of a man, that is in
the Host; will this help much to mend the matter, or to lessen the Absurdity,
and not rather increase and swell it? For besides the incredible wonder, that a
bit of Bread should by a few words of every common Priest, be turned
immediately into the true and perfect Body of a man; nay, into ten thousand
Bodies at the same time, which is a greater Miracle than ever was done in the
World, and is as great almost, as creating the World it self out of nothing;
and if it were true, would make the Priest a God, certainly, and not a man, and
much rather to be worshipped than a bit of Bread, as Lactantius says of the
Heathen Idols, He that made them, ought rather to be worshipped than they
Meliorem esse qui fecit, quam illa quae facta sunt and si haec adoranda sunt,
artificem a quo facta sunt, ipsum quoque multo potiori jure adorandum esse,
Lactant. Instit. l. 2. c. 2.
. Besides this, it seems it is the whole Body of a man, then, which is eaten
and swallowed down, instead of Bread; for sure the same thing is not one thing
when it is worshipped, and another thing when it is eaten; and then how barbarous
and inhumane, as well as absurd and ridiculous, must this appear to any man,
that is not used to swallow the most substantial Nonsense, as well as the whole
Body of a man for a Morsel? and then all the former Absurdities which I
mentioned, do return again, of the Eating that which we worship, which the
Apologists thought so wild and extravagant in the Egyptian God eaters. Well
then, there is no other way, but to say, we don't eat him as we eat other food
Boil c. 10. l. 2. Comestionem substantiae corporis Christi non esse naturalem.
; so might the Egyptians have said too, if they had pleased; tho, how they can
otherwise eat him, it is hard to understand; but only in the heretical sense of
Spiritual and Sacramental Eating; unless they will at the same time say, They
do not eat him truly and naturally, and yet do eat him so; and they are so used
to Contradictions in this point, that I don't know whether they will make any
more Bones of this, than of the rest, or of the substantial Body of a man
himself, when they have got so large a Faith, or rather so large a Swallow. But
how is it, that ye do not eat him after a natural and carnal manner, and yet it
is a carnal Body, that ye so much contend for, and that ye really and truly
eat, and it is a Carnal mouth and throat he is put into, and sometimes a very
foul and wicked one? And yet this must by this carnal way eat the very Body of
Christ, as well as the most faithful; But we do not grind this Body with our
Teeth, nor chew him in our Mouths, as our other Food; nor digest him in our
Stomachs, nor cast him out into the draught; if ye do not as ye pretend, being
ashamed of the most shameful and abominable Consequences of it; and yet a very
great many among you, have owned all that Retract. Bereng. sub Nicol. 2 in
Council. Romans Verum corpus Domini nostri Jesu Christi sensualiter, non solum
Sacramento, sed in veritate, manibus Sacerdotum tractari and frangi and
fidelium dentibus atteri, Sic Gualt. and Abbaud apud. Boil. p. 177.
, as not knowing how it could be otherwise, and how if this eating be Spiritual
and Sacramental, Christ's presence may not be so too, which is the Heresy on
the other side Iste in omnibus veritatem subtrahit, dum asserit omnia fieri
(sc. fractionem and attritionem corporis Christi in Eucharistia) non substantia
sed in specie visibili and forma panis and Sacramento tantum. Gualter adversus
Abailard. apud Boil. 179.
; and ye seem to make strange Monsters of your selves that have spiritual
Teeth, and can spiritually, and not naturally eat a natural, and a carnal Body;
and if ye do not thus eat it, as ye eat other meat, when ye take it into your
Mouths, and into your Stomachs, and do every thing to it that you do to your
other food, which is as like eating as if it were very true and natural eating;
and if it be not Bread, which is thus eaten, when it is just as like other
Bread as is possible, then it is certainly, the most fantastic Food, and the
most fantastic way of eating it, that can be imagined; then there must be a
new way of eating, which is not eating, and a new way for a Body to be present,
and yet not present as a Body; and I will add there must certainly be then a
new understanding, which is no understanding, that can understand, or believe
all this.

But further, ye have found it necessary for your purpose of Adoring the Host,
to keep the Body of Christ confined to it, and enclosed in it as a Prisoner,
till the Species corrupt, and so the prison is as it were opened, and the Body
let loose, and when that is gone, whether ye think it be the Species, or the
Substance of Bread that corrupts, I would gladly know; and surely then, when
the Body is gone, there is no need of such a miracle to keep the Accidents
without a Subject; if it be Bread, what think ye of this sudden Transmutation
from Bread to Flesh, and from Flesh to Bread again, and this latter without any
words from the Priest; but since Christ's Body must be so permanently in the
Host, not only in the act and use of the Sacrament, but at all other times; ye
are then forced to own, that as it is eaten in the Communion, as well by those
who have no faith, as by the most faithful Christians, so if any other Animals
should happen to eat the Host, taking it no doubt heretically for mere Bread,
that yet they truly take the Body of Christ, and eat it after some manner or
other, but whether it be after a natural manner in them or no, I don't know how
you have resolved, but most of the Schoolmen have agreed that Scandalous
question An mus, vel Porcus vel canis comedens hostiam suscipit corpus Christi?
Bishop Jewels reply Artic. 24. See Burchard de Correct. Miss. upon those
Questions, De vino in calice congelato, de musca vel aranea vel veneno mixto
cum sanguine, de vomitu post receptionem Sacramenti, Quando cadit corpus
Christi, Quando cadit sanguis Christi. fol. 51, 52.
in the Affirmative, Whether if a Mouse, or a Hig, or a Dog eat the Host, they
do partake of Christ's Body? Or as Thomas Aquinas, your most Angelick Doctor
says, consequently to this Opinion of yours Alter derogaret veritati corporis
Christi. p. 3. qu. 79.
, It would otherwise derogate from the truth of this Sacrament and Christ's
presence in it. So that wherever the Species are, there is always Christ's Body,
and whatever happens to them, happens to that also; If they fall to the ground,
Christ's Body does so to; and so, if they lie in a hollow Tooth, or hang but in
the least crum or drop upon a Communicants Beard; there according to their
principles, they and the Body must be worshipped with Latria; and if they be in a
Mouse or Flies body, that has got to them, the adorable Object still goes with
the Species, till they be corrupted; and whither the Species be corrupted, or
no if they be poisoned as they have sometimes been, or whether Christ be there
with the Accidents of the Poison, I cannot tell; but when the Species are in the
pix, he is as fast there, as he ever was in his Sepulcher, and to all
appearance as dead and senseless, and if the Species be Burnt or Gnawn, or
vomited out of the Stomach, before they are corrupted, all these misfortunes
belong as truly to Christ's Body as to them, and so worse indignities may be
thus offered every day to Christ glorious Body, than ever were offered to it,
in its state of Humility and Contempt upon Earth, when it was Spit upon, and
Scourged, and Pierced, and Crucified by the Jews. But Good God! that men should
think to Honor and Adore Christ and his Body, by thus exposing them to the
danger of the vilest Abuses! that humane reason should be so decayed and
besotted, as to believe and defend such palpable Absurdities! that Christianity
should be so shamefully and abominably exposed to all the World, by such an
extravagant Doctrine, and such an obnoxious practice and unreasonable Idolatry
as this is? God Almighty open all our Eyes, that we may not be given up to
blindness of Mind, and darkness of Understanding, and to the belief of Lies, as
most Idolaters generally were; but may it please him, who is the God of Truth,
to bring into the way of Truth, all such as have erred and are deceived, in
this or any other matter; in which charitable and constant Prayer of our
Church, which is much better than Cursing and Anathematizing, its Adversaries,
I hope, as well as its Friends will not refuse to join with it.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere are several mistakes of the Press, but most of them are so Plain and
Obvious, that it is hoped that every Reader will immediately see and correct
them without any trouble, and without any particular account of them.

Five Sermons of Contentment, one of Patience, and one of Resignation to the
Will of God, By Isaac Barrow, D. D. late Master of Trinity College in Cambridg.
Never Published before; in Octavo.

Printed for Brabazon Aylmer.

Licensed,

Aug. 3. 1686.
A DISCOURSE OF THE Communion in One Kind: IN ANSWER TO A TREATISE OF THE
BISHOP of MEAVX's, OF Communion under both Species Lately Translated into
English.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. MDCLXXXVII.

AN ANSWER TO THE PREFACE of the Publisher.
THe Translatour of the Bishop of Meaux's Book of Communion under both Species,
having told us why he made choice of this Author, whom he styles, The Treasury
of Wisdom, the Fountain of Eloquence, the Oracle of his Age, and in brief, to
speak all in a word, the Great James, formerly Bishop of Condom, now of Meaux:
Having thus brought forth this great Champion of the Roman Church, he makes a
plain Challenge with him to us of the Church of England, in these words: If
this Author write Reason, he deserves to be believed; if otherwise, he deserves
to be confuted: By this, I perceived he expected that we should be so civil as
to take notice of so great a Man as the Bishop of Meaux, or any thing that
bears his Name, and not let it pass unregarded by us, after it was for our
benefit, as he tells us, made English: and besides, I did not know but some
unwary persons among us might believe the reason he writes however bad; and
therefore I thought he deserved to be confuted, and ought by no means to go
without the civility and complement of an English Answer. This I doubt not
might have been very well spared, had the Publisher been pleased to have gone
on a little further with his Work of Translating, and obliged us, who are
strangers to the French Tongue, with one of those Answers which are made to de
Meaux's Book in that Language, but since he has not thought fit to do that, I
must desire him to accept of such Entertainment as our Country will afford him,
though it is something hard, that we must not only treat our Friends at home,
but have as many Strangers as they please put upon us: But we who cannot
Translate so well as others, which is a much easier part than to Write at ones
own charge, must beg leave of our French Adversaries, if we sometimes speak to
them in plain English, and the Bishop of Meaux must excuse me if Truth has
sometimes made me otherwise answer him, then if I were a Cure in his own
Diocese. Whoever has so great an opinion of the Bishop of Meaux's Virtue and
Learning, as to take matter of Fact upon his word, which the Translatour's
mighty Commendations were designed, no doubt, to beget in his Reader, must
believe the Communion in One Kind was the Practice of the Primitive and the
Catholic Church, which if it were true, would be a very great, if not
sufficient excuse for the Roman. This the Bishop asserts with all the
confidence in the World, and this his Book is designed to make out; and whoever
will not believe it, must necessarily question either the Learning of this
great Man, or else his Sincerity; I shall not dare to do the former, but his
late Pastoral Letter has given too much reason to suspect the latter. He that
can now tell the World, That there has been no Persecution in France, and that
none has suffered violence either in their Persons or their Estates there, for
their Religion; may be allowed to say, That the Primitive Church had the
Communion but in one Kind, a great while ago: But the one of these matters of
Fact deserves more, I think, to be confuted than the other.

I suppose it was for the sake of the Author that the Translatour chose this
subject of Communion in One kind, though he says, It is a point peradventure of
higher concern than any other now in debate between Papists and Protestants,
this being the main Stone of Offense and Rock of Scandal, and it having been
always regarded since the Reformation, as a mighty eyesore, and alleged as
one sufficient Cause of a voluntary departure and separation from the
Pre-existent Church of Rome. When this Pre-existent Church of Rome fell into
her Corrupt, Terrestrial, and Unchristian State, among other Corruptions, this
was one that gave just offense, and was together with many more, the Cause of
our separating from it, That it gave the Eucharist but in one kind, contrary to
Christ's Institution, and took away the Cup of Christ's precious Blood from the
People: But yet this point of highest concern is, in the judgment of the
Translatour, but a bare Ceremony, and upon the whole matter the difference
herein between the Church of England and the Roman, seems to him reducible in
great measure to mere Form and Ceremony. If it be, then I hope it may be easily
compromized and agreed, for I assure him I am as little as he for making wider
Divisions, already too great; nor do I approve of the Spirit of those who tear
Christ's seamless Garment for a mere Form and Ceremony; but we who are
sometimes thought fit to be called Heretics, and to be Censured and
Anathematized as differing in Essential matters from the Church of Rome, at
other times are made such good Friends to it, that we differ but very little,
and there is nothing but Form and Ceremony between us: But what is to
Accomodate this matter, and Reconcile this difference between the two Churches?
Why, the Doctrine of the Real Presence, in which, Both Churches, he says,
agree, that Christ our Savior is truly, really, wholly, yea, and substantially
present in the Sacrament. This is to close up the difference not only of
Communion in one kind, but of the Adoration of the Sacrament, and the Sacrifice
of Mass too in the Translatour's judgment: But does the Church of England then
agree with the Roman in the Real Presence of Christ's natural Body and Blood in
the Sacrament? Does it not expressly say the contrary, namely, That the natural
Body and Blood of our Savior Christ are in Heaven and not here, and that it is
against the truth of Christ's natural Body to be at one time in more places
than one Rubric after Office of Communion.
. So that though Christ be really present by his Spirit and the real Virtue and
Efficacy of his Body and Blood, be given in the Sacrament, yet his natutural
Body is by no means present there, either by Transubstantiation or by any other
way unintelligible to us, as the Translatour would insinuate; so that all those
consequences which he or others would willingly draw from the Real Presence of
Christ's natural Body in the Sacrament, as believed by us, do fall to the
ground; and I doubt he or I shall never be so happy as to make up this great
breach between the two Churches, however willing we may be to do it; but
instead of making a Reconciliation between them, which is impossible as long as
the Doctrines of each of them stand as they do; I shall endeavor to defend
that Article of the Church of England, which not only Modern Novellists, as
the Translatour calls those who are not for his Real Presence, and his
Reconciling way; but the most learned and ancient Protestants who have been
either Bishops, Priests, or Deacons in our Church, have owned and subscribed,
namely, That the Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the Lay People, for
both the parts of the Lord's Sacrament, by Christ's Ordinance and Commandment,
ought to be ministered to all Christian Men Article 30th.
.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Reader is desired to Correct the small Errata of the Press, without a
particular Account of them.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Communion in One Kind.
THE Controversy about the Communion in One Kind, is accounted by a late
French Writer upon that Subject, one of the chiefest and most capital
Controversies in Christian Religion Cum haec quaestio ac Controversia visa sit
semper in Religione Christiana praecipua ac capitalis. Boileau de praecepto
divino Commun. sub utraque specie. p. 217.
I suppose he means, that is, in difference between the Reformed and the Church
of Rome; it is indeed such a Case as brings almost all other matters between us
to an issue; namely to this Point, Whether the Church may give a Non obstante
to the Laws of Christ, and make other Laws contrary to his, by virtue of its
own Power and Prerogative? If it may in this case, it may in all others, and
therefore it is the more considerable Question, because a great many others
depend upon the Resolution of it: When it had been thus determined in the
Council of Constance, yet a great many were so dis-satisfied, namely, the
Bohemians to have the Cup taken from them, that the Council of Basil was
forced, upon their importunity, to grant it them again; and at the Council of
Trent, it was most earnestly pressed by the Germans and the French, by the
Ambassadors of those Nations, and by the Bishops, that the People might have
the Cup restored to them. The truth in this cause, and the advantage seems to
be so plain on the side of the Reformation, that as it required great Authority
to bear it down, so it calls for the greatest Art and Sophistry plausibly to
oppose it: One would think the case were so evident, that it were needless to
say much for it, and impossible to say any thing considerable against it; but
it is some men's excellency to show their skill in a bad cause, and Monsieur de
Meaux has chosen that Province, to make an experiment of his extraordinary Wit
and Learning, and to let us see how far those will go to perplex and entangle
the clearest Truth: He has mixed a great deal of boldness with those as it was
necessary for him, when he would pretend that Communion in one kind was the
Practice of the Primitive Church, and that it was as effectual as in both, and
that the Cup did not belong to the substance of the Institution, but was wholly
indifferent to the Sacrament, and might be used or not used as the Church
thought fit: How horribly false and erroneous those Pleas of his are, the
following Discourse will sufficiently make out; and though he has said as much,
and with as much artifice and subtilty as is possible in this cause, yet there
being another Writer later then him Boileau de praecepto divino commun. Sub
utraque specie. Paris, 1685.
who denis that there is any Divine Precept for Communion in both kinds, and
who has designedly undertaken the Scripture part of this Controversy, which
Monsieur de Meaux has only here and there cunningly interwoven in his
Discourse: I resolve to consider and examine it as it lies in both those
Authors; and though I have chosen my own method to handle it, which is, First,
from Scripture, then from Antiquity, and lastly from the Reasonings and
Principles made use of by our Adversaries; yet I shall all along have a
particular regard to those two great men, and keep my eye upon them in this
Treatise, so as to pass by nothing that is said by either of them, that has any
strength or show in it; for my design is to defend the Doctrine of our own
Church in this matter, which our Adversaries have thought fit to attaque, and
to fall upon, not with their own, but the borrowed forces of the Bishop of
Meaux, whose great name and exploits are everywhere famous and renowned; but
since we have all Christian Churches in the World, except the Roman, to be our
seconds in this Cause, we shall not fear to defend them and our selves, and so
plain a Truth against all the cunning and Sophistry of our Adversaries, though
it be never so artificially, and dressed after the French Mode.

We will begin with Scripture, which ought to be our only Rule, not only in
matters of Faith, which should be founded upon nothing less than a Divine
Revelation, but in matters of pure positive and arbitrary Institution, as the
Sacraments are; for they depend merely upon the will and pleasure, the mind and
intention of him that appointed them; and the best, and indeed the only way to
know that, is, by recurring to his own Institution; as we know the mind of a
Testator by going to his last Will and Testament, and by consulting that, do
best find how he has ordered those things that were of his own free and
arbitrary disposal. And by this way we shall find, that the Church of Rome by
taking away the Cup, has plainly violated the Institution of our blessed
Savior, and deprived the People of a considerable part of that Legacy which he
bequeathed to them. Let us lay therefore before us the Institution of our
Savior, as we find it in the three Evangelists, and in St. Paul as he received
it of the Lord.

Matthew 26.26, 27, 28. Mark 14.22, 23, 24. Luke 22.19, 20. 1 Corinthians
11.23, 24, 25. JESUS took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to
the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. And he took the cup, and
gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of this; for this is my
blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.
JESUS took bread, and blessed, and brake it, and gave to them and said, Take,
eat: this is my body. And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks he gave
it to them, and they all drank of it. And he said unto them, This is my blood
of the new testament, which is shed for many. And he took bread, and gave
thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my body which is
given for you, this do in remembrance of me. Likewise also the cup after
supper, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for
you. The LORD JESUS, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread; and
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is my body
which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner
also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament
in my blood: this do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.

From all these it evidently appears, that our Savior appoints the Cup as well
as the Bread, and commands that to be drunk as much as the other to be eat: And
two of the Evangelists remark that particularly of the Cup, which they do not
of the Bread, that they all drank of it, and that Christ said expressly to them,
Drink ye all of it: As if the infinite Wisdom of God which foresaw all future
events, and all the after-errours that should arise about this Sacrament, had
had some especial regard to this very thing, and designed to prevent the abuse
and mistake of those who would not have all Christians drink of this Cup, as
well as eat of the Bread. What other reason there should be of those particular
and remarkable words in St. Matthew and St. Mark, relating to the Cup more than
to the Bread; I believe it will be hard to find out, for Christ gave them the
Bread just as he did the Cup, and there was no more danger that any of them at
that time should omit drinking the one, any more than eating the other; nor did
there need any greater caution that we know of, or more particular command in
reference to themselves for the one more than the other; and yet no doubt there
was some great and peculiar reason for St. Matthew and St. Mark's adding of
those words, of which there can be no such probable account given, as their
having a respect and relation to after Ages, as many other things in the
Scripture have, which was written for the use, not only of the present, but
all times of the Church; and if these were spoken to the Apostles only as
Priests, as the Roman Sophisters pretend, though without any ground, as we
shall show by and by, there cannot then be given any reason for them as yet,
for there is no such corruption yet got into any part of the Christian Church,
as to forbid the Priests to drink of the Cup; and therefore it cannot be said
that this remark or precaution was upon their account, unless the Romanists
will think fit to take it to themselves, upon the account of their not allowing
their very Priests to Communicate of the Cup, unless when they Minister and
Consecrate; and so will have it regard only that other abuse of theirs which
is unjustifiable, even upon their own grounds, to wit, That the assistent
Priests are not to receive it, though Christ by their own confession said to
the Priests who were present, Drink ye all of it: Which is the best way that I
know, for them to come off of those words by their own Principles. For to avoid
the force of those words, and to elude the plain Command and Institution of our
Savior, about the Cup's being given to all Christians, they say, The Apostles
received it only in the capacity of Priests; and that our Savior's Command,
Drink ye all of it, belongs only to Priests, and was given to the Apostles
merely as such; nay, Monsieur Boileau says, Igitur haec verba S. Matthei,
bibete ex hoc omnes and haec S. Marci, and biberant ex illio omnes neminem
hominem praeter duodecim Apostolos spectant aut attinent. Boileau de pracepto
divino Commun. Sub utraque specie. p. 188.
that those words in St. Matthew, Drink ye all of it, and in St. Mark, they all
drank of it: Respect no man whatsoever, nor belong to no other man but to the
twelve Apostles; and Monsieur de Meaux tells us, P. 237.
that these words were addressed to the Apostles only who were present, and
had their entire accomplishment, when in effect they all drunk of it. Then it
seems none but the Apostles themselves, no other Priests have a right or a
command to drink of the Cup, but only the Apostles: And this they might say if
they pleased, upon as good grounds, and defend with as much reason, as that the
Apostles only drank of it as Priests; but I suppose they do not intend to
improve this notion so far, but mean only the same with their Brethren who
say, that those words concern the Apostles, not only in their own persons, but
as Priests, and as bearing the persons of all Christian Priests, in which
capacity alone they received the Cup and were commanded by our Savior to drink
of it; whereas they received the Bread as Laymen, and as representing the
whole body of private and ordinary Christians. What a sudden change is here in
the Apostles! they who sat down as Laymen, and as Laymen took the Bread just
before, have their capacity altered in a trice, and are made Priests in a
moment: Yes, say they, so they were, at that very time they were made Priests,
whilst they were sitting at Table with Christ, and Celebrating this his last
Supper; the first and only ordination that ever was, either in the Jewish or
Christian Church, in the time of eating and siting at Table. And they may set
up, I dare say, for the first Authors among all the Christian Writers that ever
were of this Opinion that is now held by them; That Christ at his last Supper
appointed not only one, but two Sacraments; that of Orders as well as that of
the Eucharist; and the first without any proper Solemnity for such a purpose,
without any outward Action or any Words, one would think, importing any such
thing: But they were made Priests; say they, by virtue of those words, Hoc
facite, Do this; which Christ spoke to them after he had given them the Bread.
This is a very short and a quick form of Ordination; and had it been known to
be one sooner, for it is a very late discovery, I suppose the Roman Church would
have kept to that in the Ordaining Priests, as they do to Hoc est Corpus, in
Consecrating the Sacramental Bread: But this short form whereby they will have
the Apostles made Priests so suddenly and unexpectedly, happens to be too
quick, and to make them Priests a little too soon, which is a very unlucky
thing for their purpose; for Christ said those words, Hoc facite, do this; just
as he gave them the Bread, and spoke them in one continued sentence, with,
Take, eat: this is my body; so that whether he gave the Bread severally to each
of them, or they took it as it was upon the table, as it is said, they divided
the Cup among themselves; it cannot be supposed, but that those words hoc
facite were spoken by Christ, before the Apostles did receive the Bread, or at
least before they ate it; so that it might as fairly be pretended, and as
truly, that the Apostles ate the Bread as Priests, as well as drank the Wine as
such; for they were made as much Priests by those words, before they ate the
Bread, as before they drank the Wine: If we do suppose they did receive the
Bread into their hands, before those words were pronounced by our Savior;
which is the most that can be, yet they could not eat it before they were. And
so this fine and subtle Hypothesis which they have invented to deprive the
Laiety of the Cup, will deprive them of the Bread too, and will in its
consequence, and by the same train of arguing, tend to take away the whole
Sacrament from the People, and make it peculiar to the Priests, as some of the
Jewish Sacrifices were, and the People shall not at all partake of the Altar,
but it shall be reserved as a peculiar right and privilege of the Priests, to
which the Laity ought not to pretend, because the Apostles took the Sacrament
only as Priests, and were made Priests fore they either ate the Bread or drank
the Wine; this would make a greater difference and distinction between the
Priests and the Laiety, and tend more to preserve the honor and esteem of one
above the other. Which is the great reason they themselves give, and no doubt a
true one, for their taking away the Cup from the People; and I don't question,
but so great a Wit, and so eloquent an Artist in pleading, as the Bishop of
Meaux is, who can say a great deal for any cause, be it never so bad, may with
as good grounds, and as great a show of reason, justify if he please, the
taking away the whole Sacrament from the Laiety as the Cup, and may to this
purpose improve and advance this notion of the Apostles, receiving both kinds
as Priests, to prove the Laiety have a right to neither, and may take off the
necessity of both parts as well as one, by pretending that the real effect and
virtue of the Sacrament is received some other way, by the Sacrifice of the
Mass, or by Spiritual Manducation, or by some thing else without partaking any
of the Symbols, as well as without partaking all of them as Christ has
appointed, for if the effect and virtue of the Sacrament depend upon Christ's
Institution, then both are necessary, if it may be had without keeping to that,
then neither is so, but of this afterward, when we come to examine his grounds
and reasons. I shall make some Reflections upon our Saviors Institution of
this Sacrament, and offer some considerations against these pretenses and
Sophistries of our Adversaries.

1. I would ask them whither those words of our Savior, Do this in remembrance
of me, do not belong to all Christians as well as to the Apostles? if they do
not, then where is there any command given to Christians for to receive the
Sacrament, either in both or in one kind? Where is there any command at all for
Christians to Celebrate or come to the Lords Supper? or to observe this
Christian Rite, which is the peculiar mark and badge of our Profession, and the
most solemn part of Christian Worship? Those words surely contain in them as
plain a Command, and as direct an Obligation upon all Christians to perform
this Duty to the end of the World, as they did upon the Apostles at that time;
or else we must say with the Socinians, That the Sacrament was only a
temporary Rite, that belonged only to the Apostles, and was not to continue in
the Church, or be observed by all Christians in all Ages: But St. Paul says, 1
Cor. 11.26.
we do hereby show, or declare the Lord's death till he come, by this solemn
way of eating Bread broken, and Wine poured out; we are to remember Christ who
dyed for us, and is gone into Heaven, till he come again, when we shall live
with him, and enjoy his Presence for ever: Christ has given a command to all
Christians to do this, and they are to Do this in remembrance of him; they are
as much obliged to this, as the Apostles were; and the command does as much
belong to the People, to receive the Sacrament, as to the Apostles, or to their
Successors to give it them. The Apostles and Christian Priests are hereby
commanded to do their parts, which is, not only to receive, but to dispense
and distribute the Sacrament; and the People or Christian Laiety, are commanded
to do theirs, which is, to receive it: The Apostles are to do that which Christ
did, to Bless the Bread and break it, and give it to be eaten; to bless the
Cup, and give it to be drunk by the Communicants; and the Communicants are to
eat the Bread and drink the Cup: and if they do not both of them do this that
belongs to them, and perform those proper parts of their Duty, which are here
commanded them, they are both guilty of an unexcusable disobedience to this
plain command of Christ, Do this in remembrance of me. No body ever denied that
those words, and this command of Christ, belonged to the Apostles; but to say
they belong to them alone, and not to all Christians, is to take away the
Command and Obligation which all Christians have to receive the Holy Supper.

2. This command of Christ, as it obliges all Christians to receive the
Sacrament, the Laiety as well as the Clergy, so it obliges them to receive it
in both kinds; and as it obliges the Clergy to give the People the Sacrament,
so it obliges them to give it in both kinds; for the command of Doing this in
remembrance of Christ, belongs as much to one kind as the other; and is as
expressly added concerning the Cup, as concerning the Bread; for so it is in St.
Paul beyond all contradiction, and to the unanswerable confusion of our
Adversaries, who would pretend it belongs only to the Bread; Bellarmine
observing these words in St. Luke, to be added only after the giving of the
Bread, for they are in neither of the two other Evangelists, falls into a
mighty triumph, and into a most Religious fit of Catholic Devotion, admiring
the wonderful Providence of GOD, Mirabilis est providentia Dei in sanctis
literis, nam ut non haberent haeretici justam excusationem, sustulit eis omnem
tergiversando occasionem: Nam Lucas illud, Hoc facite, posuit post datum
Sacramentum. Sub specie panis, post datum autem calicem illud non repetivit, ut
intelligeremus jussisse Dominum ut sub specie panis omnibus distribueretur
Sacramentum, sub specie autem vini non utrem. Bellarm. de Sacram. Euchar. l. 4.
c. 25.
that to take away all Heretical Tergiversation, this should so happen, that it
might be plainly understood, that the Wine was not to be given to all, and that
this command did not belong to that, but only to the Bread: But this shows how
overhasty he was to catch at any thing, though by the plainest mistake in the
World, that might help him in his straights, and how over-glad to find any
thing that might seem to favor and relieve him in his distressed cause; and
how his zeal and forwardness out run, not only his judgment, but even his
memory; for if he had but turned to St. Paul, and had but thought of this
passage in him, where he adds these very words, Do this in remembrance of me,
to the Cup as well as to the Bread, it would have quite spoiled his mighty
Observation, and made him ashamed of it, and not have suffered him to be guilty
of so horrid a flip. But the Bishop of Meaux espied this, P. 255.
as it is hard to miss it; and what way has he to put by the force of those
words, which so undeniably belong to the Cup, as well as the Bread? He says,
They import only a conditional order, to do this in remembrance of Christ, as
often as one shall do it? and not an order absolute to do it. But does not this
conditional order imply an absolute one, to do it often; and virtually forbid
the not doing it at all? if he had gone on but to the very next verse, would he
not have found that St. Paul gives the same conditional order concerning eating
the Bread, as both here and there concerning drinking the Cup? As often as ye
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show forth, or do ye show forth,
(...), the Lord's death till he come, And do not those words, though spoke
conditionally of the Bread, yet absolutely order the eating of it, when we
received the Sacrament? if they do, as sure no body will deny, then they as
well absolutely order the drinking the Cup too, when we do so, Affirmative
precepts, such as this is, oblige us not absolutely at all times, as when ye
pray, when ye fast, are only conditional commands; but yet they import an
absolute command to perform those duties, and when we do so, to perform them so
as Christ has appointed us to do: and thus we have an absolute precept in the
Gospel, to receive the Sacrament, which he is very willing we should not have,
P. 256.
and when we do so, we are to receive it as Christ commanded we should, by
eating Bread, and drinking Wine, and doing both those in remembrance of him.

3. Christ's own Institution, had there been no such particular Commands to
Drink, as well as to Eat, and to Do both in remembrance of him; I say, his own
Institution of the Sacrament, both by Bread and Wine, should suffice, methinks,
to show us what we should do, when we Celebrate the same Sacrament that he did;
namely, use both Bread and Wine; and eat and drink it as was done then; if it
be the same Sacrament that he celebrated with his Disciples, why do not we
celebrate it as he did? why should we not observe his own Institution? but
without any order from him, and contrary to what he did, leave out part of it;
and that part of it which is as considerable and as remarkable in his
Institution, as the other? If from the bare Institution of Christ, all
Christians are bound to receive this Sacrament, which surely they are; then
from thence they are bound as much to drink the Cup, as to eat the Bread; for
both are equally instituted. If the Institution, for of that I speak now, as
it is in St. Matthew and St. Mark, without the additional command of Do this; if
that do not oblige to drink the Cup, neither does it oblige to eat the Bread;
for that is no more in the Institution then the other: And if the Church has
such a power as to take away the Cup, notwithstanding the Institution, it may
have a power to take away the Bread too, notwithstanding the Institution; for
the one is as much in the Institution as the other; and if the Cup be not an
Essential part of the Sacrament, which is the other thing they say, and which
the Bishop of Meaux insists on, which I shall examine afterward: then neither
is the Bread, so far as appears by the Institution, and so neither of them may
be necessary, and both of them may be taken away, notwithstanding Christ's own
Institution of both. Which, though it be the most presumptuous boldness, and
the most horrid Sacrilege that can be, yet shall I say no more to it at
present, but what St. Cyprian does upon the like case, of those who would omit
the Wine in the Sacrament, and use water instead of it. Quod si nec minima
demandatis Christi licet solvere, quanto magis tam magna tam grandia tam ad
ipsum dominicae passionis and nostrae Redemptionis Sacramentum pertinentia fas
non est infringere aut in aliud quam quod divinitus institutum sit, humana
institutione mutare? Cyprian ep. 63. ad Caecilium.
But if it be not lawful to loose any one of the least Commands of Christ; how
much more is it not lawful to infringe so great and so weighty ones? and such
as the very Sacrament of our Lord's Passion, and our Redemption; and to change
it by Humane Institution into quite another thing, then what it is by Divine
Institution.

4. The reason added by our Savior, to his Institution, and Command of, Drink
ye all of it; Matthew. 26.28.
for this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for you; as in St.
Luke, for many; as in St. Matthew and St. Mark, for the remission of sins: This
shows the Cup, not only to have a peculiar use, as well as the Bread, and a
particular mistical relation to his Blood shed or poured out; but that it
belongs to all those to drink of it, for whom Christ's Blood was shed; who are
to have remission of sins by it, and who have a right to the new Covenant which
Christ has purchased and established in his Blood; which I suppose, are the
Christian Laiety, as well as the Priests; though I do not think with Bellarmine
Dispute de Euch. l. 4.
that all Turks and Infidels ought to have the Cup, because Christ's Blood was
shed for them too; but I presume, he will not say, they have the same right to
it, or interest in it, that Christians have; and yet I own they ought as much
to have the Cup, as they ought to turn Christians, that is, they ought to do
both: But yet, first I think to become Christians, and be Baptized, before they
have ordinarily a right either to Christ's Blood, or to the Sacrament; and it
must seem very strange, and grate very much upon all Christian ears, to have it
said, that Turks and Infidels have a right to the Cup and Blood of Christ, as
well as Christians, from this reason here of our Savior to his Disciples,
concerning which it is, I think, very observable, that to partake of the
Sacrificial Blood, and to drink that Sacramentally, which was shed for the
expiation of our Sins, is a peculiar and extraordinary privilege allowed to
Christians. The Jews were forbid all blood, for this reason given by God
himself, Levit. 1^.10, 11.
For it is the blood that makes an atonement for the soul, and I have given it
to you upon the altar, to make an atonement for your souls: The life of the
Beast which was given, and accepted by God, for the life of the Offender, that
was forfeited by the Law, was supposed to be in the Blood; as it is there added,
the life of the flesh is in the blood, and therefore the Blood of the Sacrifice
was poured out, and so given to God at the Altar; the peculiar virtue and
atonement of Christ's Sacrifice is attributed to his Blood, We have redemption
through his blood, Ephesians. 1.7.
We are justified by his blood. Romans 5.9.
In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins,
Coloss. 1.14.
And without shedding of blood, either under the Law or under the Gospel, there
was no remission to be had Heb. 9.22.
. Now for Christians to partake and Communicate of that Blood in the Sacrament,
which was shed and sacrificed for them, and by which they have atonement and
expiation of Sins, this is a peculiar favor, and singular privilege, which
Christ has vouchsafed to Christians, and which he takes notice of at his
Institution of this Sacrament, Drink ye all of it, for this is my blood of the
new Testament, which is shed for you, for the remission of sins. The Author of
the Treatise de caena Domini, in the Works of St. Cyprian Nova est hujus
Sacramenti doctrina, and scholae Evangelicae hoc primum Magisterium
protulerunt, and doctore Christo primum haec mundo innotuit disciplina, ut
biberent sanguinem Christiani, cujus esum legis antiquae auctoritas
districtissime interdicit, Lex quippe esum sanguinis prohibet, Evangelicum
praecipit ut bibatur.
has remarked this, as first brought in by Christ, and as a new thing belonging
to the Sacrament of the Gospel, That Christians should drink Blood, which the
old Law did absolutely forbid, but this, says he, the Gospel commands; and St.
Chrysostom (...). Homil. 18. in 2 Cor.
observes, It is not now as it was formerly, when the Priest ate of that which
the People might not partake of; but now one Body and one Cup is offered to
all. So it was it seems in his time, and they had not then learnt the way of
drinking the Blood, by eating the Body, which now they pretend to do in the
Church of Rome; we do, say they, partake of the Blood and the Body both
together, for the Blood is in the Body, and necessarily joined with it; but
besides, that, this depends upon that (...), the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, upon which, this and a great many other things are built,
when it is yet too heavy and ruinous to bear its own weight; yet this cannot
here do the business, for we are to drink the Blood, and not to eat it, that
is, we are to partake of it, as separated from the Body, as shed for us, or
else it is not a Sacramental partaking of it; we are to receive Christ's Body
as it was a Sacrifice for us, but it was not a Sacrifice but as the Blood was
poured out and separated from it, and we cannot any other way partake of the
Sacrificial Blood, which is to be drunk by all Christians.

5. It is a most groundless fancy, and an Opinion perfectly precarious, to
suppose the Apostles were made Priests, at our Savior's Institution of the
Sacrament, by those words, Hoc facite, and that they received the Cup only as
Priests. None of the Ancients who write upon this Sacrament, or upon these
words of its Institution, ever thought so; nor did it ever enter into the head
of any man, till a few late Schoolmen invented this new subtilty, that they
might have something to say against the clearest cause, and to shift off, if
they could, the plainest Evidence in the World; and though they now generally
take up with this Sophistical Evasion, which Monsieur Boileau Creavit and
instituit Sacerdotes his verbis hoc facite. p. 189.
insists upon, yet some of the wisest men among them are ashamed of it: Estius
owns, that this appears not at all solid, nor agreeable to ancient Interpreters,
Nobis parum solidum videtur nec apud veteres interpretes. Did. 12.. 11.
and confesses, that Hoc facite, belongs to the common People eating and
drinking of this Sacrament, and that St. Paul refers it to them Et Paulus 1
Cor. 11. illad facere etiam ad plebem refert edenter, and bibentem de hoc
Sacramento, quando ait hoc facite, quotiescunque
. Suarez acknowledges, it is not convincing Hoc argumenti genus per se non
convincere. Disp. 74. Tom. 3.
. And Alfonsus a Castro Contra haeres, Tit. Euch. p. 99.
would not make use of it, because he says, it does not appear, whether those
words were spoken by Christ before, or after he gave the Eucharist to the
Apostles, and he rather thinks after, and that they took it not as Priests Ib.
. He was aware of a difficulty, if the Apostles took the Cup only as Priests,
and by the right of Priests, at the first Institution, then it would be
contrary to that, to have any but Priests receive the Cup: And then, why is it
ever given to the Laiety, as it is sometimes by the Pope's favor and
concession; if it belong only to Priests, and the Priests only have right to
it, from the first Institution, because the Apostles received it only as
Priests? But so inconsistent are they to their own Principles, that they do not
give the Cup, even to their Priests, unless when they themselves Consecrate and
Officiate: None but the Minister Conficiens is to receive that, though never so
many other Priests be by, so much at variance are they, between this their
pretense, and their own practice, and so do they fight, even with their own
shadows; if the Apostles received the Cup as Priests, Why then do not all
Priests receive it, as well as the Priest who Consecrates, if only he that
Consecrates be to receive it, then by this rule, the Apostles should not have
received it at the first Institution, for they did not then Consecrate? Christ
was then alone, the Minister Conficiens, and so according to them, he ought
only to have received it, and not the Apostles, and yet it is most probable
that Christ did not himself receive either the Cup, or the Bread, so that if
they will keep close to this whimsical Notion of theirs, the Minister
Conficiens is not to receive at all, but to Consecrate and give to the other
Priests that are present; but further, if the Apostles were made Priests by
those words, Hoc facite, which they so earnestly contend, and spend so much
Critical learning to show that facere signifies to Sacrifice, then they were
twice made Priests at the same time, for those words were said by our Savior,
as St. Paul Witnesses, not only after giving the Bread, but repeated again
also after the Cup, so that the Apostles were doubly Consecrated, and the
Character of Priests, was twice Imprinted upon them at the same time, which is
another difficulty with which they must be encumbred according to their own
principles, for though this Opinion be wholly Imaginary, yet like the
Nightmare, it is a real weight lying upon them, and I shall leave them to sweat
under it, and get it off as well as they can.

6. Whatever be the effects and benefits which we receive by partaking of this
Blessed Sacrament, they depend upon the Institution of it, and are not
ordinarily to be had without observing of that; I say ordinarily, because Cases
of Necessity dispense with positive precepts, as if a sick man cannot swallow
the Bread, about which there is a Provision in the Eleventh Council of Toledo,
if the natural Infirmity of another Stomach be such, that he cannot drink
Wine, which the French Discipline speaks of, and which Monsieur de Meaux P. 181.
makes an Objection against them, if the place be such that no Wine is to be
had or procured, as in Norway where Pope Innocent the Eighth allowed them to
Celebrate without Wine; in those extraordinary Cases, God has not so tied the
inward Grace to the outward Sign, but that he can give it without it; as if a
Catechumen willing and desirous of Baptism, die without it, because he could
not have it, yet the Church has always supposed he may have the benefit of it,
and so I charitably hope that the Pious and Religious Laiety in the Church of
Rome, shall have the benefit of the Blood of Christ, though they are deprived
of it in the Sacrament, and through the mere fault of their Governors, and of
their Priests, are excluded from it, and forced to violate the Divine
Institution, which is all that Calixtus and others which Monsieur de Meaux P.
277.
is willing to take advantage of, charitably allow, as not being willing to
exclude any one for Salvation, for what he cannot help; but this is no manner
of prejudice to the cause that we defend, and no excuse in the World for
breaking the Institution of Christ, and altering his positive precept without
any necessity, for though God can give the inward Grace, and no doubt, but he
will do it in extraordinary Cases without the Sacrament, without either the
whole, or any part of it, yet, he will not ordinarily do this, nor is it
ordinarily to be had, or to be expected, without keeping to that Institution,
by virtue of which, God has annexed, and promised such inward virtues, and
benefits to such outward signs, and holy Symbols, and Ceremonies, which he
himself has appointed; and therefore, though God, if he had pleased, might have
annexed the whole virtue and effect of the Sacrament, to the eating the Bread,
or to the drinking the Wine alone, or might have given it without either of
them, yet he having by the Institution, appointed both parts of the Sacrament,
has annexed the grace and virtue to both, and not to one only. Monsieur de
Meaux, will needs have the whole fruit, and virtue, and essential effect of the
Sacrament, to be given by one species, which is the great principle he goes
upon, which I shall more fully examine afterward, but if the virtue and
essential effect depend upon the Institution, and it can depend upon nothing
else, and if both species be instituted by Christ, as I have shown, then the
virtue and effect depends upon both species, and not upon one. Monsieur de
Meaux asks, Whether in the very moment, the Body of our Lord is received, all
the effects be not likewise received P. 328.
? I answer No, because all that is required in the Institution, is not then
received. He farther asks, Whether the blood can add any thing essential? I
answer Yes, because that also is in the Institution; if one of the Apostles had
stopped our Savior, when he had given them the Bread, and told them this was his
Body, and asked him this very question, I ask, whither he thinks this would have
hindered him from going on with the Cup, because they had already received the
whole virtue and effect of the Sacrament without that; and nothing essential
could be added by that? Christ, it seems by the Institution, did go on to the
Cup, after he had given the other species, and to say, he did not give any
essential virtue, or efficacy by the Cup, is an unwarrantable boldness, and
blasphemous impudence, which may as well deny, that he gave any by the Bread;
this is to make the Cup a very empty sign, and naked figure, devoid of all
inward virtue and efficacy, and to serve as de Meaux would have it, only for
Representation, and a more full and express Signification P. 176.
, in which he joins us to the Cup, with those his Adversaries, who have the
meanest thoughts of the Sacrament, and indeed, it is to make the Cup wholly
superfluous, and unnecessary, as to the conveying or exhibiting any real
Virtue, or inward Grace, which is to be received thereby, and as Monsieur de
Meaux is forced to own, when he answers that demand, to what purpose then, was
the Institution of both species P. 179.
? to make it only a more full Image, and Representation of the Sacrifice of
Christ, but not to give us any of the virtue or efficacy of it.

Christ, he says, cannot separate the virtue, or effect, that any other Grace
should accompany his blood, then the same in ground and substance which
accompanys his body P. 182.
, but he can make the whole Virtue and Grace accompany and depend upon both the
Sacramental Body, and Sacramental Blood together, and so he has done by his
Institution, according to which, the Sacramental Grace is not to be expected
ordinarily, without both; but he may deprive those Persons wholly of this, who
violate his Institution, and who receive not both species, as he has appointed
and commanded team; which is a very dreadful consideration, which should make
men afraid to dare to alter any such thing as Christ's own Institution, upon
which the whole virtue of the Sacraments does depend.

7. It Is from the Institution of the Sacrament, that we know what belongs to
the substance of it, and is essential to it, and what is only circumstantial
and accidental: I own there were several things, even at the Institution of it
by Christ, which were only circumstantials; as the place where, the time when,
the number of persons, to whom, the posture in which he gave it; for all these
are plainly, and in their own nature, circumstantial matters; so that no body
can think it necessary or essential to the Sacrament, that it be Celebrated in
an upper Room, at night after Supper, only with twelve persons, and those
sitting or lying upon Beds, as the Jews used to do at Meals; for the same thing
which Christ bids them do, may be done, the same Sacramental Action performed
in another place, at another time, with fewer or more persons, and those
otherwise postured or situated; but it cannot be the same Sacrament or same
Action, if Bread be not blessed and eaten, if Wine be not blessed and drunken,
as they were both then blessed by Christ, and eaten and drunk by his Apostles:
The doing of these is not a circumstance, but the very thing it self, and the
very substance and essence of the Sacrament; for without these we do not do
what Christ did, whereas we may do the very same thing which he did, without
any of those circumstances with which he did it: Thus in the other Sacrament of
Baptism or washing with water, whether that be done by washing the whole body
in immersion, or by washing a part of the Body in sprinkling, is but a
circumstance, that is not necessary or essential to Baptism, but to wash with
Water, is the very thing in which Baptism consists, and the very substance of
the Sacrament which is essential and unalterable; the quantity of Water with
which we wash is not, no more is the quantity of Bread and Wine which we eat
and drink in the Sacrament but eating Bread and drinking Wine is as essential
to the Eucharist, as washing with Water is to Baptism. Monsieur de Meaux
betrays the great weakness of his Cause, and his own inability to defend it,
when to take off the Argument from the Institution, he says, P. 168.
We do not give the Lord's Supper at Table, or during Supper, as Jesus Christ
did, neither do we regard, as necessary, many other things which he observed.
And when he recurs to Baptism P. 173.
as if by not using immersion, we did not observe the Institution of that
Sacrament, when (...) so plainly signifies washing with water, without plunging
or immerging, as Mark 7.4. (...), except they are washed or baptized when they
return from the Market, they eat not, and the (...) the washings of Pots, and
of Cups, Mark 7.4.8. and in the washing of the dead, and diverse washings (...)
of the Jews, Hebrews 9.10. which were without any plunging or immerging, as is
sufficiently made out by all Authors, against the Anabaptists: A great man,
must be mightily put to his shifts, when he is fain to use such poor cavils,
and such little evasions as these, against a plain command, and a clear
Institution; where to drink is as evidently commanded, as to eat, and where it
is equally commanded to do both; and where it appears that doing both those in
remembrance of Christ, make up the very substance and essence of what was done,
and commanded by him, in the Institution. The matter of the Sacraments is
certainly of the substance of them; Why else might we not Baptize without Water
as well as perform the Eucharist without Bread and Wine? This the Schools are
unanimously agreed in, and this was the Argument of St. Cyprian, against the
Aquarii, who used Water instead of Wine; of Pope Julius against other
Heretics, who used Milk; and of Thomas Aquinas, against the Artotyritae, who
offered Bread and Cheese together in this Sacrament; they tell them, that
Excluduntur per hoc quod Christus, hoc Sacramentum instituit in pane. Aquinas
Part 3. Quest. 24.
Christ Instituted this Sacrament in another Element, Nulli lac sed panem
tantum and calicem sub hoc Sacramento noscimus dedisse. Julius P. apud Gratian
de Consecr.
that he did not give Milk, but Bread and Wine in this Sacrament; and that
Admonitos nos scias ut in calice offerendo Traditio observetur, neque aliquid
fiat a nobis quam quod pro nobis Dominus prior fecerit, nemini fas est ab eo
quod Christus Magister and precepit and gessit humana and novella institutione
decedere.
they ought to observe the Divine Tradition, neither ought any thing to be
done, but what was first done by our Lord; for it is not lawful for any by any
Humane and Novel Institution, to depart from what Christ our Master commanded
and did; and that this was a sufficient confutation of them, that they did not
do that which our Lord Jesus Christ, the Author and Teacher of this Sacrifice,
both did and Taught Non hoc faciunt quod Jesus Christus Dominus Deus noster
Sacrificis hujus Auctor and Doctor fecit and docuit. Cypr. Ep. 63.
. They all suppose it necessary to use the Elements which Christ used and
appointed, and that because of his Institution, by which it plainly appears,
what belongs to the Essence and Substance of this Sacrament, to wit, Eating of
Bread and drinking Wine blessed, in remembrance of Christ. It must be a very
strange thing sure, to make these to be but circumstances in the Sacrament, and
to doubt whether they do belong to the substance and essence of it, and to
pretend that we cannot know this from the Institution: Monsieur de Meaux, could
not have done this in earnest, had he not considered the cause he was to
defend, more than the Institution of Christ; in which, no man that will not
shut his eyes but must see what belongs to the Essence and Substance of the
Sacrament.

It is no less boldness to say, as Monsieur Boileau P. 191.
and others do, though de Meaux was too wise to offer any such thing in all his
Book, That Christ himself varied from his own Institution after his
Resurrection, and gave the Sacrament to some of the Disciples at Emmaus, under
the one Species of Bread. And that the Apostles after his Ascension, and the
sending of the Spirit upon them, Celebrated the Eucharist together with the
whole Multitude of Believers, only in Bread. It will be very strange if the
Apostles, the very first time they gave the Sacrament, should be found to break
Christ's Institution and Command about it, which were so very plain; if St.
Peter and the rest of those holy men did this, I shall never blame the Church
of Rome, nor any of his Successors for doing it afterward, and if they did it
just after they were inspired by the Holy Ghost, and had that in such a
Miraclous manner given unto them; I shall conclude, it was not the office of
that blessed Spirit to bring all things to their remembrance which Christ had
said unto them, as he told them it should be, but to teach them things quite
contrary to what he had a little before commanded and appointed them: And it
will be more strange if Christ himself, after his Resurrection, should give the
Sacrament in another manner then he had done four days before. Let us therefore
examine those places from which all these strange things are pretended, and see
if any such matter is to be found in them, which I confess, will be very
surprising, if they be: As to the first, St. Luke tells us, Chap. 24. That the
same day Christ was risen, two of the Disciples, the name of one of which was
Cleophas, going to Emmaus, a Village near to Jerusalem; Christ, as they were
Communing together about him and his Resurrection, drew near, and went along
with them, and discourst to them about those things, as a person unknown; and
going into a House and fitting at meat with them, he took bread and blessed it,
and brake, and gave to them, v. 30. Here, say they, Christ gave the Sacrament,
and gave it only in Bread, for he took bread and blessed, and brake, and gave
to them; which are the very words used at his giving his last Supper: But must
Christ always be supposed to give the Sacrament whenever he took bread and
blessed, and brake it, and gave it to others? Then he did so when he filled the
five thousand with five Loaves and two Fishes, for then he looked up to heaven
and blessed, and brake the loaves, and gave them to others, Mark 6.41. Mat.
14.19. And so he did when he filled four thousand at another time, he took the
seven loaves and gave thanks, and brake, and gave to his disciples to set
before them, Mark 8.6. Here though he blessed the Bread, and gave thanks, as
was always the custom of Pious and Religious Men, at their ordinary meals, and
though he brake the Bread, which is a Jewish phrase for distributing and giving
it; yet it cannot in the least be pretended, that in any of these places he
gave the Sacrament, nor is there any manner of reason to suppose he did so at
Emmaus, with these Disciples, but to satisfy them of the truth, of himself and
his Resurrection; he took meat with them, as he did afterward with the Eleven
Apostles, and by his behavior at Table, and by his form of Blessing, which was
probably the same he used at other times, and by thus seeing and conversing
with him more intimately at Table, they came to understand who it was, and
their eyes were opened, and they knew him, or as is v. 35. he was known to them
in breaking of bread; that is, in eating with him, not that any thing
miraculous or extraordinary was here shown by Christ, or wrought upon them, any
more than was to the Apostles afterward, to whom he showed himself likewise,
and took meat with them, to give them full satisfaction, that it was the same
person who was Crucified, and who was risen with the same Body he had before;
or if they were illuminated, and their eyes opened in an extraordinary manner
at that time; yet it was not necessary this should be done by the Sacrament, of
all the virtues of which, the opening men's eyes, and curing them of Infidelity,
is the least to be ascribed to it, since it is only to be taken by those who
do believe, and whose eyes are opened before, though this may sometimes be
applied to it, by way of Allegory and allusion, as it is by St. Austine,
Theophylact, and others, who make the Pool of Bethesda, and the curing of the
Lame and the Leprous by a word, to be as much Sacramental as they do this that
is to have some signification or resemblance to Spiritual things: But there is
not one Father or ancient Interpreter, who does plainly affirm, that Christ did
here give the Sacrament, to those Disciples at Emmaus: The Bread which Christ
blessed, was no more truly made a Sacrament thereby, than the House of
Cleophas, was dedicated into a Church by Christ's presence and Divine
Discourses there; which, yet it might be, according to St. Hierom's words,
without any administering of the Sacrament, of which that place quoted out of
him, makes no mention: Boileau, p. 192.
But if it must be supposed without any Authority, and without any Reason, that
Christ did here give the Sacrament, it must also be granted, that he did
something more, than is related in that short account, which is there given; he
must not only have blessed and brake the bread, and given it to them, but he
must have done it with those words, This is my body; which, they say, are
always necessary to the true Consecration of this Sacrament: And if he may be
supposed to have used those, though they are not mentioned, which is a good
argument to prove it was not the Sacrament, but only an ordinary Meal; then we
may as well suppose, that at the same time he used Wine too, though that is not
mentioned, and though we have no account of any Drink, which yet we cannot but
think they had at that Supper let it be what it will: eating together and
sitting at meat, includes and supposes drinking too, though there is no
particular or express mention of it: As in the

2. Second place in those several instances, out of the Acts of the Apostles,
wherein it is said of the first Converts to Christianity, that they continued
in breaking of Bread, and in Prayer Acts 2.42.
, and in breaking Bread, from house to house Acts 2.46
, and that they came together on the first day of the Week, to break Bread Acts
20.7.
, which I am willing to allow, may be meant of the Sacrament, though a great
many Learned men, think they belong to the charitable and friendly way of
living among those first Christians, who had all things in common, and who came
to eat together, at the same time that they came to pray, and contrived these
daily meetings, for Worship and Refreshment, in the same house, for greater
convenience: Yet, that they did not drink together, as well as eat, and that by
an usual Synecdoche, both those are not included in the Phrase of breaking of
Bread, is not to be imagined, Bread was a word, by which, not only amongst the
Jews, but all Nations, all manner of food, and nourishment necessary to life,
was signified; as being the most considerable part of it, so that we mean this
when we pray for our daily Bread, and when we say a man wants Bread, and so
to break our Bread to the hungry, Isa. 58.7. and by the young childrens asking
bread, and no man breaks it unto them. Lament. 4.4. the same is imported. To
break Bread, was an usual Hebrew expression, for giving all manner of food, as
appears by those instances, so that when Bread, which is but one part of food,
is expressed; yet the other is included and meant also, as when Christ went
into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread, Luke 14.1. we cannot
suppose that he had only such a dry Banquet, as not to drink with him too, and
when Joseph told the Steward of his house, that he should prepare an
entertainment for his brethren, for they are to eat with me at noon, Genesis
43.16. hodie sunt mecum comesturi, as in the Vulgar, he did not I suppose,
think they were not to drink with him too, and that he was not to provide Wine,
as well as other Victuals, neither did Joseph's own Brethren, suspect he would
send them away dry and thirsty, when they only heard that they should eat
bread there, v. 25. Notwithstanding this alone is mentioned, yet they met with
plenty of Wine too, as may be seen at the latter end of the Chapter, where in
the vulgar Latin it is said, Biberunt and inebriati sunt cum eo.

The Greeks thought Wine and Drinking so considerable a part of the Feast, that
they called the whole, from that one part, (...), and yet when they thus drank
together at their Entertainments, they did no doubt eat too; though, if we will
as strictly insist upon the phrase, and not allow a Synecdoche here, as well as
in the Jewish one, of breaking or eating Bread, we must make their Feasts to be
all of Liquids, and the other all of Solids: But the phrase is so clear and so
usual, that nothing could make men deny its being so, but their being willing
to stick to any thing, however weak and little it be, that seems in the least
to favor a bad cause, which is forced to call in the help of a Phrase, used in
a short History, and that against its usual meaning, to combat with a plain
Command and clear Institution; I would only ask these Gentlemen, and Monsi.
Boileau, with whom I am especially concerned, whither he does not think the
first Christians, when they met together to break Bread, allowing thereby, it
was to receive the Sacrament, did not also at the same time feast together at
their (...), and whether those were not joined with the Sacrament, and whethese
also are not meant here, and included in their breaking of Bread together?
Which I think, he or any one versed in Antiquity, will not deny. And if so, he
must either say, that at those Love Feasts they used no Wine or Drink, because
none is expressly mentioned here; though it is plain they did in the Church of
Corinth, even to excess; or else, that this Jewish phrase of breaking Bread, is
to be here taken, as it is in other places, by a Synecdoche, for both eating
and drinking together, and that either at the Lord's Table or at any other. But
in the

3. Third place, I have an undeniable Argument to prove, either that this must
be so meant, or else that the Sacrament cannot be meant, either in these places
or any other, where there is only mention of Bread, without Wine: For it is
universally owned by all the Popish Writers, as well as by all others, that to
the making a Sacrament, there ought to be both the Species Consecrated, though
they are not both given: So that in this, says Boileau, Hoc enim convenit nobis
cum Protestantibus, semper debere sacerdotes Eucharistiam consicere sub utraque
specie. p. 207.
we agree with the Protestants, that the Priests always ought to Consecrate the
Eucharist in both kinds; and Monsieur de Meaux, P. 182.
when he pretends, that he finds upon several occasions, in Antiquity, the Body
given without the Blood, and the Blood given without the Body; which I shall
examine by and by, yet confesses, that never one of them was Consecrated
without the other; and it would be Sacrilege, says Valentia, Si enim una
species absque altera conficiatur, Sacrilegium committitur. De usu Sacram. c.
13.
if one Species were Consecrated without the other; and after they are
Consecrated, Bellarmine Sacerdotibus utriusque speciei sumptio necessaria est
ex part Sacramenti de Euch. c. 4.
owns, That the sumption of both Species is necessary to the Priests who
Consecrate, and that upon the account of its being a Sacrament; as well it
seems as both ought to be Consecrated to make it a Sacrifice. Now in all these
places of the Disciples at Emmaus, of those in the Acts, of St. Paul at Troas,
which is another but too slight to be particularly considered, there is no
mention of any thing but breaking Bread, not one word said of any other
Species, either as consecrated, or as received by any one: So that if these
places do prove any thing for Communion in one kind, they prove as much for
Consecration in one kind, and for the sumption of one kind, even by the Priest
that consecrates. So that as it was wisely declared in the Council of Trent,
Soave's History of the Coun. of Trent. l. 6.
These places, and the reasons from them, must be laid aside, because by them
it would be concluded, that it was not Sacrilege to Consecrate one kind
without the other; which is contrary to all the Doctors and meaning of the
Church, and overthrows the distinction of the Eucharist, as it is a
Sacrifice, and as it is a Sacrament. So that Monsieur Boileau's strongest
Argument, is too high charged, and recoils upon himself and his own Church; and
his friends are obliged to take it out of his hands, least he do more harm to
them by it, than execution upon his enemy. But he is a bold man, that dare face
the mouth of a Cannon, who dare undertake to prove the Communion in one kind,
out of the eleventh Chapter of St. Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians;
which is such a perfect demonstration against it, that a man must outface the
Sun, who offers at any such thing.

St. Paul, as the best and truest means to correct the abuses got into the
Church of Corinth, about the Eucharist, recurs to the Institution which he
received from Christ himself, and which he delivered to the Church of Corinth;
in which there is so full an account of both the species, and such a command of
both, as is sufficient to show the Apostolical practice conformable to the
Institution of Christ, and to let us see what Tradition they left in their
Churches about it. Had there been any difference between the Priests and the
Peoples receiving the Bread and Wine; St. Paul, who wrote to the Laiety, would
no doubt have taken notice of it, and told them their respective duties; but he
delivers the Institution to them, just as Christ did to his Apostles; says not
a tittle of their not being to receive the Cup, but on the contrary, adds that
command to it, which is in none of the Evangolists, Do this in remembrance of
me; Gives not the least intimation, that this was given to the Apostles as
Priests, or that they were made Priests then; but what is observable, does not
so much as mention the Apostles, or take any notice of the persons that were
present at the Institution, and to whom the words, Do this, were spoken. So,
that so far as appears from him, they might be spoken to other Disciples, to
ordinary Laics; nay, to the women who might be present at this first Sacrament,
as well as the Apostles; and so must have been made Priests by those words, Hoc
facite, as well as they. After the recital of the Institution, in which he
observes no difference between the Priests and Laics; he tells the Faithful of
the Church of Corinth, that as often as they did eat this Bread and drink this
Cup, they showed forth the Lord's death, till he come: So that they who were to
show forth Christ's death, as well as the Priests, were to do it both by eating
the Bread and drinking the Cup; and, indeed, one of them does not show forth
his death so well as both; for it does not show his Blood separated from his
Body. He goes on to show 'um the guilt of unworthy eating and drinking, for he
all along joins both those Acts, as a phrase, signifying the Communion; and he
expressly uses it no less than four times in that Chapter: But in some Copies,
say they, instead of and, he uses the particle or, in the 27 v. Whosoever shall
eat this bread, or drink this cup unworthily: and here Monsieur Boileau would
gladly find something for either Eating or Drinking, without doing both; which
is such a shift and cavil, as nothing would make a man catch at, but such a
desperate cause as has nothing else to be said for it: If the particle (...)
or, were used in that place instead of (...) and, yet he has but little skill
either in Greek or Latin Authors, who knows not that it is the commonest thing
in both, to use that disjunctive for a copulative; as, to Abraham or his seed,
for to Abraham and his seed To. 4.13.
: Of which it were easy to give innumerable instances, both in the Bible and
profane History: The Apostle having used the copulative in all other Verses,
and all along in this Chapter, and having joined eating and drinking, cannot be
supposed here to use a disjunctive, and to separate them; but after all, there
are Copies of as great Credit and Authority for the particle (...), as for
(...), though I think no such weight bears upon the difference of these
particles, as to make it worth our while to examine them; for if the Apostles
did disjoyn them, it was only to lay a greater Emphasis upon the guilt of
unworthy eating and drinking, which though they both go together, yet are both
very great Sins; and I see no manner of consequence, that because a man may
both eat and drink unworthily, that therefore he should only eat, and not
drink at all; or that the Apostles supposed it lawful to eat without drinking,
or drink without eating.

But the Apostolical practice, and the Institution of our Savior, for
Communion in both kinds, though it be very plain and clear in Scripture, and
being founded upon so full a Command, and a Divine Institution; I know no Power
in the Church to alter it, or vary from it; yet it will be further confirmed,
and strengthened by the Universal Practice of the whole Christian Church, and
of the purest Ages after the Apostles, and by the general consent of Antiquity,
for a thousand years and more after Christ; in which I shall prove the
Eucharist was always given to all the Faithful, who came to the public Worship;
and to the Communion in both kinds, without any difference made between the
Priests and the Laiety, as to this matter, which was a thing never heard of in
Antiquity, nor ever so much as mentioned in any Author, till after the Twelfth
Century; in which wretched times of Ignorance and Superstition, the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation being newly brought in, struck men with such horror, and
Superstitious Reverence of the sacred Symbols, which they believed to be turned
into the very substance of Christ's Body and Blood; that they begun to be
afraid of taking that part which was fluid and might be spilt, each drop of
which they thought to be the same blood that flowed out of the side of Christ,
and the very substantial Blood that was running in his Veins, and now by a
miraculous way, was conveyed into the Chalice. Hence at first, they used Pipes
and Quils to suck it out of the Cup, and some used intinction or dipping of the
Bread in the Wine; and afterward the same superstition increasing, they came
to leave off, and abstain wholly from drinking the Cup; which was reserved
only to the more sacred lips of the Priests, who were willing to be hereby
distinguished from the more unworthy and profane Laiety. The Council of
Constance, first made this a Law, in the Year 1415, which was before a new and
superstitious custom, used only in some few places, and got by degrees into
some particular Churches of the Latin Communion, (for it never was in any
other, nor is to this day) of which we have the first mention in Thomas
Aquinas, who lived in the Thirteenth Age, and who speaks of it thus faintly in
his time, In aliquibus Ecclesiis servatur ut solus sacerdos communicetsanguine,
reliqui vero Corpore. Comment. in Johan. c. 6. v. 53.


In some Churches it is observed, that only the Priest Communicates of the
blood, and others of the Body; In quibusdam Ecclesiis observatur sum. p. 3. q.
80.
In quibusdam and in Aliquibus Ecclesiis; shows that it was then but creeping
into a few particular Churches, and very far from being generally observed in
the Western Parts. And that it was quite otherwise in the whole Primitive
Church, for above a thousand years, who in all their assemblies kept to our
Savior's Institution of both kinds, and never varied from what Christ and his
Apostles had commanded and delivered to them; as the Church of Rome now does, I
shall fully prove, that so, according to Vincentius Lirinensis his rule,
against all manner of Heresies, the truth may be established, First, Primo
scilicet divinae legis auctoritate, tum deinde Ecclesiae Catholicae traditione.
by the authority of a divine Law, and then by the Tradition of the Catholic
Church; which Tradition being well made out, does more fully explain the Law,
and show the necessity of observing it: The Universal practice of the Catholic
Church, being a demonstration how they understood it, contrary to the new
Sophistry of our Adversaries, and how they always thought themselves obliged by
it; And because none are more apt to boast of Tradition, and the name of the
Catholic Church upon all accounts, than these men; I shall more largely show,
how shamefully they depart from it in this, as they do, indeed, in all other
points of Controversy between us; and how they set up the Authority of their
own private Church, in opposition to the Universal, as well as to the Laws of
Christ, and Practice of the Apostles: Their Communion in one kind is such a
demonstration of this, that we need no other to prove this charge upon them;
and as I have showed this to be contrary to the Institution, and command of
Christ, and the writings of the Apostles, so I shall evidently make it out, to
be contrary to the whole Primitive and Catholic Church, in all Ages; and this
First, From the most ancient Rituals, or the earliest accounts we have, of the
manner of celebrating the blessed Eucharist in Christian Churches. Secondly,
From the most ancient Lyturgies. Thirdly, From the Testimony and Authority of
the Fathers or ancient Writers. Fourthly, From some ancient Customs. Fifthly,
From the Custom still remaining in all Christian Churches of the World, except
the Roman. Sixthly, From the Confession of the most learned of our Adversaries.


1. From the most ancient Rituals, or the earliest accounts we have of the
manner of celebrating the blessed Eucharist in the Christian Church; The first
and most Authentic of which, is in Justin Martyr's second Apology, where he
describes the public Worship of Christians upon Sundays, according to its true
Primitive Simplicity; and as to the Eucharist which was always a part of it,
(...). Justia Martyr Apolog. 2.
There was brought, he says, Bread and Wine with water (according to the
custom, I suppose, of the Greeks and Eastern Countries, who generally drank
their Wines so mixed) and these being offered to the chief Minister, he
receiving them, gives Honor and Glory to the Father of all things, through
the Name of the Son and the Holy Ghost, and renders thanksgiving to him for
these things; and having finished his Prayers and giving of Thanks, to which
the People that were present join their Amen: The Deacons give to every one
that is present, to partake of the blessed Bread, and Wine and Water; and to
those that are absent, they carry them. Having discoursed of the nature of this
Sacramental food, and shown the Institution and design of it, out of the
Gospel, and from the words of our Savior; he again repeats their manner of
Celebrating, in the same words almost which he had used before, and says,
(...). Ib. prope fiaem.
That the distribution and participation of what is blessed by the President,
is made to every one; which every one belongs plainly to the (...), that just
goes before. Nothing is more evident, than that all the Elements were given to
the People, and to every one of them; and no man, I think, ever had the
impudence to question this, or make the least doubt of it, before Monsieur
Boileau, who, if ever he read this place, may be ashamed to say as he does,
Haec Sti. Justini verba perperam assumuntur ad concludendum vere and castigate,
aetate sancti Martyris Eucharistiam plebi administratam fuisse sub utraque
specie. Boileau de praecepto divino Commun. sub utraque specie. p. 215.
That it cannot be truly and strictly concluded from hence, that the Eucharist
was Communicated to the People under both kinds, in the Age of this Holy
Martyr. And what man of modesty or creticism, besides Monsieur Boileau, would
have observed that both the Elements were not then carried to the absent? which
Monsieur de Meaux In the example of S. Justinus, the two Species, it is true,
were carried. p. 112.
owns were, though it is plainly said they carried the (...), the same things
that were blessed, and that those who were present did partake of; yet it is
not said, that they Non dicit ta conjunctim vel alternatim ad absentes
perferunt, (...), sed tantummodo ad absentes perferunt. Ib. p. 214.
carried both together, (...). He might as well have pretended that though they
carried, yet they carried nothing at all: And they that make such answers to
such plain places, had, I am sure, better say nothing at all.

Next to Justin Martyr, St. Cyril of Jerusalem gives us the fullest account of
the manner of Celebrating the blessed Eucharist, in his Mystagogic Catechisms,
they are called; wherein having discoursed of all the Christian Mysteries, to
those who were newly Baptized, and so fit and capable to be instructed in them,
he comes at last to the highest Christian Mystery, that of the Lord's Supper;
and in his fifth Catechism largely describes the performance of it, with a
great many more particular Ceremonies and Forms of Prayer, then were used
before: And having told his young Christians, in the foregoing Homily (...).
Cyril. Catech. Mystag. 4.
, That in the Species of Bread, is given the Body of Christ, and in the Species
of Wine, his Blood; that so by partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ, he
may become one body and one blood with him; he bids him come with firm Faith
and great Devotion; and tells him how he should receive the Holy Bread very
particularly, and directs him to the very posture of his Hands and Fingers; and
afterward, he as particularly, orders him how, and in what manner, he should
come to receive the Cup (...). Ic. Catech. 5.
of the Lord's Blood, not stretching out his hands, but bending, and in the
posture of worship and adoration, and whilst the moisture is upon his lips
(...). Ib.
, he bids him take it with his finger and touch his eyes and forehead, and
other parts, and so sanctify them: However superstitious that was, for I
cannot but think this use of the Sacrament to be so, as well as many others,
that were yet very ancient; it is plain that the newly baptized Christians did
then receive the Eucharist in both kinds, and were commanded (...). Ib.
to come to receive the Cup, and to drink of the Wine, as well as to partake of
the Bread.

To St. Cyril, who lived toward the latter end of the fourth Century, I shall
join the Apostolic Constitutions, as they are called, which I suppose, not to
be ancienter; and in these in one place (...). Constit. Apostol. l. 2. c. 57.
, The Sacrifice or Eucharist, is ordered to be celebrated; the People standing
and praying silently, and after the oblation, every order, (to wit, of young
and aged, of men and women, into which they were ranged before at their
Religious Assemblies, as appears in that Chapter) severally and by themselves,
take the body and blood of Christ; and when the women do it in their order,
they are to have their heads covered (...). Ib.
; So that it is plain all orders, both of Men and Women, were to receive both
the Body and Blood; In another place L. 8. c. 13.
where is a more perfect account of the Eucharistic solemnity, and of the
Prayers and Ceremonies used in it; at the latter end he describes the order, in
which they Communicated, first the Bishops, then the Presbyters and Deacons,
and other Inferior Orders, then the Religious Women, the Deaconesses, the
Virgins, the Widows and their Children; and after that, the whole People with
great Reverence, and without any tumult or noise; The Bishop gives the Bread
saying, The Body of Christ, and he that receives it, says Amen: The Deacon
gives the Cup, and says, The Blood of Christ, the Cup of Life; and he that
drinks it, says Amen. And when they have all Communicated, both men and women,
the Deacons take the remainders and carry them into the Pastophory or Vestry.

St. Dennis the Areopagite, I put after all these, because I doubt not, but
that the Book under his name, was later than any of them; there is this passage
of Celebrating the Eucharist, in those Books of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
the Priest praying that all, who partake of the Sacrament, may do it worthily,
The Bread which was covered and whole, he uncovers and divides into many parts,
and the one Cup he divides to all (...). Dyonys. Eccles. Hlerat. c. 3 p. 103.
; and afterward, he speaks particularly of the Priests first taking himself
that which he gave to others (...). Ib.
, and mentions nothing else taken by him, then what the others do partake of.

I shall to these add, the famous Ordo Romanus, which de Meaux calls the
ancient Ceremonial of the Roman Church, neither the time, nor the Author of it
is certainly known; it concerns not me to inquire whether it belong to the
Eighth or the Eleventh Age, which is upon other accounts a dispute between the
Reformed, and Roman Divines; I suppose it to be made at several times, and to
have had several Additions made to it by several Popes, one after another; for
all Missals and Eucharistic forms were at first very short, and afterward
increased by further compositions: Pope Gregory, who had the greatest hand in
it, speaks of one Scholasticus, who composed the Prayer to be said over the
Oblation Vt precem quam Scholasticus composuerat, super oblationem diceremus.
Greg. l. 7. ep. 64.
before him; who that Scholasticus was, Strabo and Berno, and the other Writers
upon the Ordo Romanus, have owned themselves ignorant, and other Learned men
have anxiously enquired; the Learned Colomesius thinks it as clear as the light
that this was Pope Gelasius Ex quo meridiana luce clarius patet quis fuerit
Scholasticus ille Gregorio M. l. 7. ep. 64. laudatus. Colomesius in Paralipom.
ad Chartophyl. Eccles. verb. Gelasius.
: But whoever were the Authors of it, and whenever it was composed, as we now
have it, it is sufficient to my purpose, that the Communion is there
distributed in both kinds; and the manner of it is thus prescribed; Deinde
venit Archidiaconus cum calice ad cornu altaris -- and refuso parum in calicem
de scypho inter manus acolyti accedunt primum Episcopi ad sedem ut commmunicent
de manu Pontificis secundum ordinem; sed and Presbyteri omnes ascendunt ut
communicent, ad altar. Episcopus autem primus accipit calicem de manu
Archidiaconi and stat in cornu altaris ut confirmet sequentes ordines; Deinde
Archidiacono accepto de manu ill is calice, refundit in scypho and tradit
calicem subdiacano regionario, qui tradit ei pugillarem cum quo comfirmet
populum -- Quos dum confirmaverit -- Postea Episcopi communicant populum and
post eos Diaconi confirmant, -- Presbyteri jussu Pontificis communicant
populum, and ipsi vicissim comfirmant, nam mox ut Pontifex caeperit communicare
populum -- psallunt usque dum communicato omni populo etiam in part mulierum.
Ordo Romanus p. 6. Edit. Hittorp. Paris.
Then comes the Archdeacon with the Cup at the side of the Altar, -- and
pouring a little into the Chalice out of the Flaggon, in the hands of the
Acolyte, the Bishops first come to their Seat, that they may Communicate from
the hand of the Pope, acccording to their order; and the Presbyters also ascend
to the Altar, that they may Communicate: the Bishop first takes the Cup from
the hand of the Archdeacon, and stands at the side of the Altar, that he may
confirm the following orders; then the Archdeacon taking the Chalice from his
hand, pours it again into the Flaggon, and gives the Cup to the regionary
Subdeacon, who gives him a hollow Pipe, with which he may confirm the people,
-- Whom, when he has confirmed, -- afterward the Bishops communicate the
people, and after them the Deacons confirm them; -- the Priests by the command
of the Pope, communicate the people, and they also confirm them: for as soon as
the Pope begins to communicate the people, the Antiphone begins, and they sing
till all the people have communicated, even on the women's side. However Rome
has thought fit of late to depart from their own Ordo Romanus; yet there is a
very remarkable story of one of their own Popes, Pope Martin the Fifth, who,
after the Council of Constance, did in a solemn Office at Easter, Communicate
the people in both kinds, according to the Roman Order; which was not so
altered and changed at that time, as it was afterward: Cassander in his
Consultatio Martinus Sanctus etiam post tempora Constantiensis synodi in
solenni Paschae officio, juxta praescriptum ordinis Romani universum populum
corpore and sanguine Dni. communicasse legitur. Consult. de Com. subutr.
, and Lindanus in his Panoplia Martinus ipse P R. 5. utramque legitur Romae
administrasse speciem, quod non de Diacono, Pontificis Administro accipiendum
est sed ut populo. Lindan. Panoplia. l. 4. c. 56.
, are both positive Witnesses for this matter of Fact, which is not only
considerable in it self, but a clear Argument of the late change and
alteration, both of the old Roman Practice, and the old Roman Order.

2. The most ancient Lyturgies that are described, and Celebrate the Communion
in both kinds: So That (...).
under the name of St. Peter, represents all the people, as partaking of the
divine, pure, heavenly, quickening, tremendous Mysteries; and this Prayer or
Thanksgiving is used for them all, (...). Lyturg. Petr. in Biblioth. Patr.
Blessed be God who has vouchsafed us to partake of his immaculate Body, and
his most precious Blood. That under the name of St. James, after the Prayer of
the Priest, that the holy Spirit coming and sanctifying the Elements, would
make them become the Body and Blood of Christ, that they may be effectual to
all that receive them for remission of Sins (...). Lytur. Jacob. Ib.
(which word all, supposes more than the Priest who Consecrates) represents the
Deacons, after the communion of the Clergy, as taking up both the Patens and
the Chalices to give to the people (...). Ib.
; and after they had received of both, the Deacons and the People both give
thanks to Christ, because he has vouchsafed them to partake of his Body and of
his Blood (...). Ib.
. The Lyturgy which bears the name of St. Mark, describes the Priest as praying
for all those who were to communicate, that they might be worthy to receive of
those good things which were set before them, the immaculate Body, and the
precious Blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Chrst (...). Lyturg. Marcl. Ib.
; and using these words in his Prayer of Consecration over the Elements, That
they may become available to all those who partake of them to Faith, Sobriety
(...) Ib.
, and Christian Virtues: Which had bin very improper, if none but himself had
bin to partake of them: So that whatever Antiquity, and whatever Authority, may
be allowed to those Lyturgies, who go under the names of those Apostolic
Saints, the advantage of them is wholly for the Communion in one kind. And
those Churches who used these Lyturgies, and so probably ascribed these Names
to them, as Jerusalem, that of St. James, Alexandria, that of St. Mark; these
must be acknowledged to have given the Communion in both kinds, as anciently
and as certainly as it can be proved, or may be supposed that they used these
Lyturgies: But to come to the more Authentic Lyturgies of St. Basil and St.
Chrysostom, which are now used in the Greek Churches, though both the time and
the Authors of these may be very questionable; yet with all their present
Additions and Interpolations, there is a manifest proof in both of them, for
the Communion in both kinds: In the former, the Priest thus prays for himself
and all the Communicants, that we all, who partake of one Bread, and one Cup,
may be united together into the Communion of one holy Spirit, and that none of
us may be partakers of the Body or Blood of Christ, to judgment or
condemnation (...). Lyturg. Easil.
; so that it was plain he did not communicate of the Bread or Cup alone, nor
was alone partaker of the Body or Blood of Christ; in another Prayer he
mentions the people expressly, and begs of Christ that he would vouchsafe, by
his great power, to give unto them his pure Blood, and by them, that is, by the
Priests, to all the People (...). Ib.
. And as the Priest thus prays for the People, and for others before the
Communion, so he offers up a Thanksgiving for them afterward in these words:
We give thee thanks, O Lord our God, for the participation of thy holy, pure,
and heavenly Mysteries, which thou have given us, to the benefit,
sanctification, and health, both of our Souls and Bodies: Do thou, O Lord of
all things, grant unto us, that this may be the partaking of the Body and Blood
of Christ to our sincere Faith (...). Ib.
. In the Lyturgie of St. Chrysostom, the Priest having prayed God to make this
Bread the precious Body of Christ (...). Lyturg. Chrysostom. Savil. Edit. Tom. 6.
; which is an expression the Church of Rome will by no means allow, and that
which is in the Cup, his Blood (...). Ib.
; that so they may become to those who partake of them, for the cleansing of
the Soul, the remission of Sins (...). Ib.
, and the like: And having used that Prayer, Vouchsafe to give us this pure
Body and Blood, and by us to all the people. He gives the Deacons both the
Bread and Wine, and uses particular expressions at the giving of each, As this
has touched thy Lips, and will take away thy Sins, and purge away thy
Wickedness (...). Ib.
: and then afterward the Deacon having the Cup, speaks to the people to draw
nigh in the fear of God, and in Charity (...). Ib.
: And though there is no particular description of their Communion, as there is
of the Deacons, yet this is only an Argument that it was the same; and had it
been different, no doubt, there would have been an account of it: but after
all, the Priest makes a general Thanksgiving, in the name of all, Blessing God,
that he has vouchsafed us this day his heavenly and immortal Mysteries (...).
Ib. p. 1003.
. To confirm this observation of the Communion in both kinds, from the Lyturgy
of St. Basil and St. Chrysostom; Cassander in his Lyturgies tells us, Lyturgia
Aethiopum sententia orationum and ordine actionis fere cum Graecorum Chrysostom.
and Basilii Lyturgiis convenit. Lyturg. per G. Cassand.
That the Lyturgie of the Aethiopians agrees with these two, both in the
prayers, and the orders of the performance; and in this the people, as he
informs us, pray toward the conclusion, That God would bless them who have
received the sacred Body and the precious Blood Populus sub finem, benedic nos
Domine servos tuos qui sanctum corpus and pretiosum sanguinem sumpsimus.
Benedictus sit qui aedit sanctum corpus and pretiosum sanguinem. Gratia sit
Domino qui dedit nobis corpus suum sanctum and pretiosum sanguinem suum. Ib.
; and blessed be God who has given us his sacred Body and precious Blood. And
again, Thanks be to God who has given us his sacred Body and precious Blood. As
to the Lyturgies of the Latins, which they call Missals, they have received
such Additions and Corrections at Rome, as was necessary to make them suit with
the present Opinions and Practices of that Church; but yet we have many of
those which have escaped that usage, and which contain the Communion in both
kinds, as appears by the Codices Sacramentorum, published at Rome by Thomasius,
where the Gelasian Form, that is older than the Gregorian, speaks of the
Priests communicating alike with the sacred Orders, and with all the People
Post haec Communicate sacerdos cum ordinibus sacris cum omni populo. P. 199.
, without any difference, and all along mentions both the Symbols, by the
words, Sacramenta, Mysteria, Dona, in the plural number; and concludes with
this Prayer, That as many as have taken the Body and Blood of Christ, may be
filled with all heavenly benediction and grace Vt quotquot ex hac altaris
partici patione sacrosanctum filii tui corpus and sanguinem sumpserimus, omni
benedictione caelesti and gratia repleamur. p. 198.
. The three other are lately published by Mabillon, and were used very
anciently in the Gallican Church, before that Nation had received the Roman
Office; in all which also, there are plain evidences for the Communion in both
kinds; in the old Gothic one, after the Lord's Prayer follows this, Libera nos
a malo Domine Christ Jesu, Corpus tuum pro nobis crucisixum edimus and
sanguinem sanctum tuum bibimus; fiat nobis corpus sanctum tuum ad salutem, and
sanguis sanctas tuus in remissionem peccatorum hic and in aeternum Missale
Gothico-Gallicanum apud Mabillon de Lyturg. Gallic. p. 300.
Deliver us from evil, O Lord Jesus Christ, we have eaten thy Body crucified
for us, we have drunk thy holy Blood, which was shed for us: Let thy sacred
Body be unto us for Salvation, and thy sacred Blood for the remission of Sins,
here and for ever. And in the Missa Dominicalis, after the Communion, there is
this Prayer, Thy body, O Lord, which we have taken, and thy Cup which we have
drunk, let it stick in our entrails Corpus tuum Domine quod accepimus, and
calicem tuum quem potavimus haereat visceribus nostris. Ib. p. 297.
. An expression used now in the Canon Missae. In the Missale Francorum, which
is but short, the Sacramenta and Mysteria, and Sacrosancta Mysteria, are used
in the plural, which may denote the two parts of the Sacrament; but in the old
Gallican Missal, it is as plain as can be in the Collect after the Eucharist,
We have taken from the holy Altars, the body and blood of Christ, our Lord and
our God: Let us pray that we being always filled with Faith, may hunger and
thirst after Righteousness Sumsimus ex sacris altaribus Christi Domini and Dei
nostri corpus and sanguinem -- oremus ut semper nobis fide plenis esurire detur
ac sitire justitiam. Ib. p. 331.
. And in another Collect, after the Communion upon Easter day, We beseech thee,
O Lord, that this wholesome food and sacred drink, may bring up thy Servants
Quaesumus Domine famulos tuos salutaris cibus and sacer potus instituat. Ib. p.
366.
. There are several old Missals produced by Menardus, at the end of his Notes
on Gregory's Sacramentary, which are supposed to be written about the Tenth and
the Eleventh Century; and though the Doctrine of Transubstantiation creeping
in, in those dark and ignorant times, made them begin to have a superstitious
fear of spilling the Wine, and so brought them, in order to prevent that, to
mix the two Elements together; yet they never gave the one without the other,
as appears in all those Masses. The Sacramentary of St. Gregory is alone a
sufficient Authority for Communion in both kinds, in which the Priest who
Celebrates, prays, that as many as shall take the sacred Body and Blood of thy
Son, may be filled with all heavenly blessings Quotquot ex hac altaris
participatione sacrosanctum filii tui corpus and sanguinem sumpserimus, omni
benedictione caelesti repleamur. Gregor. Sacram.
; and we who take the Communion of this holy Bread and Cup, are made one body
of Christ Ipsi qui sumimus Communionem hujus sancti panis and calicis, unum
Christi corpus efficimur. Ib.
. So that the Body and Blood of Christ were plainly to be taken, by more than
himself, and were so by all the Faithful, who were thereby to be made the Body
of Christ; so we are fed with his flesh, we are strengthened by his blood Cajus
cane pascimur, reboramur and sanguine. Ib.
. Thou have refreshed us with the body and blood of thy Son Corpore and
sanguine filii tui nos resecisti. Ib.
; and we beseech thee that we may be numbered amongst his members, whose body
and blood we do Communicate Quaesumus, ut inter ejus membra numeremur cujus
corpori communicamus and sanguini. Ib.
. I have before considered the Ordo Romanus, as an ancient Ritual of the Latin
Church; and both that and the Sacramentary of St. Gregory, which are the most
ancient Writings, at least next to Gelasius, that give us an account of these
things in the Roman Church, do bear witness to the custom of giving the Cup in
the Communion, as well as the Bread; which Cassander also observes Quem morem
sanguinis Domiai porrigendi and antiqua Sacramentaria B. Gregorii and libellus
Ordinis Romani aperte testantur. Cassand. Consult. de commun. sub utra que.
, who had as great skill as any man in these matters, but yet had not seen the
Gelasian Sacramentary, since published out of the Queen of Sweden's Library,
which is a further confirmation of this.

3. As to the Testimony of the Fathers or ancient Writers, some of those have
been already given upon the two former heads; I shall add several others to
them, who bear witness to the Communion in both kinds: Ignatius in one of his
Epistles says, One Bread is broken to all, one Cup is distributed to all (...).
Ignat. Ep. ad Philadelph.
. And here I cannot but admire the Confidence and Folly of Monsieur Boileau De
solitario pane mentionem facit Ignatius. Boileau de praecept. Divin. Commun.
sub utraque. p. 216.
, who brings this very passage, One Bread is broken for them all, as a proof
that it was only the Bread that was given, and leaves out what is immediately
added, One Cup is distributed to all; which not only confutes, but shames him.
Quomodo dicunt carnem in corruptionem devenire, and non percipere vitam, quae a
corpore Domini and sanguine alitur. Iren. l. 4. c. 34.
Irenaeus says, The flesh is fed by the body and blood of Christ, and that of
the Cup and the Bread, the substance of our flesh is increased and consists
Quando ergo mixtus calix and fraclus panis percipit verbum Det, fit Eucht.
istia sangutnis and corporis Christi, x quibus augetur and consistit carnti
nostrae substantia; quomodo carnem negant capacem esse donatio is Dei. qui est
vitae aeterna, quae sanguine and corpere Christi nutritur, and membrum ejus?
Id. l. 5. c. 2.
; And from hence, he there proves the Resurrection of the Body, against those
Heretics that denied it, because the body is nourished by the blood and body
of Christ, and is made a member of him. He must mean this of the Bodies of all
Christians, unless the Resurrection of the Body belong only to the Priests, as
well as the Cup. Tertullian upon the Resurrection, says the same with Irenaeus,
Our flesh is fed with the body and blood of Christ Caro corpore and sanguine
Christi vescitur. Tertul. de Resur. carnis.
: And in his Book to his Wife, he speaks of her taking the Cup, in two several
places D^^c^jus manu desiderabit? de cujus poculo participabit? Id. ad uxor. l.
2. c. 6. De cibo, de poculo invadere, desiderare in mente habere. Id. c. 4.


. Upon one of which, a very learned Critic of the Roman Church, who owns those
places to belong to the Communion, has made this observation to our hands, At
that time the Supper of the Lord was Celebrated in both Species Sub utraque
specie illo tempore convivium Domini cerebratur, quod tanta aviditate
arripiebatur ut illud invadere, desiderare, in mente habere. De la Cerda Not.
in locum. p. 634.
; Even to Women it seems, who, I suppose, were no Priests. Origin upon the Book
of Numbers, says, We drink the blood of Christ Sacramentally in the Eucharist,
as well as Spiritually, by believing his Doctrine Bibere dicimur sanguinem
Christi non solum Sacramentorum ritu se and cum sermenes ejus recipimus. Quis
est iste populus qui in usa habet sanguinem bibere? Origent. homil. 16. in Number.
: When he had before asked, What people drink of Blood? St. Cyprian admonishes
Christians to prepare themselves for the hardest encounters, as the Soldiers
of Christ, Considering that for this very purpose, Gravior nunc and ferocior
pugna immicet ad quam parare debent milites Christi, considerantes idcirco se
quotidie calicem sanguinis Christi bibere, ut possint and ipsi propter Christum
sanguinem fundere. Ep. 58. ad plebem Thiberitanam. Edit. Oxon.
they every day drink the Cup of Christ's Blood, that so they may also shed
their blood for Christ. And he pleads for giving the Communion to the lapsed,
upon this very account, to arm and fortify them for farther trials and
persecutions; How can we teach or provoke them to shed their blood for the
confession of Christ, if we deny them the Blood of Christ Nam quomodo docemus
aut provocamus eos in confessione nominis sanguinem suum fundere, si eis
militaturis Christi sanguinem denegamus? aut quomodo ad Martyrit poculum
idoneos facimus, si non eos prius ad bibendum in Ecclesia poculum Domini jure
communionis admittimus? Ep. 57. ad Cornel.
? Or how can we make them fit for the Cup of Martyrdom, if we do not first
admit them to drink the Cup of the Lord, in the Church, by the right of
Communion? The excellent Epistle Ep. 63. Caecilio fratri.
of that Holy Martyr, against those, who out of a principle of abstaining
wholly from Wine, or lest they should by the smell of Wine, which they had
drunk in the Morning-Sacrifices, Simili modo and calicem, -- quod si and a
Domino praecipitur, and ab Apostoloejus hoc idem confirmatur and traditur --
hoc faciamus quod fecit and Dominus; invenimus non observari a nobis quod
mandatum nisi eadem quae Dominus fecit nos quoque faciamus and calicem Dom.
pari ratione miscentes a divine Magisterio non recedamus. Ib. Quod nos obandire
and facere oportet, quod Christus fecit and faciendum esse mandavit. Ib.


discover themselves to be Christians, used Water in the Eucharist instead of
Wine, is so full a demonstration that the Wine ought always to be taken in the
Sacrament, and that Christ's Institution and Command could not otherwise be
observed; that there needs no other Arguments, but what that great Man there
uses, to show the necessity of Christians Communicating in both the Species of
Bread and Wine; Christ, Quare si solus Christus audiendus est, non debemus
attendere, quod alius ante nos faciendum putaverit, sed quid, qui ante omnes
est, Christus prier fecerit. Ib. Quomodo autem de creatura vitis novum vinum
cum Christo in regno patris bibemus, si in sacraficio Dei Patris and Christi
vinum non offerimus, nec calicem Domini dominica traditione miscemus? Ib.


says he, gave the Cup, and we are to do that which Christ did, and ought by no
means to depart from what was commanded by Christ, and delivered by the
Apostles, upon any custom or pretense whatsoever. How shall we drink, says he,
of the fruit of the Vine with Christ, in the Kingdom of his Father, if we do
not now offer the Wine in the Sacrifice, and mingle the Cup of the Lord as he
delivered it to us. And that this Wine was drunk by all Christians, is plain
from that fear which some had, lest by their drinking it in the morning, they
should smell of it Nisi in sacrificiis matutinis hoc quis veretur, ne per
saporem vini redoleat sanguinem Christi. Ib. p. 155.
, and so discover themselves to the Heathens: It was then it seems a mark to
know Christians by, That they did smell of the blood of Christ: which if they
had done as the Papists now do, they need not have been afraid of. But to
proceed to others, who, though they speak less of this then St. Cyprian, yet
speak plainly of Christians taking the Blood as well as the Body: Athanasius
speaking of the Cup, says, It belongs to the Priests of right, to give this to
the People (...). Apolog 2.
. St. Basil in one of his Epistles says, It is good and profitable to
Communicate every day of the Body and Blood of Christ (...). Ep. ad Caesar.
: And speaking of the peculiar Virtues of Christians, asks, What is proper to
those that eat the Bread and drink the Cup of the Lord (...). Id. Moral.
? denoting that to belong to all Christians. St. Chrysostom in his Oratorian
manner, speaks of Christians, as being all Died and Purpled with the Blood of
Christ (...). De Sacerdot. l. 3.
: And thus compares all Christians in general with the Israelites, As thou
eatest the Body of Christ, so did they Manna; as thou drinkest the Blood of
Christ, so did they Water out of the Rock (...). Id. Homil. 23. in 1 Cor.
. And in another place he expressly observes, what I have taken notice of
before, That it is not now as under the Jewish Law, where the Priest partook of
several things from the Altar, which the People did not: There is no difference
between the Priest and the People, when we come to receive the Holy Mysteries;
for one Body and one Cup is offered to all (...). Id. in Homil. 18. in 2 Cor.
. St Hierom says, The Priests serve the Eucharist, and divide the Blood of the
Lord among the People Sacerdotes Eucharisticae serviunt, and sanguinem Domini
populis ejus dividunt. Hieron. in Sophon. c. 2.
. And upon occasion, speaks of some loose and vicious Women, who yet would not
abstain from the blood of Christ Eb^^^tati sacrilegium copulantes aiunt, Absit
ut ego me a Christi sanguine abstineam. Id, Ep. ad Eustoch.
. So that this, it is plain, was taken by the Women. St. Austin to the newly
Baptized Christians, says, That in all their trials and their time of being
Catechumens, they did approve themselves, that they might eat the Lord's Body,
and drink the Cup Vt cum seipsos probaverint, tunc de mensa Domini manducent,
and de calice bibant. August. de fide and Oper.
. And speaking of the prohibition of Blood to the Jews, because it was offered
in Sacrifice; but from taking the Blood of the Sacrifice of our Lord, no one,
says he, is not only forbidden, but all are exhorted to drink of it, who will
have Life Ab hujus sacrificii sanguine in alimeatum sumendo non solum nemo
prohibetur, sed ad bibendum omnes exhortantur qui volunt habere vitam. Id. in
Levit. qu. 57.
. I might easily bring down the like clear authorities of ancient Writers much
lower, even to the times of the very Schoolmen, who are the first that ever
mention any thing about the Communion in one kind: But that I may not over-load
my self or my Reader, I shall only offer one or two more of much later date,
but yet more considerable, to our Adversaries at least, because they believed
Transubstantiation, but had not it seems improved it into that consequence,
which Superstition afterward did, of Communicating in one kind: Paschasius
Ratbertus, Abbot of Corbey, was the very Parent of Transubstantiation, and the
first founder of that Doctrine, in the Ninth Century; yet in the same Book, in
which he broaches that new Opinion, he fully and plainly asserts the old
Practice of the Communion in both kinds, The Priest, says he, consecrates by
the power of Christ, and performs the part of Christ, between God and the
People; he offers their Prayers and Oblations to God, and what he has obtained
of God, he renders to them, by the body and blood of Christ, which he
distributes to every one of them Caeterum sacerdos quia vices Christi visibili
specie inter Deum and populum agere videtur, infert per manus Angeli vota
populi ad Deum and refert, Vota quidem offert and munera, refert autem imperata
per Corpus and sanguinem and distribuit singnlis. Paschas. de Corpore and
sanguine Domini. c. 12.
. Those Singuli must be the People, whose Prayers the Priest offered, and to
whom he distributed the Blood as well as the Body of Christ; and to show
further, that the Blood was given in the Sacrament, not to the Priest only,
but to the People, he most expressly says, That when Christ gives the Sacrament
by the hands of the Ministers, he says also by them, Take, and drink ye all of
this; as well Ministers as all the rest that believe, This is the cup of my
blood of the new and everlasting testament Et ideo hic solus est qui frangit
hunc panem, and per manus ministrorum distribuit credentibus, dicens, Accipite
and bibete ex hoc omnes tam Ministri quam and reliqui credeates, hic est calix
sanguinis mei novi and aeterni testamenti. Ib. c. 15.
. Then which words there could nothing have been said, that does more directly
destroy the late pretense of our Adversaries, of the Cup's being given, and
belonging only to the Priests, or Ministers, and not to all the Faithful, or
the Reliqui Credentes: But he still goes further, as to this matter, and makes
the partaking of the Blood to be necessary to Salvation in another Chapter, It
is manifest, says he, Constat igitur and liquet omnibus quod in hac mortali
vita sine cibo and potu non vivitur, sic itaque ad illam aeternam non
pervenitur, nisi duobus istis ad immortalitatem nutriatur. Ib. c. 19.
that in this mortal life we cannot live without meat and drink, so therefore,
likewise can we not come to eternal life, unless we are spiritually nourisht
with those two unto Immortality: and speaks of the Cup in the very next words.
To him I shall add Algerus, a very zealous defender of Paschasius his Doctrine
of Transubstantiation, and as heartily agreeing with him in the practice and
necessity of Communicating in both kinds, Because, says he, we live by meat and
drink, that we can want neither, therefore Christ would have them both in his
Sacrament Vnde etiam quia potu and clod ita vivimus ut alterntro carere
nequeumus, ntrumque in Sacramento suo esse voluit. Algerus de Sacramento. l. 2.
c. 5.
: And as he redeemed both our body and our soul, by his body and blood; so, he
argues, Nos qui corpore and anima perieramus, corpus per corpus, and animam per
animam, Christus redimens, -- simul corpus and sanguis sumitur a fidelibus --
ut sumpto corpore and anima Christi totus homo vivificetur, Ib. c. 8.
we ought to partake both of his body and of his blood, that our whole man may
be quickened by both. Then he quotes St. Austin and Gelasius, for the taking of
both Species, Vnde ut ait Augustinus nec caro sine sanguine, nec sanguis sine
carne jure communicatur. Item Gelasius Majorico and Joanni Episcopis;
Comperimus quod quidam sumpta tantum corporis portione a calice sacri cruoris
abstineant, qui proculdubio aut integra Sacramenta accipiant aut ab Integris
arceantur, quia divisio unius ejusdemque mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio non
potest provenire. Ib. c. 8.
From whence, as St. Austin says, neither the flesh is rightly Communicated
without the blood, nor the blood without the flesh. So also Gelasius to
Majoricus and John Bishops, We find that some taking only the part of the
body, abstain from the Cup of the holy blood; who ought unquestionably either
to take the whole Sacrament, or to be kept wholly from it; because the division
of one and the same Sacrament, cannot be without grand Sacrilege. He that had
this Belief, and these Arguments for it, could not but be a great enemy to the
Mutilated and Sacrilegious Communion in one kind, however great a friend he was
to Transustantiation; and his authority and his words, are the more remarkable,
because he lived in the Twelfth Century, which makes him, as a great many
others then were, which I could produce, an undeniable Evidence, that that
corruption was not brought into the Latin Church, till the next Age; against
which, we have the full testimony of both ancient and later Writers.

4. It appears by some ancient Customs, that Christians were so far from
receiving the Sacrament only in one kind, that they used extraordinary care
and contrivance to receive it in both kinds: From hence it was that they used
intinction, or dipping of the Bread in the Wine, which was very early, as
appears by the Decree of Pope Julius, who forbad it in the Third Century Illud
vero quod pro complemento communionis intinctam tradunt Eucharistiam populis,
nec hoc prolatum ex Evangelio testimonium recipit, ubi Apostolis corpus suum
and sanguinem commendavit, seorsum enim panis and seorsum calicis commendatio
memoratur. Julius Papa Episcopis per Egypt. apud Gratian. decret. de Consecr.
3 Pars did. 2.
. It is probable that it was thus given to the Sick, as in the instance of
Serapion, and to Infants, in the time of St. Cyprian, which we shall have
occasion to consider afterward: In the Council of Braga, in the seventh Age
Council. Bracarense.
, this Custom, which it seems continued, was prohibited in the very words
almost of Pope Julius; so that some learned men mistake the one for the other:
Afterward in the Council of Clermont, as it is given by Baronius, The Twenty
Eighth Canon forbids any to Communicate of the Altar, unless he take the body
separately, and the blood also separately, unless through necessity, and with
caution Ne quis communicet de altari nisi corpus separatim and sanguinem
similiter sumit, nisi per necessitatem and per cautelam. Canones Concilii
Claramont. apud Baron Annal. An. 1094.. 25.
. This Intinction was generally forbid, unless in some cases, as of the Sick,
and the like; to whom the Council of Tours Quae sacra oblatio intincta esse
debet in sanguine Christi ut veraciter Presbyter possit dicere infirmo, Corpus
and sanguis Domini proficiat tibi. Apud Burchard. l. 5. c. 9. and Cassand.
Dialog. p. 5.
commands that the Sacrament be thus given, Steeped and dipped, and that for a
most considerable reason, That the Priest might truly say to the person, to
whom he gave it, the body and blood of Christ, be profitable to thee for
remission of Sins. This it seems, could not have been truly said to them,
unless they had some way or other given them both kinds: That this Intinction
was also in use in private Monasteries, appears from several Manuscripts
produced by Menardus Not. in Gregor. Sacrament
; and it is notorious, that the whole Greek Churches do use it to this day in
the Communion, not only of the Sick and Infants, but of all Laics; I am not
concerned to defend or justify this Custom, nor to say any thing more about
it, but only to observe this plain inference from it, That they who thus used
Intinction or the mixing and steeping of the Elements together, did hereby
plainly declare, that it was necessary to give the Sacrament in both kinds, and
not in one: I might make also the same remark upon the several Heretical
Customs of using Water or Milk instead of Wine, as it appears in St. Cyprian
and Pope Julius, to have been the manner of some, who though they were very
blameable, and justly censured for so doing; yet they hereby confessed, that
there ought to be two species given in the Sacrament, a liquid one, as well as
a solid: The Romanists and the Manichees, are the only Christians that ever
thought otherwise. When the Doctrine of Transubstantiation began to creep into
the Church, in the time of Berengarius, and some Christians were thereupon
possessed with a greater fear of spilling the Blood of Christ; they did not
however at first leave drinking the Cup for that reason, but they brought in
another custom to prevent spilling; which was, to fasten little Pipes or Quills
to the Chalices they then used, and through them to suck the consecrated Wine:
This appears in the order of Celebrating Mass by the Pope, taken out of several
Books of the Ordo Romanus, in Cassander's Lyturgics, The Archdeacon receives
of the Regionary Subdeacon a Pugillaris, with which he confirms the people
Archidiaconus accepto a Subdiacono regionario pugillari cum quo confirmet
populum. Cassander Lyturg. in ordine celebrat. Miss. per Romanos celebrante
pontifice.
: Cassander in his Notes upon the word Pugillaris, says, They were Pipes or
Canes, with which the Sacramental Blood was sucked out of the Chalice Fistule
seu cannae quibus sanguis e Dominico calice exugebatur. Ib.
. And he says, he had seen several of these in his time: So that in those times
when the fear of effusion was greater than it was in the time of the Apostles
and Primitive Christians, who yet had as much reverence, no doubt, for the
Sacrament as any after-Ages, they were so unwilling to be deprived of the
precious Blood of their Savior in the Sacrament, that though their
superstition made them contrive new ways to receive it, yet they could not be
contented to be wholly without it: But

5. The custom still remaining in all other Churches of the Christian World,
except the Roman, of Communicating in both kinds, is a demonstration of its
Apostolical and Primitive Practice, and of an Universal and Uninterrupted
Tradition for it; we see plainly where this Practice was broke, and this
Tradition violated, in the Roman Church, after above 1200 years, till which
time it bears witness against it self, and condemns its own late Innovation,
which is contrary not only to all former Ages, but to the present practice of
all other Christian Churches. I need not produce witnesses to prove this, the
matter of Fact is plain and undeniable, and none of their Writers can, or do
pretend the contrary as to public and general Communion concerning any
Christians, except those few that they have lately brought over by their
well-known Arts, to submit to the Roman Church, as the Maronites and the
Indians of St. Thomas: All the other vast number of Christians over all the
World, the Greeks, the Muscovites, the Russians, the Aethiopians, the
Armenians, the Assyrians, the Nestorians, the Georgians, and others do all
administer the Eucharist to the people in both kinds: There is some little
difference indeed among them in the manner of doing it; as some of them take
the two Species mingled together in a Spoon, as the Greeks and Muscovites;
others dip the Bread in the Wine, as the Armenians; but they all agree in this,
that they always receive both the Species of Bread and Wine in the Sacrament,
and never give the one without the other. Cassander has collected several of
their Rites and Orders in their public Lyturgies, as of the Syrians, the
Aethiopians, the Armenians, the Abyssins in the Kingdom of Prester John; of
whom he says, That as many as Communicate of the Body, Communicate of the Blood
also Quotquot communicant de corpore, totidem communicant etiam de sangine.
Casand. Lyturg. Reliquis omnibus nationibus Christiani nominis, ut Graecis,
Ruthenis, Armeniis, Aethiopibus priscum institutum porrigendi populo sanguinis
in hunc usque diem retinentibus. Id. Dialog.


. But we need not call in any other Churches to vouch for the universal and
primitive practice of the Communion in both kinds: We have in the last place

6. The most learned of our Adversaries, who cannot but confess this, and
therefore are forced to take other measures to defend themselves and their
cause; namely, by the Authority of the present Church, and not by the Tradition
or Practice of the Primitive, as de Meaux vainly attempts to do; which they
freely give up and acknowledge to be contrary to the Communion, as it is now
practiced in one kind. Cassander has fully and plainly declared his mind in a
particular Treatise on this Subject, among his Works printed at Paris, and in
his Dialogue which was put out by Calixtus, not being among his other Works; in
his Consultation, and in his Lyturgics; Concerning the administration, says he,
of the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, it is sufficiently known, that the
Universal Church of Christ to this very day, and the Western or Roman, for
above a thousand years after Christ, did exhibit both the Species of Bread and
Wine, to all the members of the Church of Christ, especially in the solemn and
ordinary dispensation of this Sacrament; which appears from innumerable
testimones, both of ancient Greek and Latin Writers De administratione
sacrosancti Sacramenti Eucharistiae satis compertum est, universalem Christi
Ecclesiam in hunc usque diem; Occidentalem vero seu Romanam mill amplius a
Christo annis in solenni presertim and ordinaria hujus sacramenti dispensatione
utramque panis and vini speciem omnibus Ecclesiae Christi membris exhibuisse,
id quod ex innumeris veterum scriptorum tam Graecorum quam Latinorum
testimoriis manifestum est. Cassandri Consultatio de utraque specie Sacramenti.
. In his Dialogue speaking against those who pretended that the use of either
one or both kinds was indifferent, and who endeavored to make this out by the
Authority and Practice of the Primitive Church; which is the way which de Meaux
takes, he thus seriously and heartily gives his judgment, I have searched, says
he, Equidem haud oscitanter and veteris Ecclesiae consuetudinem perscrutatus
sum, and attento aequoque animo, torum scripta, qui hoc argumentum tractarunt,
legisse and rations quibus indifferentem eum morem probare nituntur,
expendisse profiteor; neque tamen firmam ullam demonstrationem, quae non
apertissime refelli possit, reperire hactenus potui, quamvis id vehementer
exoptassem; quin multae and firmissimae rations suppetunt, quae contrarium
evincunt. G. Cassand. Dialog. apud Calixt. p. 6.
and that not slightly, the Custom of the ancient Church, and, I profess, I
have read the Writings of those who have handled this argument with an attent
and impartial mind, and have weighed the reasons by which they endeavor to
prove this indifferent Custom; but neither could I yet find any firm proof,
which could not be most plainly refuted, although I most earnestly desired it;
but there remain many, and those the most strong Reasons which do evince the
contrary. And because de Meaux pretends that there are some instances of public
Communion in the Church in one kind, I will add one other testimony of that
great man, who after the strictest search and enquiry into every thing in
Antiquity, that could be brought to color any such thing, thus determines,
Wherefore I do not think that it can be shown that for a whole thousand years
and more, that this most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist was ever administered
from the Lord's Table, in the holy Communion, to the faithful people in any
part of the Catholic Church, otherwise than under both the Symbols of Bread and
Wine Quare nec puto demonstrari totis mill amplius annis in ulla Catholicae
Ecclesiae part Sacrosanctum hoc Eucharistiae Sacramentum aliter in sacra
synaxi e mensa Dominica fideli populo, quam sub utroque panis and vini symbolo,
administratum fuisse. Id. de Sac. Com. sub utraque specie. p. 1027.
. Wicelius, another Divine of great learning and judgment, agrees fully with
Cassander, It is confessed that the holy Sumption from the Ecclesiastic Altar,
was equally common to all Christians for Salvation, through all the times of
the New Testament Et in confesso sumptionem sanctam de altari Ecclesiastico
aeque omnibus Christianis communem extitisse ad salutem per omnia novi
testamenti tempora. Vicel via Reg. tit. de utr. Specie.
, by which he means of the Christian Church, as appears by what immediately
follows, It is a little obliterated, indeed, among us of the Western Church,
and separated from a promiscuous use for some reasons, but not wholly blotted
out and destroyed Obliteratam quidem paulisper apud nos Occidentales, and ab
usu promiscuo semotam suas ob causas. at non deletam omnino atque exstinctam.
Ib.
. For it was then granted to some, as to the Bohemians; Of this thing, that is
of the Holy Sumption common to all Christians, Since we are Ejusce rei cum nube
quodam certissimorum testium septi sumus, (...) amplectimur omni excluso dubio.
Ib.
encompast with a cloud of most certain witnesses, we embrace this as a most
sure thing without any doubt. And therefore in his Account of Abuses, he
reckons that of the Communion in one kind Id. Elench. abus.
: But lest these two men, though their learning and credit be unquestionable,
should be thought through their great temper and moderation, to have yielded
more in this cause than others of that Communion, I shall show that the same
has been done by others, who cannot be suspected to have granted more than the
mere force of Truth extorted from them; Thomas Aquinas who was the first man
that proposed that question to be disputed, Whether it were lawful to take the
Body of Christ without the Blood Vtrum liceat sumere corpus Christi sine
sauguine. Th. Aquin. Sum. pars 3 qu. 80. art. 12.
? And who first tells us, That it was the use of many Churches so to do
Multarum Ecclesiarum usus in quibus populo communicanti datur corpus Christi
sumendum, non autem sanguis. Ib.
, though Bonaventure his contemporary, who died the same year, mentions nothing
of it; he in his Comment upon the Sixth of St. John, where he says, It was
observed, not in many but in some Churches, that for fear of effusion, the
Priest alone Communicated of the Blood, and the rest of the Body Propter
periculum effusionis in aliquibus Ecclesiis servatur ut solus sacerdos
communicet sanguine, reliqui vero corpore. Id. in Johan. 6.
, freely owns, that according to the custom of the ancient Church, all persons
as they communicated of the Body, so they communicated also of the Blood
Dicendum, quod secundum antiquae Ecclesiae consuetudinem, omnes sicut
communicabant corpori, ita communicabant and sanguini. Ib.
; and this he adds, is as yet also observed in some Churches Quod etiam adhuc
in aliquibus Ecclesiis servatur. Ib.
. Which shows that this half-Communion was not univerfally brought into the
Latin Church in the thirteenth Century. Salmeron the Jesuit says, We
ingenuously and openly confess (which ingenuity it were to be wished, Monsieur
de Meaux had had) that it was the general custom to communicate the Laics under
both species Ingenui and aperti consitemur morem generalem extitisse
communicandi etiam Laicos sub utraque specie. Salmeron. Tract. 35.
. Cardinal Bona, upon this subject owns, Certum quippe est omnes passim
Clericos and Laicos viros and mulieres sub utraque specie sacra mysteria
antiquitus sumsisse cum solenni eorum celebrationi aderant, -- consentiunt
omnes tam Catholici quam sectarii nec eam negare potest qui vel levissima rerum
Ecclesiasticarum notitia imbutus sit, semper enim and Vbique ab Ecclesiae
primordiis usque ad saeculum duodecimum sub specie panis and vini communicarunt
fideles. Bona rer. Lyturg. l. 2. c. 18.
That it is certain that Clergymen everywhere and Laics, men and women did
anciently receive the holy Mysteries under both kinds, when they were present
at the solemn Celebration of them: In this, says he, all, both Catholics and
Sectaries agree, neither can any one deny it, who is endued with the least
knowledge of the Ecclesiastical Affairs; for at all times, and in all places,
from the first beginnings of the Church, even to the twelfth Age, the faithful
communicated under the species of Bread and Wine. Nay, Bellarmine himself owns,
that both Christ instituted under both species, and that the ancient Church
ministered under both species; but the multitude increasing, this was found more
and more inconvenient and so by degrees the custom of both kinds ceased Nam
Christus inftituit quidem sub duplici specie Ecclesia autem vetus ministrabat
sub duplici specie, crescente autem multitudine magis and magis apparuit
incommodum and sic paulatim desiit usus sub utraque Bellarm. l. 4. c. 4. de
Euch.
. But when did it cease? not so soon as Christians grew very numerous, for that
they were long before this was practiced, in the most flourishing Ages of
Christianity, but after the new Doctrine of Transubstantiation made them grow
superstitious, and afraid to spill that liquor, which they were taught to
believe, was the very substantial and natural Blood of Christ. It is plain from
Thomas Aquinas that it was not wholly ceased in the thirteenth Century, and
Valentia owns De legit. usu Euch c. 10.
that it was but a little before the Council of Constance. It was not so much
by the command of the Bishops, as by the practice and use of the people; it was
first disused, says Costor, in his Enchiridion, where he owns that in the time
of Cyprian the people received both species Estque boc diligenter notandum
alterius speciei Communionem non tam Episcoporum mandato quam populi usa and
facto introductam. p 415.
Quia suo, i. e. Cypriani tempore populus utramque speciem sumebat. Ib. p. 421.
. But when the Bishops took advantage of that superstition they had taught the
people, and made this new Custom of theirs a Law of the Church; yet in that
very Council which first commanded the Communion in one kind, It was owned that
it used to be received of the Faithful in both, in the Primitive Church Licet
in primitiva Ecclesia bujusmodi Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub utraque
spscie, tamen haec consuetudo ad evitandum aliqua pericula and scandala, est
rationabiliter introducta. Council. Constant. Sess. 13.
, but to prevent some scandals and dangers, which the Primitive Church it seems
never thought of, nor took care to avoid, as the people themselves now did, the
Council declares this custom to be fitly brought in, and so decrees it to be
observed under the penalty of Excommunication. The Council of Trent also
acknowledges, though as spairingly as may be, that in the beginnings of
Christian Religion, the use of both kinds was not infrequent or unusual Licet
ab initio Christianae Religionis non infrequens utriusque speciei usus fuisset,
tamen progressu temporis, latissime jam mutata illa consuetudine de gravibus
and justis causis adducta, hanc consuetudinem sub altera specie communicandi
approbavit. Sess. 5. Canone 2. de Doctr.
; why truly, that which was constant was not infrequent, but in the progress
of time, 'twas a pretty long progress from the beginning of Christianity to the
Thirteenth Century, that custom being very widely changed, for great and just
causes, such as the Laymens dipping their Beards in the Wine, when in the
Primitive times, I suppose, they had no Beards, it approved the custom of
Communicating in one kind, though contrary to the custom of the whole Primitive
Church for above a thousand years; who must yet have had the same reasons to
have done it, if they had been such great and just ones; for there can be no
other reason given now, but what would have been as good five hundred or a
thousand years before; but they having altered the Doctrine of the Primitive
Church; this was a just reason to alter the practice. I might add several
other confessions of their own learned men, for the Primitive Practice of
Communion in both kinds, as Albaspinaeus, de la Cerda, and many others, but it
might be tedious to my Reader as well as my self; I will conclude with one whom
Monsieur de Meaux is very well acquainted with, and whom he knows to be as
great a Master in Antiquity and all Learning, as any the French Church now has;
and I will beg leave to put the same words to Monsieur de Meaux, Negabitne hunc
Eucharisticae sub utraque specie Communionis usum Apostolis temporibus fuisse?
Multisque inde saeculis apud Ecclesiam perseverasse? Atqui hoc negare vel
inficiari non potest, nisi vel in ultima indoctorum, vel certe in prima
imprudentium hominum class censeri velit. Petav. de paenit. pub. c. 5.
, that he does to Monsieur Arnaud, Will any one deny this use of the
Eucharistic Communion to have been in both kinds, in the times of the Apostles?
And that it continued in the Church many Ages after? No man can deny or
question this, unless he be willing to be reckoned either in the last rank of
unlearned, or in the first of imprudent men.

And now having given so full a proof that the Communion in both kinds, was the
Practice of the Primitive Church, which I have done so largely, because
Monsieur de Meaux has the face to deny this, and to attempt to prove the
contrary; it will be very strange if after so many Affirmative Evidences, who
all unanimously and positively declare that the Communion was always in both
kinds, there should be any Negative Testimonies produced to the contrary, who
shall fully contradict these, and depose that it was very often the custom of
the Church to Communicate but in one. Monsieur de Meaux has made it his
business to do this, and brings several instances out of Antiquity to show,
that the Communion was very frequently given in the Primitive Church but in one
kind, as in the Communion of the Sick, the Communion of Infants, Domestic
Communion, and which, as he tells us, is very surprising, the Public Communion
in the Church. If he can but make out one of these customs, to wit, the latter,
that of Public Communion in the Church, it will be much more considerable than
all his other; for if they should prove true, namely, that in particular and
extraordinary cases of necessity, to which we know all positive precepts are to
give way; the Communion was given but in one kind to those who were incapable
to receive both, as to sick Persons and Children, or that in times of
Persecution Christians did carry home only the Bread with them, that so they
might eat it in private, when they could not so conveniently carry home the
Wine; What will this signify to the justifying the Constant and Public
Communions in one kind, when there are no such particular or extraordinary
reasons for it, and the establishing this by a Law, as a standing and necessary
Practice to be observed by the whole Church? The doing this, is as if the Jews,
because whilst they were in the Wilderness they could not so well observe the
Precept of Circumcision, and so were at that time for a particular reason
excused from it, should ever after have omitted it as unnecessary, and have
thought fit at last to forbid it by a Law of their Sanhedrim: This sure had
been making too bold with a positive Precept, although there might be a
particular case or instance wherein it was not so exactly to be observed: Every
Christian is obliged to have and to read the Word of God, notwithstanding that
there may be instances of some who are Dumb or Blind, who are incapable and so
excused from those otherwise necessary duties, as the Sick and the Captives,
and the Deaf are, from coming to Public Prayers and Public Worship; and where
there are the like particular exceptions, and as particular reasons for not
receiving the Sacrament in both kinds, as in the Sick, and Infants, who cannot
swallow the Bread, the Abstemii, who naturally abhor Wine and the like, there
without any derogating to the general Law of Christ, they may be dispensed
withal by virtue of that necessity, which takes away the obligation of all
positive Laws; but it will not at all follow from hence, that the Law does not
oblige in all other cases. If Monsieur de Meaux therefore could prove, as he
offers to do, but upon what false, or at least dubious grounds, I shall
consider by and by, that the Sick and Infants who could not swallow the Bread
did receive only the Wine; and that in the times of Persecution when they
could not come so often to the public Communion, that they communicated at home
only of tha Bread which they could carry away and keep safely by them, when
they could not so well either keep or carry away the Wine; this will by no
means justify the single Communion to all persons, and at all other times,
when there is no such particular necessity or extraordinary reason for it:
Though they might in those cases hope for the benefit of the Sacrament, and not
doubt but that God would bestow it upon them, though they received but in one
kind, when they could not receive both, yet there is not the same reason to
expect it at other times when we may, and so are obliged to both; as the Jews
whilst in the Wilderness might hope to enjoy all the benefits of Circumcision,
and being in Covenant with God, though they did not then observe the Law and
Institution of that Sacrament, but this they could not expect, but would
certainly have forfeited, if they did not punctually observe it afterward as
it was commanded them.

And as for the two instances he brings of Public Communion in the Church in
one kind, as on Good Friday in the Latin Church, and all Lent in the Mass of
the Presanctified, in the Greek, were those true, as I shall show they are not,
but that both Species were used in both those Communions, yet they being such
Communions as were particular to those days, and remarkably different from the
Communions at all other times of the year, would plainly prove, that the
ordinary and usual Communions upon all other other days, and at all other
times, were constantly in both kinds in the Latin and Greek Church: If they
were not, why are these picked out by him as single Instances of Communions in
one kind? By this he plainly acknowledges, that these differed from the stated
and constant Communions, and so confesses that those were in both kinds: And
though he ventures to say, that in the ordinary Office the Church received
either both species, or one only; yet this is so wholly without any shadow of
proof, that I wonder he would expose the credit of his learning, or his honesty
upon so notorious a falsehood, that has not the least Fig-leave to cover its
shame; for as to the decrees of Pope Leo and Gelasius, against Communicating in
one kind, to make these an Argument for it, is a piece of such refined art and
skill, as no body but de Meaux could have found out or made use of; but because
the strength of his Book lies upon the truth of these Instances of his, though
I think that be already shaken, yet I shall take it down to the very
foundation, and show how weak that is, and how unable to bear what he would
build upon it.

The first Custom he alleges of Communion in one kind, is that of the Sick;
Communion of Sick.
the two examples he gives of this, are Serapion and St. Ambrose, neither of
which are sufficient to his purpose; As to the first, we have the account of it
in an Epistle of St. Dennis of Alexandria, in the History of Eusebius L. 6. c.
44.
: He was in the state of Penance, having lapsed in a former persecution, and at
his death desired the Eucharist to be given as a token of Peace and Communion
with the Church; which was a favor thought fit to be then granted to
Penitents; to this purpose he sent for the Priest, but he being sick, and it
being in the nightime, upon consideration of his extremity and nearness to
death, for he had lain three days speechless and senseless before he came to
himself, and had desired this; the Priest, rather than he should want this
comfort, sent him by the young man who came to him, a small parcel of the
Eucharist, bidding him moisten it, and so put it into the mouth of the old man;
which he did, and so he immediately gave up the Ghost: Now here, says de Meaux
(...). Ib.
, although it appears from this relation, that the Priest sent only to his
Penitent that part of the Sacrament which was solid, in that he ordained only
the young man whom he sent, to moisten it in some liquor before he gave it to
the sick person; yet the good old man never complained that any thing was
wanting. But how does it appear from this relation that he sent only the
Bread, or what was solid; does (...), a little of the Sacrament, which is the
thing he is said to send, signify only Bread or the solid part? or does it
not rather signify a little of both the Species which make the Sacrament; as
it plainly does in Justin Martyr, who speaking of that Sacramental Food under
both kinds, says, this (...) is called by us the (...) Apolog. 2.
; And why might not he give him a little Wine as well as a little Bread? and
why may we not suppose that the liquour he was to moisten the Bread in was the
Wine? And not as Valesius, without any grounds, puts in his Translation Water:
I believe it is a thing strange and unheard of in Antiquity, to mix the
Eucharistic Bread with mere Water, and so take it infused in Water without any
Wine: Monsieur de Meaux who says the Custom of mixing the two species together,
was not in use till after-Ages (not in public I own, but in private it might)
will be more hard put to it to show the custom of mixing the Species of Bread
with Water; and this was so mixed with some liquor, that it was rather fluid
than solid, and so was said to be infused or poured into his mouth (...). Ib.
. That the Wine was used to be carried to the sick as well as the Bread, is
plain from Justin Martyr, if those who were absent from the Public Communion,
were, as it is probable, the sick, for to them the Deacons carried the very
same that they gave to those that were present, without any manner of
difference (...). Justin Martyr. Apolog. 2.
, as is plain from that fore-quoted place in his second Apology. And St. Hierom
relates of Exuperius, Bishop of Toulouse, that he carried the Body of our Lord
in a Basket, and the Blood in a Vessel of Glass Qui corpus Domini
canistrivimineo, sanguinem portat in vitro. Ep. ad Rustic. Monach.
, after he had sold the rich Utensils and Plate of the Church to relieve the
Poor and redeem Captives: And the Council of Tours thought the Wine so
necessary as well as the Bread, that it commands, that the Bread be always
dipped in the Cup, that so the Priest may truly say the Body and Blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ avail unto thee for the remission of Sins, and to eternal
Life. This Cassander Ego sane demonstare possum etiam infirmis plenum corporis
and sanguinis Sacramentam dispensatum, certe in promtu est Capitulum Turonensis
Concilii quod ab Ivone, Reginone and Burchardo anducitur, quo jubetur ut
Eucharistia quae in viaticum e vita excedentium rese vatur intincta sit in
Calicem Dni. ut Presbyter veraciter possit dicere, Corpus and sanguis Dni.
nostri Jesu Christi prosit tibi in vitam aeternam. Cassand. Dialog. apud
Calixt. p. 5.
produces as a demonstration that the Communion of the Sick used to be in both
kinds; and the reason which is there given for this, is so considerable, that
it plainly shows that both Species were necessary to make it a true Sacrament,
and that neither the Body and Blood of Christ, nor the virtue and benefit of
them could be given without both: and this forces de Meaux to confess P. 52.
, after all his shifts and artifices, that in effect, it is true that in some
sense, to be able to call it the Body and the Blood, the two Species must be
given. And further, from hence also the whole Doctrine of Transubstantiation
and Concomitancy grounded upon it, whereby they suppose the Body and Blood of
Christ to be in either of the Species, is wholly overthrown and destroyed; but
this by the by: as to Serapion, it is strange that the Priest should not rather
have sent him the Wine alone, if he had intended him but one Species, that
being more fit to be received, and more proper to enter the parcht throat of an
agonizing man, as de Meaux speaks, then the Bread, however moistened, and
therefore it was provided both by the Cannons of some Councils Council. Carthag.
4. Toled. 11.
and the Decrees of some Popes Paschal. 2. Urban. 2.
, that in cales of extraordinary necessity (which dispense with positive
Precepts) the sick and dying who could not swallow the Bread, might Communicate
only with the Wine; but to give them only Bread as de Meaux would have it in
both his Instances of Serapion and St. Ambrose, who were both a dying, and not
to give them the more proper Species of Wine, was very strange, if they had
designed them but one only Species without the other: But I pass to consider
St. Ambrose by it self, Paulinus who wrote his Life, relates this of his Death,
That Honoratus Bishop of Verceills, being to visit him in the night whilst he
was at his repose, he heard this Voice three times, Rise, stay not, he is a
dying: He went down and gave him the Body of our Lord, and the Saint had no
sooner received it, but he gave up the Ghost. So that it seems he died and
received only one kind; but who can help that, if he did, if he died before he
could receive the other, as it is probable from the History he did: If the
Roman Priests did like Honoratus give only the Bread to those, who when they
have received it die before they can take the Cup; this would be a very
justifiable excuse, and needs no great Authority to defend it; but if they will
undertake to prove that St. Ambrose had time enough to have received the Cup as
well as the Bread before he died, which they must merely by supposing some
thing more than is in the History; then by the very same way I will prove that
he did receive the Cup, and that that by a Syneckdoche is to be understood as
well as the Bread, by the Body of Christ which he is there said to receive: And
I am sure I have a better argument for this than they can have against it, or
than these two Instances of Serapion and St. Ambrose are for the custom of
Communicating the Sick in one kind, and that is a full proof of a contrary
custom for their Communicating in both: I confess I cannot produce any very
ancient testimonies for this, because in the first Ages the faithful who used
to receive the Communion very frequently in public, it being in its self and
its own nature a true part of public Worship, did seldom or never take it upon
their Death beds in private Vide Dallaeum de Cult. l. 4. c. 3.
; and therefore they who give us an account of the death of several very pious
and devout Christians, as Athanasius of St. Antony, Gregory Nazianzen of
Athanasius, of his own Father, and of his Sister Gorgonia, yet they never
mention any thing of their receiving the Sacrament at their deaths; no more
does Eusebius De vita Constant. l. 3. c. 46.
in his History of the Death of Helena, the most zealous Mother of Constantine;
but so soon as Christians came to receive the Sacrament as the most comfortable
Viaticum at their deaths, which was not till after-Ages, then by whatever
instances it appears that they received it at all, it appears also, that they
received it in both kinds; and it is plain, that among the numerous examples of
this nature, which are to be found in Bid and Surius, and the Writers of the
Saints Lives, there is not one to be produced to the contrary; else no doubt
the learned Bishop of Meaux, who picks up every thing that seems to make for
his purpose, and who was fain to content himself with those two insignificant
ones of Serapion and St. Ambrose, would not have omitted them. I shall mention
some few in opposition to those two of his, of those who according to St.
Austine's advice, Quoties aliqua infirmitas supervenerit, Corpus and sanguinem
Christi ille qui aegrotat, accipiat. Sermo. 215 de Tempore.
When they were sick, did partake both of the Body and of the Blood of Christ,
contrary to what they would have Paulinus report of St. Ambrose to St. Austine
himself, that he did only receive the Body: And the first shall be that of
Valentinus of Pavia, in the fifth Century, Ante obitum propriis manibus accepit
corporis and sanginis Domini Sacramentum. Surius August. 4.
who before his death took with his own hands the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ. The second, that of Elpidius, as it is in the next Century
reported by Gregory the Great (...). Gregorii Dialog. 616. (...).
, That calling his Brethren, and standing in the midst of them, he took the
Body and the Blood of the Lord, and continuing in prayer, gave up the Ghost:
And he mentions this no less then of three others in the same Dialogues, and in
his Office for Visiting the Infirm, after Prayers and other things, then says
he, Deinde communicet eum corpore and sanguine Domini. Gregor. Sacram. Visit.
infirm.
Let the Priest Communicate him with the Body and Blood of Christ. In the same
Age the Writer of St. Vedastus his Life, says, Sacrosancto Corporis and
sanguinis Domini Viatico confirmatus obiit. Alcuin in vit. Vedast.
He died, being confirmed with the most sacred Viaticum of the Body and Blood
of Christ. And the same also of Richarius, very near in the same words;
Isidore, the famous Bishop of Sevil, Received with a profound sigh the Body and
Blood of the Lord, and died presently after Corpus and sanguinem Domini cum
profundo gemitu suscepit. Redemptus de obit. Isidor.
: And to go down no lower than the next Age, Bid then reports of Ceadda, a
British Bishop, That he fortified his departure with the perception of the Body
and Blood of our Lord seven days before Obitum suum Dominici Corporis and
sanguinis perceptione septimo ante mortem die munivit. Bed. Hist. Angl. l. 4.
: And the same of St. Cuthbert, Who received from him the most wholesome
Sacraments of Christ's Body and Blood Acceptis a me Sacramentis salutaribus
Dominici Corporis and Sanguinis. Id. in vit. Cuthberti.
. And thus did that glorious Prince Charles the Great, make his pious exit,
Commanding his most familiar Priest Hiltibald, to come unto him and give him
the Sacraments of the Lords Body and Blood Jussit familiarissimum Pontificem
suum Hiltibaldum venire ad se ut ei Sacramenta Dominici Corporis and Sanguinis
tribueret. Eginhard vit. Caroli Mag.
. And the same universal Custom and Practice I might bring down to all those
other Ages that succeed, till a new Doctrine of the Sacrament brought in a new
Practice by degrees; but I cannot omit one in the Eleventh Age, though it has a
Legendary Miracle joined with it; it is an account Damianus Presbyterum quendam
Cumanae Ecclesie Eucharistium detalisse aegroto, illum mox cum in Ecclesiam
rediens aliquantulum Dominici sanguinis comperisset remansisse in calice --
Peri Damian. Opusc.
gives of a Priest, Who had carried the Eucharist to a sick person, and by
negligence brought back, and left in the Cup a little of the Blood of the Lord:
So that it is plain, nowithstanding the fear either of keeping or spilling,
they carried the Wine with them to the sick as well as the Bread, and
Communicated them with both: And now if we add to these the Decree of Pope
Paschal the Second, forbidding to mix the Sacramental Elements, but to give
them seperately and distinctly, unless to young Children and to the Sick (which
exception makes it unquestionable, that both were then given to the Sick) and
the forementioned Canon of the Council of Tours, which is in Burchard, Ivo,
and Regino, commanding the Bread to be dipped in the Wine, that the Priest may
truly say to the sick, The Body and Blood of Christ be profitable to thee;
these being all laid together, make it clear beyond all contradiction, that the
Communion of the Sick was not, as de Meaux pretends, in one kind, but in both:
and as a parting blow upon this point, I shall only offer that observation of
their own learned Menardus Cum communicate infirmus quem vis morbi non ad tantam
virium imbecillitatem adduxit dicitur utraque forma Corpus Domini nostri Jesu
Christi custodiat te in vitam aeternam, sanguis Domini nostri Jesu Christi
redimat te in vitam aeternam, quae distinctam sumptionem indicant; at dum
communicate infirmus qui ingravari caeperit, unica tantum formula recitatur in
hunc modum Corpus and Sanguis Domini nostri Jesu Christi custodiat animam tuam
in vitam aeternam. Menard. notae in Greg. Sacram. p. 379, 380.
, from an ancient Mass, in his Notes upon the Sacramentary of St. Gregory, that
in case the sick person was in a condition to receive the Elements separately,
then this form was used, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ keep thee to eternal
Life; The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve thee to eternal Life; which,
says he, shows a distinct Sumption: If he was in such weakness and extremity as
to have them given mixed, then it was said, The Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ preserve thy Soul to Eternal Life: which as well shows a Sumption of
both the Elements, though in a different manner, according to the different
state of the sick person.

The Communion of Infants is the next custom alleged by this Author; Communion
of Infants.
it was a very ancient, and almost universal practice of the Church, to give
the Eucharist to little Children as soon as they were Baptized, thinking it to
be as necessary to their Salvation as Baptism, and that they were as capable of
the one as the other; and therefore the Council of Trent, which has condemned
all those who say the Eucharist is necessary for Infants, has herein determined
against the general sense and practice of the Church, and put no less men than
St. Austin and Innocent, a Pope of their own, notwithstanding his
Infallibility, who were notoriously of this Opinion, under an Anathema; which,
how they can reconcile with their other principles of following Tradition, and
of the Churches Infallibility in all Ages, I shall leave to them to consider
and make out if they can: But as to our present question, when the Communion
was thus given to Infants, I utterly deny that it was only in one kind; I
cannot indeed produce so many proofs that it was in both, as in the Sick,
because there was not so much occasion in any History to make mention of the
one as the other; but that which was the very ground and foundation of this
Practice of Communicating Infants, and the reason why they thought it necessary
to their Salvation, namely, those words of our Savior, John 6.53. Except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you:
these do suppose an equal necessity to drink the Blood as to eat the Flesh, and
to do both as well as one: And hence St. Austine who denis, as he says, all
Catholics do with him, That Infants can have Life without partaking of the
Eucharist, expresses it in such words as suppose plainly their partaking of
both kinds, viz. Parvulos sine cibo carnis Christi and sanguinis potu vitam non
habituros -- sine participatione corporis and sanguinis Domini. Ep. 106.
Their distinct eating the flesh and drinking the blood of Christ; as other
Authors also do, who mention this very thing in relation to Infants Non cibatis
carne neque potatis sanguine Christi Hipogn. l. 5. Corporis Dominici edulio ac
sanguinis haustu satiatos. Liber Catoh. magni de Imag. c. 27.
; and Pope Paschal the Second, who in the eleventh Century, allows the mixing
the two species for Infants, by this means appoints them to take both, and
supposes it an original custom to do so; and if we had nothing else, yet the
remaining custom in the Greek and Eastern, and in all Churches that still
continue the Communion of Infants, to Communicate them in both kinds, is as
full an evidence of this as can be expected: And de Meaux has not been able to
offer any one example to the contrary, but that poor one out of St. Cyprian,
which if it proves any thing, it proves that the whole Christian Assembly
received only the Cup in their public and solemn Meetings, as well as the
Infant he mentions; which he is not so hardy as to venture to say, nor dare any
one that understands any thing of St. Cyprian's time; but the Story he would
improve to his purpose is this: Cyprian de Lausis p. 132. Edit Oxon.
A Child who had been carried by its Nurse to an Idol Temple, and had there
tasted of a little Bread and Wine that was Sacrificed, this was afterward
brought by its Mother, who knew nothing of this matter, to the Christian
Assembly, and there it discovered the strange misfortune had befallen to it;
For all the time of the Prayers it was in great trouble and uneasiness, it
cried and tossed and was impatient, as if it had been in a fit and an agony, and
seemed to confess that by its actions, which it could not by words; thus it
continued whilst the Solemn Offices were performed, and toward the end of
them, when the Deacon bringing the Cup about to all the rest, at last came to
that, it turned away its face and kept its lips close, and would not receive
it, but the Deacon poured in a little into its mouth against its will, which it
quickly brought up again, not being able to retain what was so holy and sacred
in its impure and polluted stomach: This was a miraculous and extraordinary
warning to others not to partake with any part of the Idol Worship or
Offerings, which they were in that time greatly tempted to; and for this
purpose St. Cyprian relates the thing of his own knowledge, he being an
Eyewitness of it: But Monsieur de Meaux would have this serve to show, that
the Child had the Cup only given to it, there being no mention of the Bread,
and therefore that it received but in one kind, and consequently that it was
the custom for Infants to receive but in one kind in St. Cyprian's time; if so,
then it was the custom also for all Christians in their Religious Assemblies to
receive only in one kind; for St. Cyprian mentions nothing at all of the Bread
in this place given to the rest, any more than to the Child; and if de Meaux or
any one that pretends to any thing of Learning, will assert this, That in St.
Cyprian's time Christians in the public Communion received but one Species, and
that this Species was that of Wine; I Will willingly give them this instance of
the Child, and take them up upon the other, where I am sure I have all the
learned men that ever read St. Cyprian, or understand any thing of Antiquity,
on my side: But why does not St. Cyprian mention any thing of the Bread, if
that were then given to the Child or others? Because he had no reason to do it
in this short relation, which was not to give an account of all that was then
done by the Christians in their Religious Offices, but only of this accident
which happened to the Child at that time, it being his business in that
Discourse to deter men from joining in the Pagan Idolatry, from the terrible
Judgments of God upon several who had done this; and after this remarkable
instance of the Child, he relates another of a man who had received the Bread
in the Sacrament Sacrificio a sacerdote celebrato, partem cum caeteris ausus
est latenter accipere, sanctum Domini edere and contrectare non potuit, cinerem
far se apertis manibus invenit. Cyp. Ib. de Laps.
(so that they received that, it seems, as well as the Wine) which was as
miraculously turned into Ashes. But why was not the Child as much disturbed at
the receiving the Bread, if that was given it, as at the receiving the Wine?
Why so it was, during the whole time of being there at the Prayers, and at the
whole Solemnity it was under the same trouble, agitation, and discomposure, but
most remarkably at the end and conclusion of all when it had taken the whole
Sacrament.

If the other Christians received the other part of the Sacrament, though it be
not mentioned, so might this child; and as, I think, none will from hence
attempt to show that all Christians were then deprived of the Bread, so it is
plain, they all had the Cup, and that the Children as well as the Adult, did
then partake of both, appears from the same Treatise of St. Cyprian de Lapsis,
where he represents the Children who were thus carried to partake of the Idol
Offerings, as blaming their Parents for it, and making this Vindication for
themselves, Nos nihil secimus nec derelicto cibo and poculo Domini ad profana
contagia sponte properavimus -- Perdidit nos aliena persidia. Cypr. de Laps.
We have not left the Meat nor the Cup of the Lord, nor gone of our selves to
the profane Banquets, but another perfidiousness has destroyed us. So that
they were then to partake not only of the Cup, but of the Meat of the Lord.

Monsieur de Meaux was in a great straight sure for some other instances of the
Communion of Children in one kind, when he brings in P. 91, 92, 94.
the Schoolboys at Constantinople, who according to Evagrius Hist. l. 4.
, had the remainders of the Bread that was left at the Communion given to them;
which custom he finds also in a French Council Mascon.
; Were these Boys true Communicants for all that? were not the Elements given
them, as they were sometimes to the Poor, who were not present at the Office,
merely that they might consume them, that so they might not be undecently kept
or carried away? As for the same reason it was the custom to burn them in the
Church of Jerusalem Hesych. in Levit. l. 2. c. 8.
, and as it is now with us in the Church of England, for the Communicants to
eat them before they go out of the Church: If we should have some remainders of
consecrated Bread which we might call the particles of Christ's Body, as
Evagrius there does, would the eating of them be an argument that we had a
custom to Communicate in one kind; and yet Monsieur de Meaux's Wit and
Eloquence must be laid out on such ridiculous things as these, to show what
Customs there remain in History in testimony against the Protestants, P. 94.
and how the Communion of some Infants under the sole Species of Wine, and some
under that of Bread, is a clear conviction of their error. It would be to
little other purpose, but to tire my self and my Reader to follow that great
man through all his little Arguments and Authorities of this Nature, and
especially into the dark and blind paths of later Ages, when Superstition and
Ignorance lead men out of the way, both of Scripture and Antiquity, which are
the good old Paths that we are resolved to walk in. His French Answerers, I
hear, have pursued him through all these, and driven him out of every private
skulking-hole he would make to himself: I am rather for meeting him in the open
Field, and for engaging his main strength, and most considerable arguments and
objections; and I seriously profess, though I never met with any Book written
so shrewdly and cunningly, with so much Art and Eloquence, upon a subject that
I thought could hardly bear it, though it stood in need of it above any other;
yet there is not any thing of strength in it, that I have not fairly
considered, and I hope fully answered.

The third Custom is the Domestic Communion, Of Domestic Communion.
when after the Christians had received the Sacrament in their public
Meetings, they carried it also home with them to receive it alone in their
private Houses; this must be allowed also to be very ancient, being mentioned
both by Tertullian Accepto corpore Domini and Reservato de orat. Cap. ult.
Nesciat maritus quid secreto ante omnem cibum gustes. Ad Uxor. l. 2.


and St. Cyprian Cum quaedam arcam suam, in qua Domini sanctum fuit. De Laps.
, and the reason of it was, that in those times of Persecution when they could
not come so frequently to the public Communions, and yet stood in need of the
greatest aids and supports, they might not want the benefit and comfort of what
was so precious to them; but though there might be great zeal and piety in this
practice, yet I cannot wholly excuse it from superstition, nor think it to be
any thing less than an abuse of the Sacrament; and the same opinion the Church
quickly had of it, and therefore universally forbad it Council. Caesar Augustan.
; and as Petavius says, De paenit. publ. l. 1. c. 7.
It would be now a very punishable action, and accounted a great profanation of
the Sacrament. Howe-ever angry Monsieur de Meaux is with the Protestants for
calling it so P. 105.
, undoubtedly the Eucharist was not intended by our Savior for any such
private use, but to be a public part of Christian Worship, and a solemn
Commemoration of his Death and Passion: And I know not how to call this a true
or perfect Communion, unless as it was a part of the same Communion that was in
the Church; as the sending a person part of the entertainment at a common Feast
or Banquet, is a making him partaker of the same Feast, though he be not
present at the Table, but eats it by himself; however, let it be allowed to be
never so true a Communion, yet I know no advantage that can be made of it, to
the purpose of Communion in one kind, unless it can be made appear, that after
the Faithful had communicated of both kinds in the Church, that they only
reserved and carried home one Species to be received in their private Houses:
How improbable is this, if it be granted that they received both in public,
which is not denied; why should not they be as desirous to partake of both at
home, as they were in the Church? Upon what account, as de Meaux says, P. 114.
should they refuse them both? And believe that the the sacred Body with which
they trusted them, was more precious than the Blood? He is forced to own, That
the Blood was not refused to the Faithful to carry with them, when they
required it P. 113.
. And why they should not desire that as well as the other, I cannot imagine;
the only argument he has against it, is that they could not keep it any long
time: But could not they keep it so long as till the next public Communion?
could they not conserve the Wine in little Vessels to that purpose, as well as
the Bread? Does Nature it self, as he pretends, more oppose the one than the
other? when we find by experience that Wine will keep much longer without
corruption than Bread; What a vain cavil is it therefore, which begins and runs
through his whole Book, to make us believe, that the Christians so often
communicated under the species of Bread alone, because the species of Wine
could not be either so long or so easily reserved, being too subject to
alteration; and Jesus Christ would not that any thing should appear to the
sense in this Mystery of Faith, contrary to the ordinary course of Nature P. 9.
. But it is matter of fact we have now to do with, and that must be made out,
not by slight surmises, but by good testimony; and whether the Christians when
this custom of Domestic Communion was in use among them, did not reserve and
carry home both kinds, the Wine as well as the Bread, let us now examine:
Monsieur de Meaux has not one Authority that proves any thing more, than that
they used to reserve the Sacrament or Body of Christ, which by a Synecdoche is
a common phrase in Ecclesiastical Writers for the whole Eucharist, and is used
by Tertullian and St. Cyprian, where the two Species were unquestionably used,
as in the Public Communion; St. Basil who speaks of the Communion of Hermits,
and who is produced as an evidence by de Meaux, that they communicated in the
Deserts, advises them expressly to partake of the Body and of the Blood of
Christ (...). Basil. Ep. 280.
; and when those Solitarys had the Communion brought to them, that it was in
both kinds, appears from their own Cardinal Bona Re um Lyturg. l. 2. c. 18.
, in the relation of Zozimus, an Abbot of a Monastery, his carrying in a Vessel
a portion of the sacred Body and Blood of Christ, to one Mary of Egypt, who
had lived forty seven years in the Wilderness. That those who communicated at
home had both kinds sent to them, appears evidently from Justin Martyr Apolog.
2.
, and de Meaux owns from him, That the two species it is true, were carried P.
112.
; but this, says he, was presently after they had been consecrated. Not till
the Public Communion was over, and then also the Faithful carried away what
they reserved; but it does not appear that they kept them; nor does it appear
to the contrary, but they might have kept them if they had pleased.

He who wrote the Life of St. Basil, by the name of Amphilochius, reports the
story of a Jew, who being got secretly among the Christians at the time of
Communion, communicated with them, and took the Sacrament first of the Body,
and then of the Blood; and then took and carried away with him (...).
Amphiloch. vit. Basil. c. 7.
some part of each of the Elements, and showed them to his Wife, to confirm the
truth of what he had done. Monsieur de Meaux has made no objection to the
credit of this Writer; and no doubt had it not been usual for Christians to
carry away both the Elements, the Writer of that Life, let him be who he will,
had not told so improbable a Story.

Gregory Nazianzen Orat. 11.
relates of his Sister Gorgonia, That what her hands had treasured up of the
Anti-types of the precious Body or Blood of Christ, that she mingled with her
tears, and anointed her self withal. So that it seems her hands treasured up
both the Species or Anti-types, as he calls them; and it is a mighty subtilty
to say, She did not treasure them up both together, when she certainly
treasured up both.

But if we had no such instances as these, there are two such unanswerable
Authorities against de Meaux his Opinion, That the faithful carried home only
the Bread, and communicated but in one kind, as are enough to make him give up
this part of the Cause, and those are the famous Albaspinaeus, Bishop of
Orleans, and Cardinal Baronius, two men whose skill in Antiquity is enough to
weigh down whatever can be said by de Meaux, or any other, and whose words will
go farther in the Church of Rome than most men's; and they are both positive,
that not only the Bread, but that the Wine also was reserved and carried home
by Christians in their Domestic Communions; Upon what account can they prove,
says Albaspinaeus Sed quo tandem pacto probare poterunt Laicis Eucharistiam sub
specie panis domum portare licuisse, sub vini non licuisse. Albaspin. Observat.
4. l. 1.
, that it was lawful for Laics to carry home the Eucharist under the Species of
Bread, and not under the Species of Wine? Consider, says Baronius Hic Lector
considera quam procul abhorreant a Patrum Traditione usuque Ecclesiae
Catholicae qui nostro tempore Heretici negant, asservandam esse Sacratissimam
Eucharistiam quam videmus non sub specie panis tantum sed sub specie vini olim
consuevisse recondi. Baron. Annal. an. 404. n. 32.
to his Reader, how the Heretics of our time differ from the Tradition of the
Fathers, and the Custom of the Catholic Church, who deny that the Eucharist is
to be reserved, when we see it used to be kept, not only in the Species of
Bread, but in the Species of Wine. And that he meant this of private
reservation as well as in the Church, he goes on further, to prove this keeping
of both Species by the Authority of Gregory the Great, who gives an account in
his Dialogues of one Maximianus a Monk, and others his Companions, who being in
a great Storm and Tempest at Sea, and in great danger of their Lives, they took
the Sacrament which they had carried with them, and in both kinds received the
Body and Blood of their Redeemer (...). Greg. Dialog. Graece. l. 3. c. 36.
: But to this says Monsieur de Meaux, To show the faithful had kept the two
Species in their Vessel from Rome to Constantinople, it ought before to have
been certain that there was no Priest in this Vessel, or that Maximian, of whom
St. Gregory speaks in this place, was none, though he was the Superior of a
Monastery. But Gregory speaks not a word of any Priest being there, and
Maximian might be no Priest, though he were Superior of a Monastery, for they
and the Monks were often no Priests; but if a Priest had been there, it had
been unlawful for him, according to the Principles of the Roman Church, to have
Consecrated the Eucharist in such a Tempest, in an unconsecrated place, and at
Sea; where according to Cassander Lyturgic. c. 34. Haec Missa sicca, i. e. sine
consecratione and communicatione, etiam navalis seu nautica dicitur, eo quod in
loco fluctuante and vacillante ut in mari and flaminibus, quibus in locis
plenam missam celebrandam non putant. In libello ordinis Missae secundum usum
Romanae Ecclesiae.
, they are not permitted to use Consecration, nor to have the full Mass, but
only what he calls the Missa sicca, and the Missa Navalis: and it is plain
Baronius, with whose Authority I am now urging de Meaux, is of the mind that
the faithful did carry the two Species in their Vessel, for he says so expressly
in so many words In Navi portasse Navigantes Christi Corpus and Sanguinem.
Baron. Annal. an. 404. n. 32.
: There is no getting off the plain and evident Authority of these two great
men for receiving the Eucharist in both kinds; Monsieur de Meaux, though he
heaves a little, yet cannot but sink under it, and it makes him confess, That
these passages may very well prove that the Blood was not refused to the
faithful to carry with them, if they required it, but can never prove that they
could keep it any long time, since that Nature it self opposes it. So that if
Nature be not against keeping the Wine, Custom and Authority it seems are for
it; and I dare say, that Nature will suffer the Wine to be kept as long as the
Bread; however, they who are such friends to Miracles, and have them so ready
at every turn, especially in the Sacrament, have no reason methinks to be so
afraid of Nature.

Monsieur de Meaux passes next to the Public Communion in the Church; Of Public
Communion in the Church.
And if he can prove that to have been in one kind, he has gained his main
point, however unsuccessfully he has come off with the rest; though we see all
his other pretenses are too weak to be defended, and we have destroyed, I
think, all his outworks, yet if he can but maintain this great fort, he saves
the Capitol, and preserves the Romish Cause: He has used, I confess, all
imaginable stratagems to do it, and has endeavored to make up his want of
strength, with subtlety and intrigue. He will not pretend it was a constant
custom to have the Public Communion in one kind, but that it was free for
Christians to receive either both Species, or one only, in the Church it self,
and in their solemn Assemblies; and that they did this on some particular days
and occasions, as in the Latin Church on Good Friday, and almost all Lent in
the Greek. Now though we have made it out, that the whole Catholic Church did
generally in their Public Communions use both kinds, yet if they left it free
to Christians to receive one or both as they pleased, or to receive sometimes
both, and sometimes one, this if it can be proved, will show that they thought
Communion in one might be lawful and sufficient, and that it was not necessary
to be in both: Let us therefore see what evidence there is for any such thing,
for it looks very strangely, that the Church in all its Lyturgies, in all the
accounts of celebrating the Communion, should always use both kinds to all that
partook of the Sacrament, and yet leave it free to Christians to receive it in
one if they pleased, and that on some few days they should give the same
Sacrament in a quite different manner then they used at all other times; this
if it be true, must be very odd and unaccountable, and unless there be very
full and evident proof of it, we may certainly conclude it to be false: What
cloud of witnesses then does de Meaux bring to justify this, what names of
credit and authority does he produce for it? Why, not one, not so much as a
single testimony against the universal suffrage of the whole Church, and of the
most learned of our Adversaries, who all agree in this truth, That the Public
Communion was in both kinds for above a thousand years: Is there any one Writer
in all the Ten, nay, Twelve Centuries, who plainly contradicts it? any one
between the Apostles and Thomas Aquinas, who says, it was the Custom of the
Catholic Church or any part of it, to Communicate only in one kind? Nay, can
de Meaux show any particular persons, or any sort of Christians that ever were
in the World before the thirteenth Age, that were against both kinds, and
received only in one, except the Manichees, a sort of vile and abominable
Heretics, who are the only Instances in Antiquity for Communion in one kind:
These men believing Christ not to have really shed his Blood, but only in
phantasm and appearance, would not take the Sacrament of his Blood, and by the
same reason neither should they have taken that of his Body; and thinking Wine
not to be the Creature of God, the Father of Christ, but of the Devil, or some
evil Principle or bad Spirit, and so calling it the Gall of the Dragon; they
had a general abhorrence from it, and so would not receive it in the Sacrament:
Pope Leo heard that several of these were at Rome, and that to cover their
infidelity, and skulk more securely, Cum ad tegendam infidelitatem suam nostris
audeant interesse mysteriis, ita in Sacramentorum Communione se temperant, ut
interdum tutius lateant ore indigno Christi Corpus accipiunt, Sanguinem autem
Redemptionis nostrae haurire omnino declinant, Quod ideo vestram volumus scire
sanctitatem ut vobis hujusmodi homines and his manisestentur indiciis, and
quorum deprehema fuerit sacrilega simulatio, notati and proditi, a sanctorum
societate sacerdotali auctoritate pellantur. Leo Sermo 4 de Quadrag.
they came to the public Assemblies, and were present at the very Sacrament;
but yet they did so order themselves at the Communion, that so they might the
more safely hide themselves, and be undiscovered: They take with their unworthy
mouth the Body of Christ, but they refused to drink his Blood; this he gave
notice of to his Roman Congregation, that so these men might be made manifest
to them by these marks and tokens, that their sacrilegious disimulation being
apprehended, they might be marked and discovered, and so expelled or
excommunicated from the society of the Faithful, by the Priestly Authority. Now
how can all this, which shows plainly, that the Communion at Rome was in both
kinds, be turned to the advantage of Communion in one; this requires the slight
and the dexterity of Monsieur de Meaux, and it is one of the most artificial
fetches that ever were; It is the only argument which he has to prove that the
Public Communion was not in both kinds; This remark upon the words of Pope Leo,
and upon the Decree of Gelasius. which is much of the like nature; This
fraudulent design, says he, of the Manichees, could hardly be discovered,
because Catholics themselves did not all of them Communicate under both
Species. But how knows he that? That is the question that is not to be begged,
but proved; and it is a strange way of proving it by no other medium but only
supposing it, and that very groundlesly and unreasonably: Is this poor weak
supposition to bear the weight of that bold assertion which contradicts all
manner of Evidence and Authority, that the Public Communion in the Church was
in one kind? If it had been so, and Catholics had not all of them Communicated
under both Species, the Manichees would not have been discovered at all, for
they would have done the same the Catholics did, and to all outward appearance
been as good Catholics as they; they might have kept their Opinion and Heresy
to themselves, and that it seems they intended to dissemble and keep private;
but as to their Practice it would have been but the same with others, and so
they could not have been found out or discovered by that; But it was taken
notice of at the last, says de Meaux, that these Heretics did it out of
affectation, insomuch that the holy Pope, St. Leo the Great, would that those
who were known as such by this mark, should be expelled the Church. How does it
appear that their affectation was taken notice of? or that they did it out of
that? does Pope Leo say any thing of this? but only points at their Practice
without so much as intimating their reason; Was their affectation the mark by
which the Pope would have them known? As de Meaux slighly, but not honestly,
makes him speak, by putting those words of his, as relating to his own that
went before, whereas in Leo they relate not to the doing it outof affectation,
for he speaks not a word of that, but merely to the not drinking the Blood;
This was the only mark by which they were known as such; by these indicia,
these marks and tokens of not drinking the Blood, they were to be known, and
discovered, and made manifest, according to the words of St. Leo, by their
visible Practice, not by their Opinion or their Affectation; and for this they
were to be expelled the Society of Christians, because they refused to drink
the Blood of our Redemption, without regard to their private or particular
reasons, which St. Leo takes no notice of: These cunning and dissembling
Heretics to cover their dissimulation and infidelity, and hide themselves the
better, which was it seems their main end and design, might take the Cup, but
yet not drink of it nor taste the least drop of Wine; and for this cause there
must have been time and a particular vigilance to discern these Heretics from
amongst the Faithful, and not because there was a general liberty to receive
one or both Species; as de Meaux pretends, That liberty is a very strange thing
which has no manner of evidence for it, which Pope Leo says nothing of, but the
quite contrary, namely, that the Body and Blood were both received in the
Communion; and which if it had been allowed, as it would have bred infinite
confusion in the Church, so the Manichees might have made use of it to their
wicked purpose, of receiving only in one kind. The continuance of this fraud
and dissimulation, either in the Manichees or some other Heretics and
superstitious Christians, for it does not appear who they were caused a
necessity at last in the time of Pope Gelasius, to make an express Order and
Decree against the sacrilegious dividing of the Sacrament, and the taking of
one Species without the other: And let us now come to consider that, as it is
in Gratian's Decree, Comperimus autem quod quidam sumpta tantummodo corporis
sacri portione a calice Sacrati cruoris abstineant, qui proculdubio (quoniam
nescio qua superstitione docentur astringi) aut integra Sacramenta percipiant
aut ab integris arceantur, quia divisio unius ejusdemque mysterii sine grandi
sacrilegio non potest pervenire. Gratian. decret. 3. pars did. 2.
We find, says he, that some taking only a portion of the Body, abstain from
the Cup of the holy Blood, which persons (because they seem to adhere to I know
not what superstition) let them either take the Sacraments entirely, or else be
wholly kept from them, because the division of one and the same Mystery cannot
be without great Sacrilege. Can any thing be more plain or more full than this
against mangling and dividing the blessed Sacrament, and against taking it in
one kind? is it possible to put by such a home-thrust against it as this is?
and will it not require great art to turn this into an argument for Communion
in one kind, which is so directly against it? Surely the substance of words and
arguments must be annihilated and transubstantiated into quite another thing,
before this can be done: Let us see another trial of Monsieur de Meaux's skill,
Gelasius, says he, was obliged to forbid expressly to Communicate any other ways
then under both Species: A sign that the thing was free before, and that they
would not have thought of making this Ordinance, but to take from the
Manicheans the means of deceiving. Was it then free till the time of Pope
Gelasius, to receive either in one or both kinds? does any such thing appear in
the whole Christian Church? or is there any instance of any one Public
Communion without both kinds? is a Decree of a Church-Governour upon a
particular occasion against particular Heretics and superstitious Persons new
rose up, and persuant to a general Law of Christianity, and the Custom of the
whole Church? is that a sign the thing was free before? Then it was free for
Christians not to come to the Sacrament at all, before such and such Councils
and Bishops commanded them to come at such times: Then it was free for the
Priests who minister'd, to receive but in one kind, before this Decree of
Gelasius, for it is to those it is referred in Gratian, where the title of it is,
The Priest ought not to receive the Body of Christ, without the Blood Corpus
Christi sine ejus sanguine sacerdos non debet accipere. Ib.
. Though there is no mention of the Priest in the Decree, neither was there in
the title in the ancient MSS Copies, as Cassander assures us Ep. 19.
; and it seems plainly to concern neither the Priest nor the Faithful, who by a
constant and universal custom received in both kinds, but only those
superstitious persons who were then at Rome, and, for I know not what reason,
refused the Cup; and though there was a particular reason to make this Decree
against them, yet there needed no reason to make a Decree for the Faithful, who
always Communicated in both kinds, and it is plain from hence, did so in the
time of Gelasius.

The motive inducing this Pope to make this Decree was, because he found that
some did not receive the Blood as well as the Body; and the reason why they did
not, was some either Manichean or other Superstition; so that this Decree, I
own, was occasioned by them, and particularly relates to them, and shows that
they herein differed from the Faithful, not only in their superstition, but in
the practice too; but to say that he forbad this practice only in respect of
such a Superstition going along with it, and that he did not forbid the
Practice it self, which was the effect of it, is so notoriously false, that the
Decree relates wholly to the Practice, and as to the Superstition it does not
inform us what it was, or wherein it consisted; no doubt it must be some
Superstition or other, that hinders any from taking the Cup, the superstitious
fear of spilling Christ's Blood, or the superstitious belief that one Species
contains both the Body and Blood together, and so conveys the whole virtue of
both; which is truly Superstition, as having no foundation in Scripture, or in
the Institution of Christ, which gives the Sacrament its whole virtue, and and
annexs it not to one but to both Species. And whatever the Superstition be,
Gelasius declares it is Sacrilege to divide the Mystery, or to take one
Species without the other; the reason which he gives against taking one kind,
is general and absolute, because the Mystery cannot be divided without
Sacrilege; so that however our Adversaries may assoile themselves from the
Superstition in Gelasius, they can never get off from the Sacrilege: How wide
these conjectures from Pope Leo and Gelasius are from the mark, which de Meaux
aims at, I shall let him see from one of his own Communion, whose knowledge and
judgment in antiquity was no way inferior to his own, and his honesty much
greater; who thus sums up that matter against one that would have strained and
perverted it to the same use that de Meaux does: Conjectura vero quam adfert ex
Leonis Sermon and Gelasii decreto prorsus contrarium evincit, nam ex iis
Manifest constat, horum Pontificum temporibus Communionem non nisi in utraque
specie in Ecclesia usitatam fuisse; Quomodo enim Manichaei hac nota
deprehenderentur, quod ingredientes Ecclesiam, percepto cum reliquis corpore
Domini a sanguine Redemptionis abstinerent nisi calix Dominici sanguinis
distributue fuisset and quomodo superstitionis convincerentur qui sumpta
Dominici corporis pertione, a calice sacrati cruoris abstinerent nisi calix
ille sacrati cruoris omnibus in Ecclesia fuisset oblatus? non igitur ut quidam
existimant novo decreto utriusque speciei usum hi sanctissimi Pontisices
edixerunt sed eos qui solennem hunc and receptum calicis sumendi morem
neglexerunt, ille ut heresis Manichaeae affines notandos and evitandos, hic ad
usitatatam integri Sacramenti perceptionem compellendos aut ab omni prorsus
Communione arcendos censait, Nam Catholicis novo decreto non opus erat qui
receptam integra Sacramenta percipiendi consuetudinem religiose servabant.
Cassand. de Com. sub utraque p. 1026.
The Conjecture, says he, which he makes from the Sermon of Pope Leo, and the
Decrees of Gelasius, does wholly evince the contrary to what he pretends, for
from them it manifestly appears, that in the time of these two Popes, the
Communion was only used in both kinds; for how should the Manichees be known
by this mark, that when they came to the Churches, they abstained from the
Blood of our Redemption, after they had with others, taken the Body of the
Lord; unless the Cup of the Lord had been distributed? and how should they be
convicted of Superstition, who took a portion of the Lord's Body, and abstained
from the Cup, unless the Cup of his sacred Blood had been offered to all in the
Church? These holy Popes did not therefore, as some imagine, appoint the use of
both Species by a new Decree, but those who neglected this solemn and received
custom of taking the Cup; one of these Popes would have them avoided and marked
as those, who were akin to the Manichean Heresy; the other would have them
compelled to the accustomed perception of the entire Sacrament, or else to be
wholly kept from all Communion, for there was need of no new Decree for the
Catholics who did Religiously observe the received custom of taking the
Sacrament entirely, that is, in both kinds.

There needs much better Arguments to prove the Public Communion in the Church
to have been ever in one kind, than such improbable Guesses and forced
Conjectures, whereby plain and full evidences are rackt and tortured to get
that out of them, which is contrary to their whole testimony, sense, and
meaning. Let us enquire then, whether any particular instances can be given as
matters of fact, which will make it appear, that the Church ever used only one
kind in its Public Communions; this de Meaux attempts to show in the last
place, and as the strongest evidence he can rally up for his otherwise
vanquished cause: He brings both the Latin and Greek Church to his assistance,
though the latter he owns, appears not for the most part, very favorable to
Communion under one Species, but yet this manner of Communicating is practiced
however, and consecrated too by the Tradition of both Churches: If it be but
practiced in both Churches, this will go a great way to make it a Practice of
the Catholic Church; though neither of those Churches singly, nor both of them
together, do make the Catholic: But let us see how this is practiced in those
two great, though particular Churches, Why in the Office of Good Friday, in the
Latin Church, and the Office of the Greek Church every day in Lent, except
Saturday and Sunday; at those times it seems, these two Churches have the
Communion only in one kind, as appears by their public Offices; if they have
it so at those times, at other times then, I suppose, they have it in both, or
else how come those particular times, and those particular Offices, to be
singled out and remarked as distinct and different from all the rest; then
generally and for the most part the Public Communion is to be in both kinds,
according to the Tradition of both those Churches; and then surely this
Tradition which is thus consecrated by both the Churches, Of the Mass on
Good Friday in the Roman Church.
is violated by the Roman: But the Priest himself who officiates, takes but in
one kind, in the Missa Parasceues, as they call it, or the Mass on Good Friday,
as appears by the Office; this custom then will show that the Priest himself,
or the Minister Conficiens, may receive only in one kind in the Public
Communion, as well as the People, which I think they ordinarily think unlawful,
and call it Sacrilege if he should ordinarily do so; and if I remember,
Bellarmine himself says, Sacerdotibus utriusque speciei Sumptio necessaria est
ex part Sacramenti, nam quia Sacramentum sub duplici specie institutum est,
utraque species necessario ab aliquibus sumenda est. Bellarm. de Euchar. c. 4.
c. 23.
The Sumption of both Species is necessary for the Priest, who officiates, as
it is a Sacrament as well as a Sacrifice; for since the Sacrament was
Instituted under both kinds, it is necessary that both kinds be taken by
somebody, to make it a Sacrament. This Communion then of the Priest in one
kind, must be no Sacrament, and the Missa Parasceues, must be a very imperfect
one, and I think themselves are pleased so to call it, it must be but
equivocally called a Mass, as Cardinal de Bona phrases it Missam illam non nisi
aequivoce ita dici. Bona rer. Lyturg. l. 1. c. 15.
; and consequently such an unusual, and extraordinary, and imperfect Communion
as this, will be no good president, nor an instance of any weight and authority
to justify the practice of Public Communion in one kind: But after all,
perhaps there may be a great mistake, and this Mass on Good Friday, though it
be very different from all others, yet may not be a Communion in one kind, but
in both; and so may that in the Greek Church, in the Lyturgy of the
Presanctified, which is used on most days in Lent; and then we may relieve the
Church of Rome from the difficulty of the Priests Communicating but in one
kind, and vindicate both the Churches in great measure, from being guilty of
such an irregular practice, contrary to the general practice of the whole
Church, and to the institution of Christ; this cannot to this day be laid to
the Greek Church, who never uses the Communion in one kind, neither privately
nor publicly, nor could it be charged upon the Roman till long after this
particular Mass on Good Friday was used in it, which it is plain it was in the
eleventh Age, from the Ordo Romanus, Amulatius, Alcuinus, Rupertus Tuiriensis,
and others; but there is no manner of proof that the Public Communion in one
kind was brought into the Church of Rome till the thirteenth Century, when it
came by degrees into some particular Churches, as Thomas Aquinas informs us,
and was afterward established by a general Decree in the Council of Constance:
The Mass therefore on Good Friday, though it was a singular and different
Office from all others, they not thinking it fit, for I know not what reasons,
to make a formal Consecration of Christ's Body on the same day he died, but to
Celebrate the Communion with what was thus consecrated the day before, yet it
was not wholly in the one species of Bread, but in that of Wine too, as is
plain from the Office it self, and from those Authors who have wrote upon it:
The Bread which was Consecrated the day before, Corpus Domini quod pridie
remansit ponentes in patenam- and Subdiaconus teneat calicem cum vino non
consecrato, and alter Subdiaconus patenam cum corpore Domini -- quibus
tenentibus accipit unus Presbyter prior patenam, and alter calicem and defertur
super altar nudatum. Ordo Romanus, p. 75. ex Edit. Hittorp.
was brought by the Subdeacon, and a Calice of unconsecrated Wine by another
Subdeacon; and the Priest sets them both together upon the Altar; then after
some Prayers, and particularly the Lord's Prayer, he takes the consecrated
Bread Sumit de Sancta and ponit in caticem, Sanctificatur autem vinum non
consecratum per sanctificatum panem and communicant omnes cum silantio. Ib.
and puts into the Calice, and so the unconsecrated Wine is sanctified by the
sanctified Bread; and then they all Communicate with silence: They Communicated
with the Bread and the Wine thus mixed together, and so their Communion this
day was not in one kind: But this Wine, says de Meaux, was not truly
Consecrated, this Sanctification of the unconsecrated Wine, by the mixture of
the Body of our Lord, cannot be that true Consecration by which the Wine is
changed into the Blood: I cannot tell whether it be such a Consecration that
does that in his sense, but it may be as true a Sacramental Consecration of the
Elements for all that, not only by virtue of the mixture and by way of
contact, as some explain it Aliter in Romano Ordine legitur ut contactu
Dominici corporis integra fiat Communio. Cassand. de Com. sub utr. p. 1027.
Council. Araus. primum.
, but by the solemnity of the action, and by all the Religious circumstances
that attend it, and especially by those Prayers and Thanksgivings which were
then used; as in Micrologus, it is clearly and plainly expressed, Vinum non
consecratum cum Dominica Oratione and Dominici Corporis immissione jubet
consecrare. Microlog. de Ecclesiast. Observe. c. 19. in Edit. Hittorp. p. 742.
that the Wine is Consecrated with the Lord's Prayer, and the Immission of the
Lord's Body. And why will not de Meaux allow, that a true Consecration may be
made by those words and prayers, as well as by those formal words, This is my
Body; when it is made out beyound all contradiction, both by Dallee and
Albertinus, that the Primitive Church did not Consecrate by those words, but by
a Prayer, and their own St. Gregory says, Apostolos sula Dominica prece
praemissa consecrasse and Sacramenta distribuisse. Greg. l. 7. Ep. 63. ad Sir.
That the Apostles Consecrated the Sacrament only with the Lord's Prayer: Which
was used here and particularly observed to be so by Micrologus, as that whereby
the Wine was consecrated; so that all Monsieur de Meaux's labor is vain, to
show that the Consecration could not be without words; And that it cannot enter
into the mind of a man of sense, that it could ever be believed in the Church,
the Wine was consecrated without words, by the sole mixture of the Body: The
Consecration might be made without those very formal words now used in the
Roman Missal, as it was by Prayer in the Primitive Church; Walafridus Strabo,
observes concerning this very Office on Good Friday, that it was agreeable to
the more ancient and simple way of the Communion of the first Christians, which
was performed only with the use of the Lord's Prayer, and some commemoration of
Christ's Passion Et relatio majorum est ita primis temporibus Missas fieri
solitas, sicut modo in Parasceue Paschae communicationem facere solemus, i. e.
pramissa Oratione Dominica and sicut ipse Dominus noster praecepit,
commemoratione passionis ejus adhibita. Walagrid. Strabo de rebus Eccles. c.
22. p. 680. Edit. Hittorp.
, and yet he did not question but the Consecration was truly made by that
simple manner; and it did so far enter into the minds of the men of sense, that
were in those times, that they all did believe that the Wine was truly
consecrated this way; for so says expressly the Ordo Romanus, the ancient
Ceremonial, as he calls it, of that Church; the Wine is sanctified and there is
no difference between that and consecrated, that I know of, and it is plain
they both mean the same thing there, for it calls the consecrated Body, the
sanctified Body Sanctificatur vinum non consecratum per sanctificatum panem.
, and I know not what Sanctification of another nature that can be, which is
not Consecration, or Sanctifing it to a holy and Sacramental use; indeed this
may not so well agree with the Doctrine and Opinion of Transubstantiation,
which requires the powerful and almighty words of, This is my Body; this is my
Blood, to be pronounced over the Elements, to convert them into Christ's
natural Flesh and Blood; but it agrees as well with the true notion of the
Sacrament, and the Primitive Christians no doubt had as truly the Body and
Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, though they used not those words of
Consecration, which the Latins now do; and the Latins had them both as truly
in the Missa Parascues, in which as Strabo says, they used the old simple
manner of Communion, as much as on any other days: De Meaux must either deny
that Consecration of the Elements may be truly performed by that simple and
ancient way, which will be to deny the Apostolic and first Ages to have had any
true Consecration, or else he must own this to be a true one; The Roman Order
says, not only the Wine is Consecrated, which it does in more places then one,
but that it is fully and wholly Consecrated, so that the people may be
confirmed by it Vt ex eadem sacro vase confirmetur populus quia vinum etiam non
consecratum sed sanguine Domini commixtum sanctificatur per omnem modum. Ord.
Romans
; a phrase often used in Ecclesiastical Writers for partaking of the Cup and
entire Sacrament; Amalarius thinks this to be so true a Consecration, that he
says Qui juxta ordinem libelli per commixtionem panis and vini consecrat vinum,
non observat traditionem Ecclesiae de qua dicit Innocentius, isto biduo
Sacramenta penitus non celebrari. Amalar. Fortunat. de Eccles. Offic. l. 1. c.
15. Edit. Hittorp.
, He who according to the order of that Book, Consecrates the Wine by the
commixtion of the Bread and Wine, does not observe the Tradition of the Church,
of which Innocent speaks, that on these two days (Friday and Saturday before
Easter) no Sacraments at all should be Celebrated: So that he complains of it,
because such a Consecration is used on that day. The Author of the Book of
Divine Offices, under the name of Alcuinus De hac autem Communicatione utrum
debeat fieri supra relatum est -- Sanctificatur autem vinum non consecratum per
sanctificatum panem. Alcuini. lib. de Off. div. p. 253. Ib.
, makes a question whether there ought to be such a Communion? but says
expressly that the Unconsecrated Wine is sanctified by the sanctified Bread.
Micrologus says the same, in the place produced before, that it is Consecrated
by Prayer as well as mixture with the Body; and he gives this as a reason
against Intinction in that Chapter C. 19. In parascene vinum non consecratum
cum Dominica oratione and Dominici corporis immissione jubet consecrare, ut
populus plene possit communicare; quod utique superflao praeciperet, si
intinctum Dominicum a priore die corpus servaretur, and ita intinctum populo ad
Communicandum sufficere videretur.
, that the Wine is Consecrated on that day, so that the people might fully
Communicate; to show that it would not have been sufficient, as he thinks, to
have had the Bread dipped in the Wine the day before and so kept; and I suppose,
he was of de Meaux's mind, that the Wine was not so fit to be kept for fear of
that change which might happen to it, even from one day to the next; but he is
so far from Communion in one kind, that in that very Chapter against
Intinction, he mentions Pope Julius his Decree Julias Papa huiusmodi
intinctionem penitus probibet, and seorsum panem and seorsum calicem juxta
Dominicam institutionem, sumenda docet.
which forbids that, and commands the Bread to be given by it self, and the
Wine by it self, according to Christ's Institution; and likewise the Decree of
Gelasius Vnde and beatus Gelasius excommunicari illos praecepit, quicunque
sumpto corpore Dominico, a calicis participatione se abstinerent, nam and ipse
in eodem decreto asserit, hujusmodi Sacramentorum divisio sine grandi
sacrilegio provenire non potest. Ib. Microlog.
in these words: He commanded those to be Excommunicated who taking the Lord's
Body abstained from the participation of the Cup: And he asserts, says he, in
the same Decree, that this division of the Sacraments could not be without
great Sacrilege. So that this man could not be a favourer of Communion in one
kind, or an asserter that the Good Friday Communion was such. When ever this
Communion came into the Latin Church, for it was not ancient to have any
Communion on those two days on which Christ died and was buried, yet it will by
no means serve the purpose of de Meaux for Communion in the Church in one kind,
for it is plain, this Communion was in both; and it was the belief of the
Church, and of all those who writ upon the Roman Order, except Hugo de St.
Victore who is very late and no older than the twelfth Century, when
Corruptions were come to a great height, that the Communion on that day was
full and entire, as well with the Bread which was reserved the day before, as
with the Wine which was truly Consecrated on that, and held to be so by the
opinion of them all.

The Lyturgy of the Presanctified in the Greek Church, Of the Office of the
Presanctified in the Greek Church.
will afford as little assistance, if not much less, to de Meaux's Opinion of
Public Communion in one kind, then the Missa Parasceues we see has done in the
Latin; the Greeks do not think fit solemnly to Consecrate the Eucharist, which
is a Religious Feast of Joy, upon those days which they appoint to Fasting,
Mortification, and Sadness, and therefore during the whole time of Lent they
Consecrate only upon Saturdays and Sundays, on which they do not fast, and all
the other five days of the Week they receive the Communion in those Elements
which are Consecrated upon those two days, which they therefore call the (...),
or Presanctified: The antiquity of this observation cannot be contested, as de
Meaux says, seeing it appears, not in the sixth Age, as he would have it, but
in the seventh, whereas the beginning of the Latin Office on Good Friday is
very uncertain, and there is no evidence for it, till toward the ninth
Century: In a Council held under Justinian, in the Hall of the Imperial Palace
at Constantinople, called therefore in Trullo, An. 686. there is a Canon which
commands that on all days of Lent, except Saturday and Sunday, and the day of
the Annunciation, the Communion be made of the Presanctified; there was long
before a Canon in the Council of Laodicea, which forbad any Oblation to be made
in Lent but upon those days, viz. The Sabbath and the Lord's Day, but that says
nothing of the Presanctified, nor of any Communion on the other days; but let
it be as ancient as they please, although it be a peculiar Office, which is
neither in the Lyturgy of St. Basil, or St. Chrysostom, but is to be found by
it self in the Bibliotheca Patrum, where it is translated by Genebrardus, it is
most abominably false that it was only the Bread which they reserved, or which
they distributed in those days to the People; for they pour some of the
consecrated Wine upon the consecrated Bread, which they reserve on those days,
and make the form of the Cross with it upon the Bread; as appears from the
Rubric in the Greek Euchologion (...). In Eucholog.
: And whatever any private men may pretend to the contrary, as Michael
Cerularius, or Leo Allatius, a Latinized Greek, this can with no manner of
reason prejudice or confront the public Ritual of a Church, which as it in no
instance practices Communion in one kind, but to prevent that, uses often the
mixture of the two Species, where never so little of each is sufficient to
justify the use of both; so by this custom of dropping some of the consecrated
Wine upon the reserved Bread, it shows both its judgment and its care never to
have the Communion wholly in one kind: But to take off this custom of theirs of
dropping some Wine upon the Bread which they reserved for this Communion, de
Meaux says, That immediately after they have dropped it, they dry the Bread
upon a Chafendish, and reduce it to Powder, and in that manner keep it, as well
for the Sick, as for the Office of the Presanctified. So that no part of the
fluid Wine can remain in the Bread thus dried and powdered; however this is,
for I must take it upon de Meaux's credit, finding nothing like it in this
Office of the Greeks, yet to a man that believes Transubstantiation, and thinks
the most minute particle of the Species of Wine or Bread contains in a
miraculous manner the whole substance of Christ's Body and Blood, this
difficulty methinks might in some measure be salved, however small parts of the
Wine may be supposed to remain in the crumbs of Bread; and as the Greeks when
they mix the Wine and the Bread together for the Sick and Infants, yet believe
that they give both the Species, however small the margaritae or crumbs be which
are in the Wine, so they do the same as to the presanctified Bread, however few
unexhaled particles of Wine remain in it: But Monsieur de Meaux knows very
well, and acknowledges that the Greeks do further provide against a mere dry
Communion in this Office, by mixing this sacred Bread with more Wine and Water
at the time of the Communion; and then, as I proved, in the case of the Latin
Office on Good Friday, that the unconsecrated Wine was consecrated by this
mixture and by the Prayers and Thanksgivings that were used at that Solemnity;
so by this way as well as by the first mixture of some drops of Wine with the
Bread, the Communion in both kinds will be secured in the Greek Church, in
their Office of the Presanctified; and to put it out of all doubt, that this is
such a Communion, let us but look into their Office, and we shall find there it
plainly is so: Behold, say the Faithful, in their Prayer before the Communion,
the immaculate Body and the quickening Blood of Christ, are here to be set
before us on this mystical Table (...).
: And the Priest in his low Prayer, Begs of Christ that he would vouchsafe to
communicate to them his immaculate Body and sacred Blood, and by them to the
whole People (...). Ib.
: Then after he has Communicated, He returns God thanks for the Communion of
the holy Body and Blood of Christ. So that it is most remarkable, as de Meaux
says, that the Greeks change nothing in this Office, from their ordinary
Formularies; the sacred Gifts are always named in the plural, and they speak no
less there in their Prayers of the Body and the Blood: Is it to be imagined
they could do this, if they received not any thing upon these days but the Body
of our Lord? would they not then as the Church of Rome has done, change in this
Office from their ordinary Formularies; but so steadfastly is it, says he,
imprinted in the minds of Christians, that they cannot receive one of the
Species without receiving at the same time, not only the virtue but also the
substance of one and the other. So firmly is it imprinted upon the minds of
those Christians, that they ought not to receive one Species alone without the
other, contrary to the plain Institution of Christ, that they take all care not
to do it, either in this or any other Office, least they should loose the whole
virtue, and substance, and benefit of them: If in spite of the opinions of the
Greeks themselves, which de Meaux owns are of another mind, and in spite of
their public Rubric, their Rituals and Missals, they must be understood to
celebrate the Communion in their Churches in one kind; then so far as I know,
de Meaux may as confidently impose upon us and all the World, and bear us down
by dint of Impudence, that both the Greek Church and all the Christian Churches
that ever were in the World, had always the Public Communion in one kind,
notwithstanding all their Offices and all their Lyturgies speak to the contrary.

And now having so fully shown the universal consent and constant and
perpetual Practice of the Church for Communion in both kinds, and having
answered all the Instances by which de Meaux vainly endeavors to overthrow
that: I have, I hope, in some measure performed what was the subject of de
Meaux's Prayer at the beginning of his Treatise, That not only Antiquity may
be illustrated, but that Truth also may become manifest and triumphant P. 9.
. And I have hereby wholly taken away the main strength, and the very
foundation of his Book, for that lies in those several customs and pretended
matters of fact which he brings to justify the Churches practice for single
Communion; and if these be all false and mistaken, as upon examination they
appear to be, then his principles upon which he founds this wrong practice, if
they are not false and erroneous, yet they are useless and insignificant, for
they do not prove, but only suppose the Churches practice; and if the practice
be not true, as it is plain it is not, then what signify those principles
which are wholly grounded upon a wrong supposal, and are only designed to make
out that which never was? Those principles are like framing an Hypothesis to
give an account of the reason of some strange and extraordinary thing, which
thing upon enquiry, proves false and mistaken, and so they are but like the
Virtuoso's solution of a Phoenominon, which, nothwithstanding all his
Philosophic fancy and fine Hypothesis, never was in Nature. Monsieur de Meaux
must better prove to us the Practice of the Church for Communion in one kind,
then he has yet done, before he establishes such Principles, by which such a
Practice may be made out; for whatever the Principles be, as long as the
Practice is false, the Principles will not make it true. And since I have so
largely proved that Communion in both kinds, was the Practice of the Primitive
and the whole Catholic Church for above Twelve hundred years, and have
disproved all the instances of de Meaux to the contrary, so that no manner of
question can be made of the truth of this matter of fact, unless where, as de
Meaux says, Passion makes prevaricated persons undertake and believe any thing
P. 164.
: I have sufficiently answered that part of de Meaux's Book, wherein the
strength of the whole lies, and that which is the ground and foundation of all
the rest being destroyed, the other falls of its self; I might therefore spare
my self the trouble of Examining the Principles which de Meaux lays down, as
the Reasons of the Churches practice; for if the Practice of the Church be
against him, the reasons of that Practice will be so too, and I may turn those
upon him as I have done the other: His third Principle, which is the most
considerable, and which alone, he says, carries along with it, the decision of
this question P. 194.
, namely, That the Law ought to be explained by constant and perpetual
Practice, this is wholly for us, who are assured that we have the constant and
perpetual Practice of the Church for so many Ages for the Communion in both
kinds, and therefore though the Law of Christ, which is so clear in it self,
that it needs nothing to explain it, be the main thing upon which the decision
of this matter depends, yet the Tradition and Practice of the Church is a
farther confirmation of the Law to us, and we shall be willing to join with de
Meaux in whatever he can say for Tradition, provided it be so certain and
general and authentic, as we have proved it to be for Communion in both kinds,
and provided that it do not destroy a plain Law of Christ, nor make void the
Commandment of God, which we can never believe that an universal Tradition of
the Catholic Church ever will do: What a vain and empty flourish some are used
to make with a name of Tradition and the Church: I have shown in this question
of the Communion in one kind, in the managing of which, I have, as de Meaux
speaks, Attacked our enemies in their own Fortress P. 254.
, and taken this Goliath weapon out of their hands; and though the disarming de
Meaux of that, in which his whole strength lies, is entirely to overcome him;
yet since some of the reasons he lays down to justify his pretended Tradition,
may without that, considered merely by themselves, carry a seeming
plausibleness, if not real strength in them to defend the Communion in one kind
from those apparent difficulties under which, as he owns, it labors, and which
he would willingly take off from it: I shall in the last place consider all
those principles and arguments from Reason which are laid down by him to this
purpose.

His first principle is this: That in the administration of the Sacraments we
are obliged to do not all that which Jesus Christ has done, but only that
which is essential to them. This we allow, and this principle, as he says, Is
without contest: No Church, nor no Christians, did ever think themselves
obliged to all those circumstances with which Christ celebrated the blessed
Eucharist at its first Institution; and as to Baptism, Christ himself did not
perform, but only command that Sacrament: I cannot think that Monsieur Jurieux
should propose this for a rule, as de Meaux charges him P. 349.
, To do universally all that Jesus Christ did, in such sort, that we should
regard all circumstances he observed, as being of absolute necessity. What to
do it only at night, and after supper, and in an upper room, and the like?
This could never enter into any man's head of common understanding, much less
into so learned a man's as Monsieur Jurieux. They who are so zealous for
unleavened Bread, because Christ probably used it (for there are disputes about
it) at his Paschal Supper, though if he did it was only by accident, yet do
not think fit to enquire what was the particular sort of Wine which he blessed
and gave his Disciples, nor think themselves obliged to celebrate only in that,
which yet they might do with as much reason; and though the putting Water into
the Wine, which was very ancient, and used very likely by the Jews and others
in those hot Countries, is not remarked in the first Institution; yet I know
none that make any great scruple at it: As to the posture of receiving, which
has been the most controverted, yet the stiffest Contenders in that, have not
thought it necessary to keep exactly to the same in which Christ gave and the
Apostles received at first, which was discumbency; if these circumstances
indeed had been commanded, as a great many of the like nature were very
precisely to the Jews in their eating the Passover, then they ought to have
been observed in obedience to the Divine Law; but the Command of Christ, Do
this; does not in the least extend to these, but only to the Sacramental
Action of blessing Bread and eating it, blessing Wine and drinking it in
remembrance of Christ: For that was the thing which Christ did, and which he
commanded them to do; and the very same thing may be done with quite other
circumstances then those with which he did it, with other words, for we know
not what were the words with which Christ blessed the Bread or the Wine; with
other company, more or less then twelve men, in another posture then that of
lying, and in another place and time, and the like; he that does not plainly
see those to be circumstances, and cannot easily distinguish them from the
thing it self which Christ did and commanded to be done, must not know what it
is to eat and to drink, unless it be with his own family, in such a room of his
own house, and at such an hour of the day; it is certainly as easy to know what
Christ instituted, and what he commanded, as to know this, and consequently
what belongs to the essence of the Sacrament without which it would not be such
a Sacrament as Christ celebrated and appointed, as to know what it is to eat
and to drink: and yet Monsieur de Meaux is pleased to make this the great
difficulty, P. 239, 257, 349.
To know what belongs to the essence of the Sacrament, and what does not, and
to distinguish what is essential in it, from what is not. And by this means he
endeavor; to darken what is as clear as the light, and so to avoid the
plainest Institution and the clearest Command: The Institution, says he, does
not suffice, since the question always returns to know what appertains to the
essence of the Institution, Jesus Christ not having distinguished them. Jesus
Christ instituted this Sacrament in the evening, at the beginning of the night
in which he was to be delivered, it was at this time he would leave us his Body
given for us: Does the time or the hour then belong to the Institution? does
this appertain to the essence of it? and is it not as plainly and evidently a
circumstance, as night or noon is a circumstance to eating and drinking? Does
the command of Christ, Do this, belong to that or to the other circumstances of
doing it, when the same thing, the same Sacramental action may be done without
them? is not this a plain rule to make a distinction between the act it self,
and the circumstances of performing it? Because there were a great many things
done by Jesus Christ in this Mystery, which we do not believe our selves
obliged to do: such as being in an upper Room, lying upon a Bed, and the like,
which are not properly things done by Christ, so much as circumstances of doing
it; for the thing done, was taking Bread and Wine, and blessing and
distributing them; does therefore Christ's command Do this, belong no more to
eating and drinking, than it does to those other things, or rather
circumstances with which he performed those? is drinking as much a circumstance
as doing it after supper, if it be, eating may be so too? Monsieur de Meaux is
ashamed to say this, but yet it is what he aims at; for else the Cup will
necessarily appear to belong to the Sacrament as an essential, and consequently
an indispensible part of it; and this may be plainly known to be so from the
words of Christ and from Scripture, without the help of Tradition; though that
also, as I have shown, does fully agree with those, but they are so plain as
not to need it in this case: Eating and drinking are so plainly the essential
part of the Sacrament, and so clearly distinguished from the other circumstances
in Scripture, that St. Paul always speaks of those without any regard to the
other: The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ?
the Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of
Christ 1 Cor. 10.16.
? For as often as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's
death till he come 11.26, 27, 28, 29.
. Whosoever shall eat this Bread and drink this Cup unworthily: Let a man
examine himself and so let him eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup, for he
that eats and drinks -- So that he must be wilfully blind who cannot see
from Scripture what is essential to this Sacrament, from what is not: But
Monsieur de Meaux thinks to find more advantage in the other Sacrament of
Baptism, and therefore he chiefly insists upon that under this head, and his
design is to make out that immersion or plunging under Water, is meant and
signified by the word Baptize, in which, he tells us, the whole World agree P.
168.
and that this is the only manner of Baptizing we read of the Scriptures, and
that he can show by the Acts of Councils, and by ancient Rituals that for
thirteen hundred years the whole Church Baptized after this manner, as much as
it was possible P. 171.
. If it be so, than it seems there is not only Scripture but Tradition for it,
which is the great principle he takes so much pains to establish; And what then
shall we have to say to the Anabaptists, to whom de Meaux seems to have given
up that cause, that he may defend the other of Communion in one kind, for his
aim in all this is to make immersion as essential to Baptism, as eating and
drinking to the Lord's Supper? and if Scripture and Tradition be both so fully
for it, I know not what can be against it; P. 299.
but de Meaux knows some Gentlemen who answer things as best pleases them; the
present difficulty transports them, and being pressed by the objection, they
say at that moment what seems most to disentangle them from it, without much
reflecting whether it agree, I do not say, with truth, but with their own
thoughts. The Institution of the Eucharist in Bread and Wine, and the command
to do this, which belonged to both eating and drinking, lay very heavy upon
him, and to ease himself of those which he could not do if it were always
necessary to observe what Christ instituted and commanded, he was willing to
make Baptism by dipping to be as much commanded and instituted as this, though
it be not now observed as necessary either by those of the Church of Rome, or
the Reformed; and besides his arguments to prove that from Scripture, he makes
an universal Tradition of the Church, which he pretends all along in his Book,
is against Communion in both kinds, and which is the great thing he goes upon,
yet to be for this sort of Baptism no less than 1300 years: So that neither the
law in Scripture, nor Tradition, as it explains that law, is always, it seems,
to be observed, which is the thing ought openly to be said for Communion in one
kind: The Cause it self demands this, and we must not expect that an error can
be defended after a consequent manner Ib.
. But is Scripture and Tradition both for Baptism by immersion? Surely not; the
word Baptize, in which the command is given, signifies only to wash in general,
and not to plung all over, as I have already shown in this Treatise P. 21.
, and as all Writers against the Anabaptists do sufficiently make out, to whom
I shall refer the Reader for further satisfaction in that Controversy, which
it is not my business to consider at present; and so much is de Meaux out about
Tradition being so wholly and universally for Baptism by immersion, that
Tertullian plainly speaks of it by intinction Omne praeterea cunctationis and
tergiversationis erga paenitentiam vitium praesumtio intinctionis importat.
Tertul. de paenir. Cap. 6.
and by sprinkling Quis enim tibi tam infidae paenitentiae viro asperginem unam
cujuslibet aquae commodabit? Ib.
; reprehending those who presumed upon pardon to be obtained by Baptism without
repentance: and S. Cyprian in his Epistle to Magnus, determines, That the form
of Baptism by aspersion, is as good and valid as by immersion, and confirms
this by several examples and instances of the Jewish Purifications Aspergam
super vos aquam mundam -- Ezech. 36.25. non erit mundus quoniam aqua
aspersionis non est super eum sparsa Number. 19.19. Aqua aspersionis purificatio
est Number. 19.9. unde apparet aspersionem quoque aquae, instar salutaris lavacri
obtinere. Cypr. Ep. 96. Edit. Oxon.
, which were only by sprinkling. It is not the manner of washing, nor the
quantity, or the sort of Water, but only washing with Water, which is
essential to Baptism, and unalterable; and so it is not the sort of Bread, or
Wine, or the manner of receiving them, that is essential to the Eucharist, but
the receiving both of them is, because they are both commanded and instituted,
and both of them are the matter of that Sacrament, as much as Water is of
Baptism; in a word, without those we cannot do what Christ did and commanded to
be done, though we may without the other circumstances with which he did them,
which I think is a very plain way to distinguish the one from the other, though
de Meaux is so unwilling to see it.

The second principle of de Meaux is, That to distinguish what appertains or
does not appertain to the substance of a Sacrament; we must regard the
essential effect of that Sacrament. But must we regard nothing else? must we
not regard the outward part as well as the inward? and does not that appertain
to the substance of a Sacrament as well as the other? I confess the word
substance which de Meaux uses, is equivocal and ambiguous, for it may signify
either the outward part of it as it is a sacred sign or symbol, and so the
matter and form does appertain to the substance or essence of it, or it may
signify the inward grace and virtue, which is also of the substance of the
Sacrament as it is the thing signified, and it is not only one but both of
these that do appertain to the substance of the Sacrament, or to speak more
clearly and plainly, that make it a Sacrament: If de Meaux understands nothing
else by the substance of the Sacrament but the essential effect of it, then his
words are confused and run together, and he had as good have put it thus: That
to distinguish what appertains or does not appertain to the essential effect of
the Sacrament, we must regard the essential effect of the Sacrament: Which
though it had not been sense, yet he had better told us his meaning by it; but
surely there is something else that does plainly belong to the substance of the
Sacrament, besides the essential effect; it is strange that de Meaux, the
Treasury of Wisdom, the Fountain of Eloquence, the Oracle of his Age, as he is
styled by the Translator, but who like the Oracles of old, too often doubles
and equivocates, that so great a man should not either understand or consider
the plain nature of a Sacrament, so as to account the external and visible part
to belong to the essence or substance of it, as well as the internal or the
essential effect: Does not every Catechism tell us that the Sacrament is made
up of these two parts, of the Res Terrena and Caelestis, as Irenaeus L. 4.
calls it; the Esca Corporalis and Spiritualis, as St. Ambrose De Mist.
; the Sacramentum or outward Sign, and Res Sacramenti, as St. Austin De
Consecdist. 2.
; and must we not have regard to both these, without which we destroy the very
nature of a Sacrament, as well as to one? The very essence or substance, if de
Meaux pleases, of the Sacrament of Baptism lies in the outward washing the body
with Water, in the name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost, which is the outward
form of it, without which it was declared null, as well as in the cleansing the
Soul, and we must regard the one as well as the other, 1 Pet. 3.21.
though St. Peter tells us, It is not the putting away the filth of the flesh,
whereby baptism saves us, but the answer of a good conscience toward God. Yet
still we are to observe the outward ceremony, and may know by another way,
namely, from the Institution, that that does appertain to the substance of it;
else with the Quakers and Socinians, we may leave off all Sacraments, and all
the positive and outward ceremonies of Christianity, and only regard the
essential effect and invisible grace of them, which they also pretend to have
without the visible sign: As washing with water does appertain to the substance
of Baptism, so does eating Bread and drinking Wine appertain to the substance
of the Eucharist; and we must regard those which are the true matter of this
Sacrament as well as the essential effect of it; else how were the Aquarii that
used Water, and others that used Milk, reproved so severely by St. Cyprian and
Pope Julius, if the keeping to the outward Elements which Christ has instituted
and appointed, be not as well to be regarded as the inward and essential
effect? and if these do not appertain to the substance of the Sacrament, and
could not be easily known and distinguished from the other circumstances of the
Sacrament, by other means than by regard to the essential effect, which they
might hope to partake of without them: De Meaux is so wholly taken up with the
essential Effect, and entire Fruit, and the inseparable Grace of the Sacrament,
with which words he hopes to blind and amuse his Reader, and therefore he drops
them almost in half the Pages of his Book, that he takes not due care, nor is
much concerned about the outward and visible part of the Sacrament, which he
knows is so grossly violated, and shamefully mangled, and mutilated in his
Church, and yet this is so considerable, that it is not a true Sacrament without
it; and Gelasius plainly calls the dividing of the outward part of the
Sacrament the dividing of the Mystery; and to be plain with him, and to give
the killing blow to his cause, and to all the artifical slights with which he
fences and defends it, and as he speaks, For once to stop the mouth of these
Cavillers, I shall lay down this principle, that the essential effect or inward
substance of the Sacrament is not ordinarily to be received or partaken,
without receiving and partaking the external part or the outward substance of
it, which is instituted and appointed by Christ: And by this plain principle
which I have made use of before, and shall further strengthen and confirm, all
that he says about receiving the Grace, and Virtue, and essential Effect of the
Sacrament by one kind, will be quite taken off and destroyed; but because this
is the great Plea, and the fundamental reasoning which he everywhere uses in
his Book, I shall therefore fully consider it under these two Questions: 1.
Whether the same Grace, Virtue, and Benefit do not belong to one Species, or be
not given by one Species which is by both? 2. Whether one Species containing
both Christ's Body and Blood, by the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and
consequently the person of Christ whole and entire by the Doctrine of
Concomitancy, do not contain and give whole Christ, and so the whole substance
and thing signified of the Sacrament?


I. Whether the same Grace, Virtue, and Benefit be not given by one Species as
by both? This de Meaux everywhere asserts, and it is the foundation he all
along goes upon; but is it not strange presumption when God has been pleased to
appoint such a Religious Rite and Sacramental Action to be performed in such a
manner, with a promise of such graces and benefits to those who perform it
aright, to think he will grant the same benefits to those who perform it
otherwise than he has appointed, and to venture to make a change and alteration
from what he positively ordered, and yet think to partake of the same benefits
another way, without any such outward means, and without any Sacraments at all,
for they are wholly in his own free disposal, and he is not tied to any outward
means, nor to such particular means as the Sacraments are; but since he has
thought fit to make them the ordinary means of conveying those benefits to us,
we cannot ordinarily hope for the one without the other; thus we cannot expect
the virtue and benefit of Baptism without the outward ceremony of washing, and
without observing that in such a way as Christ has appointed, i. e. washing
with Water in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; neither can we
receive the inward grace and virtue of the Eucharist without taking that
Sacrament as Christ has appointed and commanded it, for all Sacraments would
loose their worth and value, their esteem and reverence, and would not be
necessary to be observed according to the Divine Institution, if without the
observance of that we had any just grounds to hope for the virtue and benefits
of them; there is therefore all the reason in the World to fear that God to
preserve the integrity of his own Institution, and the force and authority of
his own Laws, will deny the inward Grace and Virtue of the Sacrament to those
who wilfully violate and transgress the outward observance of it in such a way
as he has appointed: Has not Christ annexed the inward Grace and Virtue of the
Sacrament to the outward Sign? If he have, and we do not receive the outward
Sign as he has appointed, how can we then hope to receive the inward Grace?
What is it that makes such an outward sign or ceremony as a Sacrament, be a
means of conveying such spiritual Grace and Virtue, and exibiting such inward
benefits to our minds? It is not any physical power, or natural virtue which
they have in themselves; it is not the washing with a little Water can cleanse
the Soul, or the eating a little Bread and drinking a little Wine, can nourish
and strengthen it, but it is the Divine Power of Christ, who by his Institution
has given such a spiritual and inward virtue to such outward signs and visible
actions, and made these the means and instruments of conveying and exhibiting
such grace and virtue and real benefits to us; all the power and efficacy they
have to do this is owing purely to the Divine Institution, and wholly depends
upon that; if therefore we do not observe the Institution, how can we expect
the benefit that comes wholly from that, and if Christ by the Institution has
annexed the grace, and virtue, and benefit of the Sacrament to both kinds,
which he has plainly done by instituting of both; how can we then hope to
receive it by one contrary to the Institution? and how can we be assured that
we loose nothing, and are deprived of nothing by taking one only, and that
this is as good and sufficient as taking of both? There is nothing appears from
the will and pleasure of him that instituted both, upon which the whole virtue
of them does entirely depend, from whence we can gather any such thing, it
rather appears from thence that both are necessary, because both are
instituted; de Meaux therefore does not fetch it from thence, but from the
nature of the thing it self, from the inseperableness of that grace which is
given in the Sacrament, and from the impossibility in the thing to have it
otherwise: Christ, says he, cannot separate the virtue of the Sacrament, nor
effect that any other grace should accompany his Blood shed, than that same in
the ground and substance which accompanies his Body immolated P. 182.
. But Christ can annex the virtue of the Sacrament to the whole Sacrament, and
not to any part of it, and he can effect that the grace of his Body and Blould
should accompany or belong to both the eating his Body and drinking his Blood,
and not to the doing one of these without the other, contrary to his command
and institution; although the grace be inseparable, so that the grace annexed
to the Body be no other than that which is annexed to the Blood P. 3.
; yet this grace may not be given till both the Body and Blood are received, as
Bellarmine expressly says, it may not in the case of the Priests taking both
kinds till the whole sumption of both Species is performed and finished Possit
etiam dici Eucharistiam sub specie panis non confer gratiam nisi tota
sumptione Eucharistiae absolata, and quia cum sumitur utraque species non
censetur absoluta sumptio nisi cum sumta est utraque species, ideo Eucharistiam
sub specie panis confer quidem gratiam sed non ante sumptionem alterius
speciei. Bellarm. de Sacram. Euch. l. 4. c. 23.
; and if it may not be so in the case of the Priest, why not also in all other
Communicants, unless Christ have made and declared it otherwise, which he has
not? what will it then signify, if, as de Meaux says, It be impossible to
separate in the application the effect of Christ's Blood from that of his Body
P. 182.
: If the effect of these be not applied till they are both received, and there
be no application of the effect, as we cannot be assured there is without the
receiving of both: But did Christ then, says he, suspend the effect which his
Body was to produce, until such time as the Apostles had received the Blood, in
the first institution of this Sacrament, and in the internal between their
taking the Bread and the Cup? I answer, they did not receive the grace of the
Sacrament till they had received the whole Sacrament, because the grace and
effect was annexed to the whole and not to any part of it; and therefore the
effect may not only be suspended till the whole is taken, but even utterly
lost without receiving the whole. It is a little too nice and curious to
enquire what are the precise moments in which we receive this grace of the
Sacrament, or any other ordinance as well as what is the particular manner in
which we do receive it, as whether all at once or by part, or whether the
effect be given in such a minute, or suspended till the next? In return to de
Meaux's question, I might as well ask him whether the effect of the Body is
given when it is just put into the mouth? or when the species is chewed there?
or when it is swallowed down and comes into the stomach? or whether it be
suspended till all this is done? So in Baptism which he will needs have to be
commanded by Christ, and anciently practiced by immersion; Was the grace of it
given when part of the body was dipped, or the whole immerged? and then, whether
when the body was under water, or when it was raised out of it? and when this
was performed by Trine Immersion, as it is commanded in the Apostolic Canons
Canon. 50.
, was the effect of it suspended till the last immersion was over? so in the
Jews eating of their Sacrifices whereby they were made partakers of the Altar,
and had the virtue of those applied to them, as we by feeding on the Christian
Sacrifice do partake of the virtue of that, Was this done by the first bit they
ate of them? or was the half the virtue applied when they had ate half? or was
the whole suspended till the whole was eaten? By these questions I hope de
Meaux may see the vain subtilty and folly of his own, which he thinks is so
much to the purpose, and does the business of proving the effect of the
Sacrament to be given by one Species either before or without the other; when
the effect depends, besides other things, upon the whole action, and the whole
performance, and the receiving of both of them. When there is a conveyance of a
thing by some visible ceremony which consists of several parts and several
actions; as suppose the conveying an Estate by Deed, there is to be the setting
of a Hand, and the putting of a Seal, and the delivery of it, and something
given and received, as Livery and Seizin, and the like; all those things which
the Law requires to be done as a form of passing and transferring of a right
from one and receiving it by another; these are all to be done before the thing
is truly, and legally, and rightly conveyed: The Sacraments he knows are
outward tokens, and visible pledges, and solemn rites and ceremonies of
Christ's conveying and our receiving his Body and Blood, and all the effects
and benefits of them, and till all that the Law of Christ appoints to be done
in them according to his command and institution, be truly and fully performed;
we do not ordinarily receive, nor can we pretend a right to those things which
they are designed to convey to us; which I think is a plain illustration of the
thing, and takes off all the vain and nice subtilties of de Meaux about this
matter; but yet I shall offer something further concerning it.

First, The Grace of the Sacrament which God has annexed to both, and not to
one Species, though it be not to be separated so that ^^e Species should have a
peculiar and distinct virtue proper to that, which does not belong to both of
them, (as there were not two distinct virtues in the Sacrifice and the pouring
out the Blood of the Sacrifice but one expiatory virtue by the Sacrifice whose
Blood was poured out) yet this Grace is given in different measures and
degrees, so that however confidently de Meaux determines, P. 179, 184. P.
7.5.161.
That the whole Grace and the entire Fruit of the Sacrament is received by one
Species as well as both, and that one has always the same efficacy of virtue
that both, so that we loose nothing by taking one Species only, but that
Communion under one is as good and sufficient as under both: Yet this is
contrary to the opinion of the learned men even of his own Church; Vasquez
expressly declares the contrary, Their opinion, says he, seemed always more
probable to me, who say, that there is greater fruit of grace received from
both kinds than from one onley, and therefore that they who take the Cup do
attain a new increase of Grace Probabilior sententia mihi semper visa est eorum
qui dicunt majorem frugem gratiae ex utraque specie hujus Sacramenti, quam ex
altera tantum percipi, ac proinde eos qui calicem sumunt, novum augmentum
gratiae consequi. Vasquez in Tert. disp. 215. c. 2.
: And he cites several other Writers of the Roman Communion as agreeing with
him in this, and even one of their own Popes, Clement the sixth, who granting
the Communion of both kinds to one of our English Kings, does it with this
particular reason set down in his Bull, That it might be for the augmentation
of Grace Vt ad Gratiae augmentum sub utraque specie communicaret. Ib.
. Alexander Alensis said the same before Vasquez, namely, That the Sumption
under both kinds, which was that which our Lord delivered, was more complete
and more efficacious Sumptio sub utraque specie, quem modum sumendi tradidit
Dominus, est majoris efficaciae and complementi. Alexand. Alens. in 4 sent.
quest. 53.
; and although he defends and asserts that the Sumption under one is
sufficient, yet that under both, he acknowledges, is of greater merit Licet
illa sumtio, quae est in accipiendo sub una specie sufficiat, illa tamen quae
est sub duabus est majoris meriti. Ib.
. Suarez tells us, This was the opinion of many Catholics, That there was more
Grace given by both Species than by one alone; and grave men, says he, relate
that this was held by most of the Fathers, who were present in the Council of
Trent, and therefore that Council speaks very cautiously, and only says that
the Faithful by communicating only in one kind, are deprived of no Grace
necessary to Salvation Fuit multorum Catholicorum opinio, plus gratiae dari per
duas species quam per unam tantum, Quam viri graves referunt tenuisse plures ex
Patribus qui Concilio Tridentino affuerunt, and ideo idem Concilium caute
dixisse, fideles eo quod communicent sub una tantum specie, nulla Gratia ad
salutem necessaria defraudari. Suarez Tom. 3. in Tert. Disp. 63.
. So that it seems they may by their own tacit confession be deprived of some
grace that is very useful and beneficial to a Christian, or of some degree of
that Sacramental Grace which is given by both Species and not by one: If it
were no more than this, which themselves own, yet it is pity sure that
Christians should be deprived of that; but they can never assure Christians
that they are not deprived of all, even of that which is necessary to
Salvation. So far as the Grace of the Sacrament is so, because this necessary
Grace is annexed not to one kind but to both, and the taking the species of
Wine is as necessary to receive that by Christ's Institution, as the species of
Bread, for no reason can be imagined why the one should give only the
necessary Grace, and the other only the additional. Men must make too bold
with the Grace of God, and the Grace of the Sacrament, who think to give it as
they please, and to part and divide it as they think fit by their presumptuous
and ungrounded fancies, and do not wholly depend upon his will and pleasure for
the receiving of it, and that way and manner which he himself has appointed.
Others there are who though they defend the Communion in one kind, yet speak
very doubtingly about that question, Whether more spiritual fruit or more grace
be not received by both than by one: Salmeron says, It is a difficult question,
because we have nothing from the Ancients whereby we can decide it Dissicilis
sane quaestio propterea quod ex antiquis quicquam vix habemus unde possimus eam
decidere. Salmer. de Euch.
; no truly the question and the reason of it, which is their practice, is too
late and novel to have any thing produced for it out of Antiquity: So that
those Doctors who speak of this matter, have had various opinions about it Vt
propterea Doctores qui de hac reloquuti sunt in varias iverint sententias. Ib.
. Some saw there was no reason for it, and that it was perfectly precarious and
ungrounded, but others thought it necessary to defend their Communion in one
kind: Bellarmine himself owns that this is not so certain, for diverse have
different sentiments concerning it; neither does the Council openly define it
Haec propositio non est adeo certa -- de hac enim vary sentiunt Theologi neque
Concilium eam aperte definire videtur. Bellar. de Euch.
. But de Meaux has done it very positively and definitively, contrary to many
learned men in his own Church, and without any warrant from the Council of
Trent or any other.

Secondly, To make the whole Grace, and Virtue, and entire Fruit of the
Sacrament to be given by one Species, is to render the other wholly useless and
superfluous as to the conveying any real virtue or benefit to him that receives
it. When the Priest has taken the Species of Bread, and has by that fully
received the whole Grace and entire Fruit of the Sacrament, what can he further
receive by the Cup, and what benefit can he have by it? De Meaux will by no
means have the effect of the Body suspended till the Blood is received P. 3.
; though Bellarmine is willing it should De Euch. l. 4. c. 23.
: But if it be so to the Priests why may it not likewise to the people? and if
the Priests receive any benefit by the Cup, which they would not have without
it, why may not the people also? For they have not yet declared, that I know
of, that the Priest is to receive more grace by the Sacrament than the people:
What a mere empty Cup must the Priest then receive, void of all grace and
virtue, after he has taken the Species of Bread which has before given him the
whole and entire fruit and grace of the Sacrament, to which the Cup can add
nothing at all? It must be then as utterly fruitless to him, as the Wine of
ablution is to the Laiety, and if it be so inconsiderable, they need not,
methinks, be so afraid of the Laymens spilling it or dipping their Beards and
Whiskers in it; but it is still the very natural and true Blood of Christ; if
it be so, it is strange that it should have no true and essential virtue
belonging to it, surely Christ's Blood is never without that, nor ought any to
have so mean and low an opinion of it.

Why did Christ give the Cup to the Apostles, as part of the Sacrament, if they
had received the whole grace and virtue of the Sacrament before? and if so soon
as they had received his Body, at the same instant they received the whole
grace that accompanied that, and his Blood too? Christ if he did not suspend
the effect of the Blood till it was taken, must have prevented it, and given it
before it was. Christ no doubt might have given the whole grace and effect of
the Sacrament by one Species, if he had pleased; but if he had done that, he
would not have given the other, nor should we have had two Species Instituted
by him, if he had restrained the effect of those two to one only: When Christ
has appointed two and gave two himself, for men to come and argue that one
alone may give the whole good of both, because the Grace of both is the same,
and inseparable from either, and because Christ did not suspend the effect of
one till he gave the other, and that it is impossible he should separate the
effect of his Blood from that of his Body; this is to argue at all adventures
against what is known, from what is secret and uncertain, against the plain
will of Christ from his power, and against what he has done from what he might
do, and is to set up a precarious and ungrounded Hypothesis of our own, from
the nature of the thing, when the thing itself is purely arbitrary and
positive, and depends wholly upon Christ's will and pleasure. If Christ himself
has appointed two Species in the Sacrament to convey the whole and entire
virtue of the Sacrament to worthy receivers, as he seems plainly to have done
by instituting both, and giving both to his Apostles, and commanding both; how
groundless and arrogant is it in any to say, That one is sufficient to give
this, and that both are not necessary to this end; without knowing any thing
further of Christ's will about it; and when they believe as de Meaux does, P.
130.
That Jesus Christ has equally instituted both parts; Yet notwithstanding to
make one unnecessary to the giving any real virtue and benefit, and to dare to
affirm as de Meaux does, P. 4.
That the receiving the Blood is not necessary for the grace of the Sacrament,
or the ground of the Mystery.

Let me then ask what it is necessary for, and why it was equally instituted
with the other? De Meaux gives not a plain answer to that, but tells us, That
the Eucharist has another quality, namely, that of a Sacrifice P. 179.
; and for this reason, both Species are always consecrated, that so they may be
offered to God, and a more lively representation may be made of Christ's death.
But this is no answer to the question, for I do not ask why they are necessary
as the Eucharist is a Sacrifice, which it is not in a proper sense, though it
be not my business to show that here, but as it is a Sacrament; Why did Christ
institute both Species in the Eucharist, as it is a Sacrament? and why did he
give both Species to his Apostles? He did not give these to them as a
Sacrifice, for as such, if it were so, it was to be only offered up to God;
but he gave both the Species to his Disciples; and why did he do this, if the
whole grace and virtue of the Sacrament was given by one? and why does the
Priest receive both as well as offer both to God? He does not receive them as a
Sacrifice, but as a Sacrament: And why is the Sumption of both necessary to
him, as the Eucharist is a Sacrament; which Bellarmine says it is, upon that
very account Sacerdotibus utriusque speciei Sumptio necessaria est ex part
Sacramenti. Bellarm. de Euch. c. 4.
; If the taking of one be sufficient to convey the whole grace and virtue of
both, and the other be not necessary for this end? All these questions will
return upon de Meaux though the Eucharist were a Sacrifice; and as to that I
shall only ask him this question, Whether Christ did as truly and properly
offer up his Body and Blood as a Sacrifice to God when he instituted this
Sacrament, as he did upon the Cross? If he did, and therefore two Species were
necessary, (though if his Body and Blood be both together in one, that might be
sufficient) why needed he then to have afterward offered up himself upon the
Cross, when he had as truly offered up his Body and Blood before in the
Eucharist?

If two Species are necessary to make a full representation of Christ's death,
and to preserve a perfect image of his Sacrifice upon the Cross, and by the
mystical separation of his Body and Blood in the Eucharist, to represent how
they were really separated at his death; why are they not then necessary as de
Meaux says, They are not to the ground of the Mystery: Is not the Eucharist as
it is a Sacrament, designed to do all this, and to be such a Remembrance of
Christ, and a showing forth the Lord's death till he come; as the Scripture
speaks? And do not they in great measure destroy this, by giving the Sacrament
in one kind, without this mystical separation of Christ's Body and Blood; and
without preserving such a sacramental Representation of it as Christ has
appointed? But says de Meaux, The ultimate exactness of representation is not
requisite P. 175.
. This I confess, for then the eating the Flesh and drinking the Blood of a
man, as some Heretics did of an Infant, might more exactly represent than Bread
and Wine; but such a representation as Christ himself has appointed and
commanded, this is requisite: and when he can prove that Christ has commanded
Immersion in Baptism to represent the cleansing of the Soul, as he has done
taking Bread broken and Wine poured out in the Eucharist, to represent his
Death, I will own that to be requisite in answer to his. 11. There ought to be
also an expression of the grace of the Sacrament, which is not found in one
Species alone, for that is not a full expression of our perfect nourishment
both by meat and drink; and if the Sacraments only exhibit what they
represent, which is an Axiom of the Schoolmen; then as one kind represents our
spiritual nourishment imperfectly, so it exhibits it imperfectly; but however,
if the whole grace and virtue of the Sacrament be given by one Species, the
other must be wholly superfluous and unnecessary as to the inward effect, and
so at most it must be but a mere significant sign, void of all grace, as de
Meaux indeed makes it, though the name of a sign, as applied to the Sacrament,
is so hard to go down with them at other times, when he says of the species of
Wine, That the whole fruit of the Sacrament is given without it, and that this
can add nothing thereunto, but only a more full expression of the same
Mystery P. 185.
.

II. The second question I proposed to consider, was, Whether one Species
containing both Christ's Body and Blood by the Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
and consequently the person of Christ whole and entire by the Doctrine of
Concomitancy, do not contain and give whole Christ, and so the whole substance
and thing signified of the Sacrament? This de Meaux and all of them plead,
That each Species contains Jesus Christ whole and entire P. 306.. 9.
; so that we have in his Flesh his Blood, and in his Blood his Flesh, and in
either of the two his Person whole and entire, and in both the one and the
other his blessed Soul with his Divinity, whole and entire, so that there is in
either of the Species the whole substance of the Sacrament, and together with
that substance the whole essential virtue of the Eucharist P. 327.
, according to these Principles of the Roman Church. I am not here to dispute
against those, nor to show the falseness and unreasonableness of that which is
the ground of them, and which if it be false destroys all the rest, I mean
Transubstantiation, whereby they suppose the Bread to be turned into the very
natural Body of Christ, with Flesh, Bones, Nerves, and all other parts
belonging to it, and the Wine to be turned into the very natural substance of
his Blood; and since this Flesh is not a dead Flesh, it must have the Blood
joined with it, and even the very Soul and Divinity of Christ, which is always
Hypostatically united to it, and so does necessarily accompany it; and the Body
with Christ's Soul and Divinity, must thus likewise ever accompany his Blood:
To which prodigious Doctrine of theirs as it relates to the Communion in one
kind, I have these things to say:

1. It does so confound the two Species, and make them to be one and the same
thing, that it renders the distinct consecration of them to be not only
impertinent but senceless; For to what purpose, or with what sense can the
words of Consecration be said over the Bread, This is my Body? and those again
over the Wine, This is my Blood: If upon the saying of them by the Priest the
Bread does immediately become both the Body and Blood of Christ, and the Wine
both his Blood and his Body too; this is to make the Bread become the same
thing with the Wine, and the Wine the same thing with the Bread, and to make
only the same thing twice over, and to do that again with one form of words
which was done before with another; for upon repeating the words, This is my
Body, Christ's Body and Blood are both of them immediately and truly present;
and when they are so, what need is there of the other form, This is my Blood,
to make the same thing present again, which was truly present before? It
matters not at all in this case, whether they be present by virtue of the
consecration, or by virtue of Concomitancy, for if they be truly present once,
what need they be present again, if they become the same thing after the first
form of Consecration which they do after the second? why do they become the
same thing twice? or what need is there of another form of words to make the
Wine become that which the Bread was before? they hold it indeed to be
Sacrilege not to consecrate both the Species, but I cannot see according to
this principle of theirs, why the consecrating of one Species should not be
sufficient, when upon the consecration of that, it immediately becomes both
Christ's Body and Blood; and what reason is there for making the same Body and
Blood over again by another consecration? They might if they pleased say over
the Bread alone, Hoc est Corpus meum, and hoc est sanguis meus; This is my
Body, and this is my Blood: for they believe it is so upon the saying those
words, Hoc est Corpus meum; This is my Body And if it be so as soon as the
words are pronounced, they may as truly affirm it to be both as one: What does
it signify to say, they are both present by Concomitancy? does not
Concomitancy always go along with the Consecration? is there any space between
the Consecration and the Concomitancy? is not the one as quick and sudden as
the other? and can it be said over the Species of Bread, This is my Body,
before it can be as truly said, This is my Blood? why therefore may not they be
both said together? Nay, it may be as truly said by virtue of this Doctrine not
only, This is my Body and Blood, but this is my Soul and my Divinity; for
though they will not say it is made all those, yet it becomes all those, and
truly is all those by this Concomitancy upon the Consecration, and it may be
said to be all those as soon as it is consecrated, and at the same time that
those words are spoke.

There being a distinct Consecration of Christ's Body and Blood in the
Sacrament, if Christ's Body and Blood be really present there by virtue of the
words of Consecration, yet they ought to be as distinctly present as they are
distinctly consecrated, that is, the Body present in the species of Bread, and
the Blood in the species of Wine, for else they are not present according to
the Consecration; so that this Concomitancy by which they are present together,
does quite spoil the Consecration by which they are present asunder, and so
confounds the two Species as to make them become both the same thing after they
are consecrated, and renders the consecration of one of them to be without
either use or sense.

2. It makes the distinct Sumption of both the Species to be vain and
unnecessary to any persons, to the Priests or to any others to whom the Pope
has sometimes granted them, and even to the Apostles and all the first
Christians who received both; for if the one contains the very same thing with
the other, and gives the very same thing, what need is there of having or of
taking both, that is, of taking the very same thing twice over at the same
time? If one Species contain Jesus Christ whole and entire, his Body, Blood,
Soul, and Divinity, and all these are given by one Species, what can be desired
more as de Meaux says, Then Jesus Christ himself? and what then can the other
Species give but the same thing? is Jesus Christ with whole Humanity and
Divinity to be thus taken over and over, and to be taken twice at the same
time? if he be, why not several times more, and if he were so, this might be
done by taking several times the same Species, since one Species contains the
same as both, even the whole substance, and the whole essential effect of the
Sacrament, and the very person of Jesus Christ himself. This does so alter the
nature of the Sacrament by which we have a continual nourishment conveyed to
our Souls, and receive the Grace and Spirit of Christ by fresh and daily
recruits, and in several measures and degrees every time we Communicate, that
it makes it not only to no purpose for any person to take more than one
Species at once, but to take the Sacrament more than once all his whole life,
for what need he desire more, who has received together with the humanity of
Jesus Christ, his Divinity also whole and entire P. 314.
, and if he has received that once, there is no reason for receiving it again,
for this as it renders the Grace and Substance of the Sacrament Indivisible, as
de Meaux often pleades, so it renders it Infinite, to which nothing can be ever
added by receiving it never so often; and if we thus make this Sacrament to
give the very Body and Blood of Christ, and so the whole and entire Person of
Christ, and his whole Humanity and his whole Divinity, instead of giving the
spiritual Graces and Virtues of Christ's Body and Blood, we then make every
Communicant to receive all that by one single Communion which he can ever
receive by never so many thousands, and we make all persons to receive this
alike, however different the preparations and dispositions of their minds are,
and even the most wicked and vile wretches must receive, not only Christ's
Body and Blood, but even his Soul, and his Divinity, and his whole and entire
Person; for though the spiritual graces and virtues may be given in different
measures and degrees, and in different proportions according to the capacity of
the receiver, yet the Humanity and Divinity of Christ, which is whole and
entire in each Species, never can.

Thirdly, If Christ's Body and Blood were thus always joined together in the
Sacrament, and were both contained in one Species, yet this would not be a true
Sacramental reception of them, for to make that, they ought to be taken as
separate and divided from one another, his Body from his Blood, and his Blood
from his Body, and not as conjoined or mixed together; this was the way and
manner which Christ himself appointed, and this is the only way by which we
can be said to eat his Body and to drink his Blood: and as they own they ought
to be thus consecrated, so they ought also to be thus received, for I cannot
understand why they might not be as well consecrated together as received
together, and why it would not be as true a Sacrament with such a Consecration
as with such a Sumption; nay, I think the Consecration this way would have more
sense in it than the Sumption, for it is nothing so odd and strange to suppose
the Bread to be turned into the Body and Blood of Christ, as to suppose that by
eating that we both eat the Body and drink the Blood of Christ; to make eating
and drinking the same thing, or to say we drink by eating, and eat by drinking,
are very unaccountable and unintelligible expressions, so that Concomitancy
does wholly confound those two Sacramental Phrases and Sacramental Actions: But
is it not enough, says de Meaux P. 323.
, for a Christian to receive Jesus Christ? is it not a Sacrament where Jesus
Christ is pleased to be in person? But Jesus Christ is not received in the
Sacrament in any other manner but by receiving his Body and Blood, nor is it
his Person he bids us receive, but his Body and Blood, and the way by which we
are to receive them is by eating the one and drinking the other, and we cannot
be properly said to do that, or to receive Christ or his Body and Blood
Sacramentally, but this way: Though the Body and Blood of Christ, therefore
should be both in one Species and both received by one Species, yet this would
not be the eating the Body and the drinking the Blood, for as one of their own
Popes, Innocent the Third, says, and Durandus from him, Neither is the Blood
drunk under the Species of Bread, nor the Body eaten under the Species of Wine,
for as the Blood is not eaten nor the Body drank, so neither is drunk under the
Species of Bread nor eat under the Species of Wine Nec sanguis sub specie panis
nec Corpus sub specie vini bibitur aut comeditur, quia sicut nec sanguis
comeditur nec Corpus bibitur ita neutrum sub species panis bibitur aut sub
specie vini comeditur. Durand. Rational. l. 4. c. 42.
. And therefore though they should be both received according to them by one
Species, yet they would not be both eat and drank, that is received
Sacramentally; eating and drinking are distinct things, and both belong to the
Sacrament; and though eating and drinking spiritually be as de Meaux says, The
same thing P. 184.
, and both the one and the other is to believe: Yet eating and drinking
Sacramentally are not, but are to be two distinct outward actions that are to
go along in the Sacrament with our inward Faith.

This Doctrine of Concomitancy and of receiving the Body and Blood of Christ
together in that gross manner which is believed in the Roman Church, does quite
spoil the Sacramental reception of Christ's Body and Blood, for according to
that, they can never be received separate and apart, no not by the two Species,
but they must be always received together in either of them; so that though by
the Institution the Species of Bread seems particularly to contain, or rather
give the Body, and the Species of Wine the Blood, and as St. Paul says 1 Cor.
10.16.
, The bread which we bless, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? and
the cup which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? Yet
hereby either of them is made the Communion of both, and it is made impossible
to receive them asunder, as Christ instituted and appointed and as is plainly
implied by eating and drinking, and seems to be the very nature of a
Sacramental reception: But

Fourthly, This Concomitancy makes us to receive Christ's Body and Blood not as
sacrificed and shed for us upon the Cross, but as they are now living and both
joined together in Heaven, whereas Christ's Body and Blood is given in the
Sacrament, not as in the state of life and glory, but as under the state of
death, for so he tells us, This is my body which is given for you, that is, to
God as a Sacrifice and Oblation, and, This is my blood which is shed for the
remission of sins. So that we are to take Christ's Body in the Sacrament as it
was crucified for us and offered up upon the Cross, and his Blood as it was
shed and poured out, not as joined with his Body, but as separated from it: the
Virtue of Christ's Body and Blood comes from his Death and from its being a
Sacrifice which was slain, and whose Blood was poured out for to make expiation
for our Sins, and as such we are to take Christ's Body and Blood, that is, the
virtue and benefits of them in the Sacrament, for as de Meaux says, P. 311.
This Body and this Blood with which he nourishes and quickneth us, would not
have the virtue if they had not been once actually separated, and if this
separation had not caused the violent Death of our Savior, by which he became
our Victim. So neither will it have that virtue in the Sacrament if the Body be
not taken as broken and sacrificed, and the Blood as shed or poured out, and
both as separated from one another: De Meaux owns, We ought to have our living
Victim under an image of Death, otherwise we should not be enlivened P. 312.
. I do not well understand the meaning of a living Victim, for though Christ
who was our Victim is alive, yet he was a Victim only as he died; so that a
living Victim is perhaps as improper a phrase as a dead Animal. If we are to
receive Christ then in the Sacrament as a Victim or Sacrifice, we are to
receive him not as living but as dead; I would not have de Meaux or any else
mistake me, as if I asserted that we received a dead Body, a dead flesh, a
carcass as he calls it P. 309.
in the Sacrament, for he knows we do not believe that we receive any real
flesh, or any proper natural Body at all, but only the mystical or sacramental
Body of Christ, or to speak plainer, the true and real Virtue of Christ's Body
and Blood offered for us, and we are not only to have this under an image of
death, that is, to have the two Species set before us to look upon, but we are
to receive it under this image, and to eat the Body as broken, and the Blood as
poured out, and so to partake of Christ's death in the very partaking of the
Sacrament; de Meaux speaks very well, when he says, P. 312.
The Virtue of Christ's Body and his Blood coming from his Death, he would
conserve the image of his Death when he gave us them in his holy Supper, and by
so lively a representation keep us always in mind to the cause of our
Salvation, that is to say, the Sacrifice of the Cross. But how is this image of
his Death conserved in his holy Supper, if Christ be there given not as dead
but living, Concomitancy does rather mind us of Christ's Resurrection when his
Body was made alive again and reunited to his Soul and to his Divinity, than of
his death when it was divided and separated from them; and it makes us not to
partake of Christ's Body as crucified upon the Cross, but as glorified in
Heaven; as it is so indeed Christ's body cannot be divided from his blood, and
his whole humanity, soul, and body are always united with his Divinity, but we
do not take it as such in the Sacrament, but as his body was sacrificed, and
slain, and wounded, and his blood as shed and separated from it.

They who can think of a crucified Savior, may think of receiving him thus in
the Sacrament without horror; de Meaux owns, That this mystical separation of
Christ's body and blood ought to be in the Eucharist as it is a Sacrifice P.
180, 181.
: And why not then as it is a Sacrament? is there any more horror to have
Christ's body thus consecrated, then thus eaten and received? The words of
consecration, he says, do renew mystically, as by a spiritual Sword, together
with all the wounds he received in his body, the total effusion of his blood Ib.
. Why may we not then receive Christ's body as thus wounded, and his blood as
thus poured out, in this mystical Table? and why must Concomitancy join those
together which Consecration has thus separated and divided? Christ's body and
blood we say ought to be thus mystically separated in the Sacramental reception
of them, and so ought to be taken separately and distinctly; they own they
ought to be thus mystically separated in the consecration, though how that
consists with Concomitancy is hard to understand, but whatever they have to say
against the separating them in the Reception, may be as well said against their
separating them in the Consecration; Is Christ then divided? P. 310.
is his body then despoiled of blood? and blood actually separated from the
body? ought Christ to die often, and often to shed his blood? A thing unworthy
the glorious state of his Resurrection, where he ought to conserve eternally
humane nature as entire as he had at first assumed it. Why do they then make
this separation of his body and blood when they consecrate it? if that be only
mystical and representative, so is it in our reception much better, for we do
not pretend to receive Christ's natural body and blood, as they do to
consecrate them, but only his mystical body and blood, which is always to
conserve this figure of Death, and the character of a Victim, not only when it
is consecrated, but when it is eaten and drunk, which it cannot otherwise be.
It Is this error of receiving Christ's natural body in the Sacrament which has
led men into all those dark Mazes and Labyrinths wherein they have bewildred
and entangled themselves in this matter, and so by applying all the properties
of Christ's natural body to his mystical body in the Sacrament, they have run
themselves into endless difficulties, and destroyed the very notion as well as
the nature of the Sacrament.

The third Principle of Monsieur de Meaux is this: That the Law ought to be
explained by constant and perpetual practice. But cannot then a Law of God be
so plain and clear as to be very well known and understood by all those to whom
it is given, without being thus explained? Surely so wise a Lawgiver as our
blessed Savior, would not give a Law to all Christians that was not easy to
be understood by them; it cannot be said without great reflection upon his
infinite Wisdom, that his Laws are so obscure and dark as they are delivered by
himself, and as they are necessary to be observed by us, that we cannot know
the meaning of them without a further explication: If constant and perpetual
practice be necessary to explain the Law, how could they know it or understand
it to whom it was first given, and who were first to observe it before there
was any such practice to explain it by? This practice must begin some where,
and the Law of Christ must be known to those who begun it, antecedent to their
own practice: There may be great danger if we make Practice to be the Rule of
the Law, and not the Law the Rule of Practice, and God's Laws may be very
fairly explained away, if they are left wholly to the mercy of men to explain
them: For thus it was the Pharisees who were the great men of old for
Tradition, did thereby reject and lay aside the Commandment of God by making
Tradition explain it contrary to its true sense and meaning. This Principle
therefore of Monsieur de Meaux's must not be admitted without some caution, and
though we are well assured of constant and perpetual practice for Communion in
one kind, yet the Law of Christ is so clear as not to need that to explain it,
and we may know what appertains or does not appertain to the substance of the
Sacraments from the Law it self, and from the divine Institution of them, as I
have all along shown in this Treatise.

It would have been a great reflection upon the Church, if its Practice had not
agreed with the Law of Christ, though so plain and express a Law ought neither
to loose its force nor its meaning by any subsequent practice; I have so great
a regard and honor for the Catholic Church, that I do not believe it can be
guilty of any Practice so contrary to the Law of Christ, as Communion in one
kind; and I have therefore fully shown, that its Practice has always agreed
with this Law, in opposition to de Meaux, who falsely reproaches the Church
with a practice contrary to it; his design was to destroy the Law of Christ by
the Practice of the Church; mine is to defend the Practice of the Church as
agreeable to, and founded upon the Law of Christ, but the Law of Christ ought
to take place, and is antecedent both to the Churches Practice and the Churches
Authority: As to Tradition, which was the main thing which de Meaux appealed
to, I have joined issue with him in that point, and must leave it to those who
are able to judge which of us have given in the better evidence, and I do not
doubt but we may venture the Cause upon the strength of that; but there is
another more considerable plea, which is prior to Tradition, and which as de
Meaux owns, P. 201.
Is the necessary ground work of it, and that is Scripture, or the Command and
Institution of Christ contained in Scripture, which is so plain and manifest,
that it may be very well understood by all without the help of Tradition; I do
not therefore make any manner of exceptions to Tradition in this case, only I
would set it in its right place, and not found the Law of Christ upon
Tradition, but Tradition upon the Law of Christ, and I am willing to admit it
as far as de Meaux pleases, with this reasonable Proviso, That it does not
interpret us out of a plain Law, nor make void any Command of God that may be
known without it; I have therefore prevented de Meaux in all he brings for
Tradition and the Practice of the Church, unless he will lay so great stress
upon that, as to make it null, and supersede a divine Law; nor am I at all
concerned in all the instances he brings for it out of the Old and New
Testament V.. VI.
, unless he can bring one to prove that either the Jewish Synagogue or the
Christian Church did ever make void a Divine Law by a contrary Practice and
Tradition of their own; I can never allow any Church to have a power and
Authority to do this, and I am willing to allow it all Authority that is kept
within those bounds. It was boldly and openly done indeed by the Council of
Constance, when it owned, That Christ instituted the Sacrament and administered
it to his Disciples under both kinds Licet Christus post caenam instituerit and
suis Discipulis administraverit subutra^que specie panis and vini hoc
venerabile Sacramentum -- Et similiter quod licet in primitiva Ecclesia
hujusmodi Sacramentum reciperetur a sidelibus sub utraque specie. Council.
Constant. Sess. 11.
and that the faithful received it under both kinds in the Primitive Church:
Yet to command it under one by its own power and authority, and by its own
Prerogative to give a Non obstante to Christ's Institution; this was done like
those that had a sufficient plenitude of power, and were resolved to let the
World see they had so, and that Christ's own Institution was to give way to it;
they had not then found out the more sly and shifting subtilties that Christ
gave the Cup to his Disciples only as Priests, and made them Priests just
after the giving them the Bread; this was a late invention found out since that
Council, by some more timorous and wary Sophisters who were afraid of setting
up the Churches Power against a Divine Institution; neither did they then offer
to justify the Communion in one kind by the Tradition and Practice of the
Primitive Church, as de Meaux and others have done since, but they plainly gave
up this, and only made a late Custom, which was afterward introduced, to
become a Law by virtue of their present Power, notwithstanding the Institution
of Christ and the Practice of the Primitive Church to the contrary: Here the
Case truly lies, though de Meaux is willing to go off from it, there must be a
power in the Church to void a Divine Institution, and to null a Law of Christ,
which can be no other than an Antichristian power in the strictest sense, which
may by the same reason take away all the positive Laws of Christianity, or else
Communion in one kind is not to be maintained; and this power must be in a
particular present Church, in opposition to the Primitive and the Universal, or
else this Communion is not to be maintained in the Church of Rome: De Meaux
must be driven to defend that post which he seems to have quitted and deserted,
or else he can never defend this half-Communion, which is contrary, as I have
proved, and as the Council of Constance owns, to the Institution of Christ, and
to the Practice of the Primitive Church. The new Out-work he has raised from
Tradition, in which he puts all the forces of his Book, and the main strength
of his Cause; this I have not beat down or destroyed, but taken from him; and
his cause can never hold out upon his own principles of Tradition and the
Practice of the Church, which is a very strong battery against it, as I have
largely shown; so that all that he says for Tradition is in vain, and to no
purpose, since this Tradition he pleades for is utterly against him, and if it
were never so much for him, yet no Tradition can take away a Divine Law.

He seems to own, and I think he dare not expressly deny, that what is essential
to the Sacraments, or belongs to the substance of them cannot be taken away by
Tradition or the Power of the Church, but he utterly destroys this by making
only Tradition and the Practice of the Church to determine what is thus
essential to the Sacraments, for if nothing be essential but what is made so by
them, and may be known by them, then they have a power to make or to alter even
the very essentials of the Sacraments, which are hereby made wholly to depend
upon the Church and Tradition: We are willing to own that nothing is
unalterable in the Sacraments, but what is essential to them, and that all
other indifferent things belonging to them, may be altered by the Church, or by
Tradition; but then we say that what is essential is fixed and known by the
Institution, and by a Divine Law, antecedent to Tradition; and if it were not
so, then there were nothing essential in the Sacraments at all, but all would
be indifferent, and all would depend upon Tradition and the Churches Power; and
then to what purpose is it to say, That the Church has power only in the
Accidentals, and may alter whatever is not essential, or belongs not to the
substance of the Sacraments; this only shows that they are ashamed to speak
out, and they dare not but grant with one hand, that which they are forced to
take away with another; they dare not openly say, That the Church has power
over the essentials of the Sacraments; but yet they say, That there are no
essentials but what are made and declared to be so by the Church: So the
straight they are in obliges them in effect to revoke their own concessions,
and Truth makes them say that which their Cause forces them to unsay again, and
they are put upon those things in their own necessary defense, which amount in
the whole to a contradiction.

If the Bishop of Meaux can show us that any Divine Institution was ever
altered by the Jewish or Christian Church, or any Law of God relating to
Practice and Ceremony was ever taken away by a contrary Practice and Tradition,
then he says something to the purpose, of Communion in one kind, but if the
many Instances which he brings for Tradition out of the Old and New Testament,
do none of them do this, they are then useless and insufficient, they fall
short of what they ought to prove, and come not up to the question in hand, but
are wholly vain and insignificant, and to show they are so, I shall reduce them
to these following heads:

1. They chiefly relate to the Churches Power in appointing and determining
several things which are left indifferent and undetermined by the Law of God;
and here we acknowledge the Church to have a proper Power, and that it may
oblige even in Conscience to many things, to which we are not obliged by the
Law of God; and may determine many things for the sake of Peace and Uniformity
in Divine Worship, which are not so precisely determined by God himself. Thus
the Jewish Church might settle the time of Vespers, on which their Sabbaths and
Feasts were to begin, the evening being to them the beginning of the next day;
so they might appoint also the manner of observing the new Moons; thus they
might also settle the times of the Three Sacrifices, the Daily, the Sabbatical,
and the Paschal, when they were all to be offered the same day upon one Altar;
and determine which of them should be offered first, though God himself had not
determined it: But could they take away any one of these Sacrifices which God
had commanded, upon a pretense that the other were sufficient without it? could
they have neglected either the New Moons or the Evening-Oblations which God had
appointed, because they might appoint what God had not done, namely, the manner
of observing them? because they could regulate several things relating to the
Law, and necessary to the observance of it, which God had not determined; could
they therefore void the Law it self, or transgress and violate it in any of
those things which God had particularly appointed? Thus the Christian Church
may order many things relating to Divine Worship, and even to the Sacraments
themselves, which no Law of Christ has ordered or determined, as the time, the
place, the outward form and manner of administering them; and yet these as de
Meaux says, Are absolutely necessary for the observation of the Divine Law;
which cannot be observed without some of those circumstances; thus as to
Baptism it may appoint it to be performed by sprinkling or dipping, because
neither of those are commanded by the word Baptize, but only washing with
Water, as I have shown before against de Meaux, but to do this in the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is absolutely necessary, because this is
commanded, though whether with that form, I baptize thee, or Be thou baptized;
which is used in the Greek Church, is indifferent. Thus as to the Eucharist,
the Church may command it to be taken kneeling or standing, which was an
ancient posture of receiving it; it may use such a form of words in the
consecrating the Elements, and in blessing the Bread and Wine, or another, for
it is plain, one was not always used, and St. Gregory tells us, That the
Apostles consecrated only with Lord's Prayer Epist. 63. ad Sir.
. It may use such a sort of Bread and Wine, or another, for no particular sort
is commanded; but it is necessary to bless and to give both, because both are
instituted, and both are commanded; and the Ministers, who are the Stewards of
the Mysteries of God 1 Cor. 4.1.
, these alone have the ordinary power of blessing and distributing them to the
people, but they may do this by the hands of the Deacons, or by suffering the
people to take them and divide them among themselves: Such things as these
which de Meaux offers to us as great difficulties, are only indifferent things
left undetermined by the Divine Law, in which the Church has a power to appoint
what it thinks most proper for decency, and order, and edification, and thus
the greatest knots with which he designed to entangle us are easily resolved
and untied, and yet not any one of the Divine Laws are in the least loosened or
dissolved. One of the greatest things he urges for the necessity of Tradition
and the Practice of the Church, is the Baptism of Infants, for which he says we
can produce nothing from Scripture, but must be forced to resolve it wholly
into Tradition; as to that I am not willing to begin another Controvesie with
him here, and therefore shall only send him to Bellarmine for his
satisfaction, who proves Infant Baptism from Scripture Bellarmin. de Sacram.
Baptismi. c. 8, 9.
as well as from Tradition, and says, It may be clearly gathered from Scripture
it self Tamen id and colligitur satis aperte ex Scripturis.
. But if it were not, does it follow because the Church may make a Law which is
not contained in Scripture, that therefore it may break a Law which is? and
because it may appoint some things which God has left indifferent, that
therefore it may forbid what he has absolutely commanded.

2. Other instances produced by de Meaux, relate not only to matters
Ecclesiastical, but to those that were Civil, or at least mixed, and so
belonging to the Power of the Magistrate, as the Lex Talionis, and the
prohibition of Marriage with the Moabites and Ammonites: The Civil Magistrate
was to see all possible Justice done by the one, according to God's own
command; and it was a commendable act in him to prevent all mischief that might
have come by the other, though this was done without a Divine Precept, by a
general Power vested in the Magistrate, or a particular and immediate
direction, perhaps given by God to Esdras and Nehemiah: But how these can any
way serve de Meaux, I cannot imagine, in the present Controversy, unless he
would prove the Magistrate not bound to execute the Lex Talionis at all, or
that the Jews might have dispensed with the Law in Deuteronomy, which forbad
Marriages with the Canaanites, because upon the same ground and reason they
forbad those also with the Ammonites and Moabites afterward.

3. Some cases he mentions were excused upon the account of necessity, which
when it is notorious and unavoidable, dispences with a positive Law. Thus
David's eating the Shewbread, which it was not lawful but for the Priests
ordinarily to eat, is approved by our Savior, Matthew. 12.4. not upon the
account of Tradition, or the judgment of the High Priest, but the extreme
hunger which he and his Companions were then pressed with, and which made it
lawful for them them to eat of the hallowed Bread, when there was no other to
be procured: But did this make it lawful afterward for the High Priest or the
Sanhedrim to have made the holy Bread always common to others when there was no
such necessity? Thus if some Christians lived in a Country where it was
impossible to have any Wine, this might excuse them from taking the Cup, but
does this justify the making a general Law to take away the Cup when there is
no such necessity for it? and the same may be said of many other like instances.

4. In other cases when a Law was founded upon a particular reason, the ceasing
of that made the Law to cease, which was wholly grounded upon it, as in the
prohibition of eating Blood, and things strangled, and Meats offered to Idols,
this being to avoid giving any scandal to the Jews at that time, when the
reason of it ceased, so did the Law; and it is not so much Tradition which
makes it void, as those general sayings of Christ and the Apostle, that nothing
which enters in at the mouth defiles the man; and that whatever is sold in the
shambles may be eat, without asking any question for conscience sake.

As to the Jews defending themselves upon the Sabbath, on which they were
commanded so strictly to rest, it was both necessity and the reason of the Law
which made this justifiable, and not any Tradition or any sentence of the
Sanhedrim; and our Savior when he blames their superstitious observance of the
Sabbath, does not reprove them for keeping it as it was commanded, or otherwise
than Tradition had explained it, but contrary to the true reason and meaning of
it, and to the true mind and will of the Lawgiver.

As to the Christians changing the Sabbath into the first Day of the Week, this
was not done by Tradition, but by the Apostolical Authority; and whatever
obligation there may be antecedent to the Law of Moses for observing one day in
seven, it can neither be proved that the Jews observed exactly the Seventh day
from the Creation, much less that the Christians are under any such obligation
now, or I may add, if they were, that Tradition would excuse them from a
Divine Law.

All the instances which Monsieur de Meaux heaps up, are very short of proving
that, and though I have examined every one of them, except that pretended
Jewish Tradition of Praying for the Dead, which is both false and to no
purpose, yet it was not because there was any strength in them to the
maintaining his sinking Cause, but that I might take away every slender prop by
which he endeavors in vain to keep it up, and drive him out of every little
hole in which he strives with so much labor to Earth himself, when after all
his turnings and windings he finds he must be run down.

If any instance could be found by de Meaux or others, of any Tradition, or any
Practice of a Church contrary to a Divine Institution, and to a plain Law of
God, they would deserve no other answer to be returned to it, but what Christ
gave to the Pharisees in the like case: Why do ye transgress the commandment of
God by your tradition Mar. 15.3.
? Our Savior did not put the matter upon this issue, Whether the Tradition by
which they explained the Law, so as to make it of none effect, was truly
ancient and authentic, and derived to them from their Forefathers; but he
thought it sufficient to tell them that it made void, and was contrary to a
Divine Law.

There is no Tradition, nor no Church, which has ever broke so plain a Law, and
so shamefully violated a Divine Institution, as that which has set up Communion
in One Kind: the true reason why it did so was not Tradition, no, that was not
so much as pretended at first for the doing of it, but only some imaginary
dangers and inconveniences, which brought in a new custom contrary to ancient
Tradition: These were the only things insisted on in its defense at first, the
danger of spilling the Wine, and the difficulty of getting it in some places,
and the undecency of Laymens dipping their Beards in it: These were the mighty
reasons which Gerson brought of old against the Heresy, as he calls it, of
Communicating in both Kinds Tractatus Magistri Johannis de Gerson contra
haeresin de communionae Laicorum sub utraque specie.
; as if it were a new Heresy to believe that Wine might be spilt, or that men
wore Beards, or as if the Sacrament were appointed only for those Countries
where there were Vines growing. De Meaux was very sensible of the weakness and
folly of those pretenses, though they are the pericula and the scandala meant
by the Council of Constance, and therefore he takes very little notice of them,
and indeed he has quite taken away all their arguments against the particular
use of the Wine, because he all along pleades for either of the Species, and
owns it to be indifferent which of them so ever is used in the Sacrament: But I
have shown that both of them are necessary to make a true Sacrament, because
both are commanded, and both instituted, and both of them equally belong to the
matter of the Sacrament, and so to the essence of it, and both are ordinarily
necessary to the receiving the inward Grace and Virtue of the Sacrament,
because that is annexed to both by the Institution, and cannot warrantably be
expected without both.

To conclude therefore, Communion in One Kind is both contrary to the
Institution and to the Command of Christ, and to the Tradition and Practice of
the Primitive Church grounded upon that Command, and is no less in it self than
a sacrilegious dividing and mangling of the most sacred Mystery of
Christianity, a destroying the very Nature of the Sacrament, which is to
represent the Death of Christ, and his Blood separated from his Body; a
lessening the signification and reception of our complete and entire spiritual
Nourishment, whereby we are Sacramentally to eat Christ's Body and drink his
Blood; an unjust depriving the People of that most precious Legacy which Christ
left to all of them, to wit, His Sacrificial Blood which was shed for us, and
which it is the peculiar privilege of Christians thus mystically to partake
of; and lastly, a robbing them of that Grace, and Virtue, and Benefit of the
Sacrament which belongs not to any part, but to the whole of it, and cannot
ordinarily be received without both kinds: O that God would therefore put it
into the hearts of those who are most concerned, not to do so much injury to
Christians and to Christianity; and not to suffer any longer that Divine
Majesty, which is the great Foundation of all Spiritual Grace and Life, to be
tainted and poisoned with so many corruptions as we find it is above all other
parts of Christianity! And O that that blessed Sacrament which was designed by
Christ to be the very Bond of Peace, and the Cement of Unity among all
Christians, and to make them all one Bread and one Body, may not by the
perverseness of men and the craft of the Devil, be made a means to divide and
separate them from each other, and to break that Unity and Charity which it
ought to preserve!

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of some Discourses sold by Brabazon Aylmer at the three Pigeons
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
1. A Persuasive to an Ingenuous Trial of Opinions in Religion.

2. The Difference of the Case between the Separation of the Protestants from
the Church of Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England.

3. A Discourse about the Charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther?

4. The Protestant Resolution of Faith, being an Answer to Three Questions. I.
How far we must depend on the Authority of the Church for the true Sense of
Scripture. II. Whether a vissible Succession from Christ to this day makes a
Church, which has this vissible Succession an Infallible Interpreter of
Scripture; and whether no Church which has not this visible Succession, can
teach the true Sense of Scripture. III. Whether the Church of England can make
out such a visible Succession?

5. A Discourse concerning a Guide in matters of Faith; with Respect especially
to the Romish pretense of the Necessity of such a one as is Infallible.

6. A Discourse about Tradition; showing what is meant by it, and what
Tradition is to be Received, and what Tradition is to be Rejected.

7. A Discourse concerning the Unity of the Catholic Church, maintained in the
Church of England.

8. A Discourse concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with Respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. In two Parts.

9. A Discourse concerning the Object of Religious Worship: or, a
Scripture Proof of the Unlawfulness of giving any Religious Worship to any
other Being besides the one Supreme God.

10. A Discourse against Transubstantiation.

11. A Discourse concerning the Adoration of the Host, as it is Taught and
Practiced in the Church of Rome. Wherein an Answer is given to T. G. on that
Subject, and to Monsieur Bocleau's late Book de Adoratione Eucharistiae. Paris,
1685.

12. A Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints.

13. A Discourse concerning the Devotions of the Church of Rome.

14. A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown
Tongue.

15. A Discourse concerning Auricular Confession, as it is Prescribed by the
Council of Trent, and Practiced in the Church of Rome. With a Postscript on
occasion of a Book lately printed in France, called, Historia Confessionis
Auricularis.

16. A Discourse concerning the Worship of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints;
with an Account of the Beginnings and Rise of it amongst Christians: In Answer
to Monsieur de Meaux's Appeal to the Fourth Age in his Exposition, and his
Pastoral Letter.

17. A Discourse of the Communion in One Kind, in Answer to the Bishop of
Meaux's Treatise of Communion under both Species. Lately Translated into
English.

A DISCOURSE OF THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS.

Imprimatur,

Guil. Needham.
October, 24. 1687.


LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil, M DC LXXXVIII.

The CONTENTS.
THE charge of the Church of England against the sacrifice of the Mass. page 2,
3. Sect. 1. The sacrifice of the Mass founded upon two great Errors, the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and the Opinion that Christ offered up himself
to God at his last Supper. p. 5 to 11. Sect. 2. No Scripture ground for the
sacrifice of the Mass. p. 11 to 41 Melchisedec's offering Bread and Wine, Genesis
14.18. considered. p. 13 Of the Melchisedecian Priesthood. p. 16 The figure of
the Paschal Lamb Examined. p. 19 The prophecy of Malachy Examined. p. 22 Other
places out of the Old Testament Answered. p. 25 An Answer to the places out of
the New Testament. p. 28 Plain places of Scripture against the Mass-sacrifice
out of the Epistle to the Hebrews. p. 33 Their Evasions to them Refuted. p. 35
Sect. 3. The sacrifice of the Mass has no just claim to Antiquity. p. 41 to 70
The Eucharist called a sacrifice by the Ancients upon account 1. Of the
Oblations there made. p. 44 2. Of the Religious Acts there performed. p. 47 3.
As it is Commemorative and Representative of the Crosssacrifice. p. 49
Christ is offered mentally by every Communicant. p. 52
How the Minister may be said to offer Christ to God in the Eucharist. p. 53
General Remarks out of Antiquity to prove the Eucharist no proper sacrifice. p.
54 to 70 1. From the Christian Apologists. p. 54 2. From the Epithets they give
to it when they call it a sacrifice. p. 58 3. From the Novelty of private
Masses which are a consequence of this Doctrine. p. 60 4. From the Canon of the
Mass it self. p. 63 5. From the new form of Ordination in the R. C. p. 67
Sect. 4. The Mass-sacrifice in it self Unreasonable and Absurd, and has a
great many Errors involved in it. p. 70 to 95 1. It makes an external visible
sacrifice of what is perfectly invisible. p. 70 2. It makes a proper sacrifice
without a proper sacrificing Act. p. 71 Their differences about the Essence of
the sacrifice. p. 73 3. It makes a living Body a sacrifice. p. 76 4. The making
it truly propitiatory is a great Error, and inconsistent with it self. p. 77 5.
How it is Impetratory. p. 80 6. The making it a sacrifice truly Propitiatory,
and yet only Applicatory of another is a great Absurdity. p. 82 7. The making
it the same sacrifice with That of the Cross, and yet not to have the same
virtue and efficacy is strange and unaccountable. p. 84 8. Making Christ, as
they do, the true offerer of this sacrifice has great Absurdities. p. 87 9.
The Offering this sacrifice to Redeem Souls out of Purgatory, one of the
greatest Errors and Abuses that belong to it. p. 88 Of the Ancient Oblations
for the Dead. p. 90 to 95 10. The sacrifice of the Mass must be either
unnecessary or else must reflect on the sacrifice of the Cross. p. 95 The
Conclusion and the Reason why no more of the Errors belonging to it are added.

ERRATA.
PAge 12. line a antepenult. for desire read derive. PAge 39. Line 8. for the
read that. PAge 68. To Council. Carthag. in margin add 4. PAge 72. Line 8. for
Maunday-Thursday read Good-Fryday.
A DISCOURSE OF THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS.
THE Sacrifice of the Mass is the most considerable part of Worship in the
Roman Church, It is their Juge sacrificium, their daily and continual Offering,
and the principal Thing in which their Religion does consist; It is, they tell
us, of the greatest profit and advantage to all persons, and I am sure their
Priests make it so to themselves, for by this alone a great number of them get
their Livings, by making merchandise of the Holy Sacrament, and by selling the
Blood of Christ at a dearer rate then Judas once did; The saying of Masses
keeps the Church of Rome more Priests in pay, then any Prince in Christendom
can maintain Soldiers; and it has raised more Money by them, then the richest
Bank or Exchequer in the World was ever owner of; it is indeed the truest
Patrimony of their Church, and has enricht it more then any thing else; it was
that which founded their greatest Monasteries, and their Richest Abbeys, and it
had well nigh brought all the Estates of this Kingdom into the Church, had not
the Statutes of Mortmain put a check to it; The Donation of Constantine, were
it never so true, and the Grants of Charles and Pepin, were they never so
large, and the Gifts of all their Benefactors put together, are infinitely
outdone by it; the Gain of it has been so manifestly great that one cannot but
upon that account a little suspect its Godliness, but yet if it could fairly be
made out to be a true part of Religion, it were by no means to be rejected for
that accidental though shameful abuse of it: It is accounted by them the
greatest, and the most useful and comfortable part of Christian Worship, and if
it be so, it is a great defect in us that want it; they charge us very high for
being without it, without a Sacrifice, which no Religion (they tell us) in the
World ever was before: and one amongst them of great Learning, and some temper
in other things, yet upon this occasion asks, whether it can be doubted, where
there is no Sacrifice, there can be any Religion An dubitari potest ubi nullum
peculiare Sacrisitium, ibi ne Religionem quidem esse posse? Canus in loc.
Theol. l. 12. p. 813.
? We on the other side account it a very great corruption of the Eucharist, to
turn that which is a Sacrament to be received by us into a Sacrifice to be
offered to God, and there being no Foundation for any such thing in Scripture,
but the whole ground of it being an Error and mistake, as we shall see anon,
and it being a most bold and daring presumption, to pretend properly to
Sacrifice Christ's body again which implies no less then to Murder and Crucify
him; we therefore call it a Blasphemous Fable See Article 31. of the 39
Articles of Religion.
, and as it is made use of to deceive people into the vain hopes of receiving
benefit by the Communion without partaking of it, and a true pardon of sin by
way of price, and recompense is attributed to it, and it is made as truly
propitiatory as Christ's sacrifice upon the Cross, both for the dead and living,
and for that purpose is scandalously bought and sold, so that many are hereby
cheated not only of their money but of their souls too, it is to be feared, who
trust too much to this easy way of having a great many Masses said for them,
and because when the priest pretends to do those two great things in the Mass,
to turn the Bread and Wine into the very substance of Christ's Body and Blood,
and then to offer Christ up again to his Father as truly as he offered himself
upon the cross, which are as great as the greatest works which ever God did at
the very Creation and Redemption of the World) yet that he really does no such
thing as he then vaunts and boasts of; for these Reasons we deem it no less
then a dangerous deceit Ibid.
.

These are high charges on both sides, and it concerns those who make them to
be well assured of the grounds of them. And here I cannot but passionately
resent the sad state of Christianity, which will certainly be very heavy upon
those who have been the cause of it, when the corruptions of it are so great,
and the divisions so wide about that which is one of the most sacred and the
most useful parts of it, the Blessed Eucharist; which is above any other the
most sadly depraved and perverted, as if the Devil had hereby shown his utmost
malice and subtlety, to poison one of the greatest Fountains of Christianity,
and to make that which should yield the Waters of Life be the Cup of
destruction. That blessed Sacrament which was designed to unite Christians, is
made the very bone of Contention, and the greatest instrument to divide them;
and that bread of Life is turned into a stone, and become the great Rock of
offense between them. Besides the lesser corruptions of the Eucharist in the
Church of Rome, such as using thin Wafers instead of bread, and injecting them
whole into the mouths of the Communicants, and Consecrating without a Prayer,
and speaking the words of Consecration secretly, and the like; there are four
such great ones as violate and destroy the very substance and Essence of the
Sacrament, and make it to be a quite other thing then Christ ever intended it,
and therefore such as make Communion with the Roman Altar utterly sinful and
unlawful: These are the Adoration of the Host, or making the Sacrament an
object of Divine Worship; the Communion in one Kind, or taking away the Cup
from the People; the turning the Sacrament into a true and proper Sacrifice
propitiatory for the Quick and the Dead, and the using of private or solitary
Masses, wherein the Priest who celebrates, Communicates alone. The two former
of these have been considered in some late discourses upon those subjects; the
fourth is a result and consequence of the third, for when the Sacrament was
turned into a sacrifice the people left off the frequent communicating, and
expected to be benefitted by it another way; so that this will fall in as to
the main Reasons of it, with what I now design to consider and Examine, The
Sacrifice of the Mass or Altar, wherein the Priest every time he celebrates the
Communion is supposed to offer to God the Body and Blood of Christ under the
forms of Bread and Wine, as truly as Christ once offered himself upon the
cross, and that this is as true a proper and propitiatory Sacrifice as the
other, and that it is so not only for the Living but also for the Dead. The
Objections we make against it and the Arguments by which they defend it will
fall in together at the same time, and I shall endeavor fairly and impartially
to represent them in their utmost strength, that so what we have to say against
it, and what they have to say for it, may be offered to the Reader at one view,
that he may the better judge of those high charges which are made, he sees, on
each side.

First then we say, That the very foundation of this Sacrifice of the Mass, is
established upon two very great Errors and Mistakes: The one is the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation or Christ's Corporal presence in the Eucharist; The other is
the Opinion, That Christ did offer up his body and blood as a sacrifice to God
in his last Supper, before he offered up himself upon the Cross: If either or
both of these prove false, the Sacrifice of the Mass is so far from being true,
that it must necessarily fall to the ground, according to their own principles
and acknowledgments.

Secondly, There is no Scripture ground for any such sacrifice, but it is
expressly contrary to Scripture; under which head I shall examine all their
Scriptural pretenses for it, and produce such places as are directly contrary
to it, and perfectly overthrow it.

Thirdly, That it has no just claim to Antiquity, nor was there any such
Doctrine or practice in the Primitive Church.

Fourthly, That it is in it self unreasonable and absurd, and has a great many
gross Errors involved in it.

First we say, That the very Foundation of this sacrifice is established upon
two very great Errors and Mistakes, the first of which is the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or which may be sufficient for their purpose, the corporal
presence of Christ's natural body and blood in the Eucharist, though they
disclaim the belief of this without the other: but if Christ's body and blood be
not substantially present under the species of bread and Wine, they have no
subject matter for a sacrifice, for it is not the bread and wine which they
pretend to offer, nor the bare species and accidents of those, nor can they
call them a proper propitiatory sacrifice, but it is the very natural body and
blood of Christ, under the species of bread and wine, or together with them,
for they with the species make one entire subject for sacrifice, and one entire
object for Adoration, as they are forced to confess Panis and corpus Domini,
Vinum and sanguis Domini non sunt duo sacrificia sed unum, -- neque enim
offerimus corpus Domini absolute, sed offerimus corpus Domini in specie panis,
Bellarm. de Miss. l. 1. c. 37.
; So that according to their own principles, they must both sacrifice and adore
something in the Eucharist besides the very body and blood of Christ, which is
a difficulty they will never get off, but I design not to press them with that
now, but Transubstantiation upon which their sacrifice of the Mass is founded,
is so great a difficulty that it bears down before it all sense and reason, and
only makes way for Church Authority to triumph over both; Their wisest men have
given up Scripture for it, and frankly confessed, it were not necessary to
believe it without the determination of the Church, and if so then without the
Churches determination, there had been no foundation it seems for the sacrifice
of the Mass. for there can be none for that without Transubstantiation, and
it is very strange that a sacrifice should be thus founded, not upon Scripture
or a Divine institution, but only in effect upon the Churches declaration, and
should have no true bottom without that, as according to those men it really
has not. But Transubstantiation is a Monster that startles and affrights the
boldest Faith, if the Church be not by to encourage and support it; it is too
terrible to be looked upon in its self without having a thick mist of Church
Authority and Infallibility first cast before a man's eyes, and then if there
were not a strange and almost fascinating power in such principles, one would
think it impossible that any man who has both eyes and brains in his head
should believe a Wafer were the body of a man, or that a crum of bread were a
fleshly substance, they do not indeed believe them to be both, but they believe
one to be the other which is the same thing; there is nothing can expose such a
doctrine, for nothing can be more uncouth and extravagant then itsself, it not
only takes away all evidence of sense upon which all truth of miracles, and so
of all Revelation does depend, but it destroys all manner of certainty, and all
the principles of truth and knowledge, it makes one body be a thousand, or at
least be at the same time in a thousand places, by which means the least atome
may fill the whole World; Again it makes the parts of a body to penetrate one
another, by which means all the matter of the whole World may be brought to a
single point, it makes the whole to be no greater then a part, and one part to
be as great as the whole; thus it destroys the nature of things, and makes a
body to be a spirit, and an accident to be a substance, and renders every thing
we see or taste to be only phantasm and appearance, and though the World seems
crowded with solids, yet according to that it may be all but species and
shadow, and superficies. So big is this opinion with absurdities and
inconsistencies and contradictions, and yet these must all go down and pass
into an Article of Faith before there can be any foundation for the sacrifice
of the Mass, and let any one judge that has not lost his judgment by believing
Transubstantiation, what a strange production that must be which is to be the
genuine offspring of such a doctrine. It is not my province, nor must it be my
present task to discourse at large of that, or to confute the little
sophistries with which it is thought necessary to make it outface the common
reason of mankind. There never was any paradox needed more straining to defend
it, nor any Skeptical principle but would bear as fair a wrangle on its behalf,
there is a known Treatise has so laid this cause on its back, that it can never
be able to rise again, and though after a long time it endeavors a little to
stir, and heave, and sruggle, yet if it thereby provokes another blow from the
same hand, it must expect nothing less then its mortal wound.

I pass to the next Error and Mistake upon which the sacrifice of the Mass is
founded, and that is this, that our blessed Savior did at his last Supper when
he celebrated the Communion with his Disciples offer up his body and blood to
his Father as a true propitiatory sacrifice, before he offered it as such upon
the Cross. This they pretend, and are forced to do so to establish their
sacrificing in the Mass, for they are only to do that in the Sacrament, they
own, which Christ himself did, and which he commanded his Apostles to do, and
if this sacrifice had not its institution and appointment at that time, it
never had any at all, as they cannot but grant. Let us then enquire whether
Christ did thus sacrifice himself and offer up his body and blood to God at his
last Supper: Is there any the least color or shadow of any such thing in any
of the accounts that is given of this in the three Evangelists or in St. Paul?
The Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took bread and gave
thanks, or blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying, take
eat this is my Body which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me, after
the same manner also he took the Cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them,
saying, drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the New Testament which
is shed for you, and for many for the remission of sins. Is here any mention or
any intimation of offering up any thing to God? Was not the bread and the cup,
and what he called his body and his blood given to his Disciples to be eaten
and drank by them? and was any thing else done with them? is there any thing
like an offering or a sacrificing of them? yes say they, Christ there calls it
his body which is broken and his blood which is shed, in the present tense;
therefore the one must be then broken and the other shed; So indeed it is in
the Original Greek, though in the Vulgar Latin it is in the future tense, and
so it is also put in their Missal, sanguis qui effundetur, this is my Blood
which shall be shed, and is it not usual to put the present tense instead of
the future, when that is so near and certain? Does not our Savior do it more
than once at other times? The Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners,
(...), Matthew. 26.45. before he was so, though Judas was then nigh and coming
about it. So John 10.17. I lay down my Life, (...), when he was ready to do so;
as he was to have his body broken and his blood shed, when he was prepared as a
victim to be offered the next day, so St. Paul says, (...), I now offer up my
self, 2 Timothy 4.6. when, as we translate it, he was ready to be offered. That
Christ here used the present tense for the future is owned by Cardinal Cajetan
In Luc. 22.
, and other Learned men Sa. Barrad.
of the Roman Church, and Jansenius Concord. 131.
says, the pouring out of the blood is rightly understood of the pouring it
out upon the Cross.

Christ's body was not broke, nor his blood poured out till the next day, nor
did he offer up himself as a sacrifice to his Father until then, Christ did not
then command his Apostles to offer him up in the Eucharist, when he bad them do
this: hoc facite, does not signify to sacrifice, nor will it be supposed I
hope our Savior did then use the vulgar Latin, the phrase in Virgil, cum
faciam vitula, which is always quoted to this purpose, shows it only to be so
meant when the occasion or subject matter does require it; but in our Saviors
words it plainly refers to those acts of taking bread and breaking it, and
taking Wine and Blessing it, and then giving or distributing of them, as he had
done just before, and as he commanded then to do in remembrance of him, and
that it does not relate to sacrificing is plain from St. Paul who applies it
particularly to drinking the Cup, do this as often as ye drink it in remembrance
of me, 1 Cor. 11.25. That the Apostles were made Priests by Christ at his last
Supper, by those words, hoc facite, do this, is so precarious and senseless an
opinion, that it only shows what wonderful streights and extremities our
adversaries are driven to, who are forced to espouse this to support their
ill-framed Hypothesis about the Holy Eucharist, in those two doctrines of the
Communion in One Kind, and the Sacrifice of the Mass. There is not one Father
or Ancient Interpreter, that gives any the least countenance to it, and many of
their own Authors are ashamed of it, as may be seen in a late Discourse of the
Communion in One Kind page 15.
, where this is so fully exposed that I shall here say no more of it, but that
if those words make the Apostles Priests, it makes them so twice, for they are
twice repeated by our Savior after giving the Cup, as well as after giving the
bread, as St. Paul witnesses, 1 Cor. 11.25. and so the character of Priesthood
must be double, and they must be twice ordained at the same time, when there is
nothing appears like any Ordination at all; but if they were then made Priests
they were not made so to sacrifice Christ's Body and Blood, or to do more then
he did at that time: and so this is nothing to the purpose if he himself did
not then truly offer and sacrifice himself, which is the plainest thing in the
World he did not. And what should make any man imagine that Christ's body was
broke, and his blood shed at his last Supper; or that he then sacrificed and
offered up himself I cannot conceive. Had he been no otherwise sacrificed, nor
his body any otherwise broken, nor his blood in any otherway shed besides this
the Jews had been liable to much less guilt, but mankind had bin a more
wretched condition, for Christ had not Redeemed them had he not dyed for them
upon the Cross. If the sacrifice of Christ at his last Supper, the night before
his crucifixion, was a true proper and propitiatory sacrifice, what needed he
have suffered the next day, if that was of the same nature and value with the
other, as they say, and did truly propitiate God, and procure pardon and
remission of sins for mankind, what need was there of the Cross of Christ? it
was hereby made void and of none Effect, or at least of no necessity. If Christ
had done the work without it, his sacrifice upon the Altar or the Table might
have excused his sacrifice upon the Cross, and thus the bitter Cup might have
past from him, and he might have been Crucified only in Effigy, and slain
mystically and sacramentally; and his body might have been thus broken and his
blood shed, and yet the one have been still whole, and the other in his veins.

For these Reasons one of their own Bishops in the Council of Trent denied
openly, That Christ offered up any proper sacrifice at his last Supper
Cornelius Episcopas Bitontinus, in concilio apud Tridentum, -- qui dixerit
Christum in caena non suum corpus and sanguinem obtulisse, Canus in loc. Theol.
l. 12.
. But if he did not then there was no ground for them ever to offer any in the
Eucharist, and therefore the Council was forced to declare he did, though no
such thing appears in the Evangelical History, nor could any collect it from
thence, but it was a necessary after-thought, and a groundless supposal, to
help out and establish the sacrifice of the Mass.

Secondly, There is no Scripture ground for any such sacrifice, but it is
expressly contrary to Scripture, to sacrifice Christ over again, and to have any
other propitiatory sacrifice besides that of the Cross, and to offer up Christ's
body and blood every day which was to be but once offered and that by himself.
I have already shown that the greatest foundation of this their sacrifice out
of Scripture, which is Christ offering up himself at his last Supper and
commanding others to offer him there is a mistake, and if it be so, all their
other Scriptural pretenses are vain and to no purpose; and must be so
acknowledged by themselves, for there is none other that does institute and
appoint any such sacrifice, or can with any color or shadow be pretended to do
so, and I hope they will own that without a divine institution, there cannot be
a proper and much less a propitiatory sacrifice, and this indeed they do, they
confess that it is not in the power of the Church to institute a sacrifice Non
est in potestate Ecclesiae. instituere Sacramentum, Salmeron, Tom. 9. Tract. 28.
. And that the very being and Essence of this sacrifice depends upon the
Institution of Christ Tota Essentia Sacrificii pendet ex institutione Christi,
Salmeron, ib. Suarez. Tom. 3. Disp. 75.
. If that be then taken away, and there be no such thing in Scripture as I have
shown there is not, then whatever other places they can produce to establish
this are all insignificant and to no purpose; for if they did mention this
either by way of Prophecy or of History, yet if it be no where instituted, this
will not do the business, for the Institution ought not to be supposed but
clearly proved and made out, and if that cannot be, every thing else that is to
support it as a collateral evidence falls to the ground. What will it signify
if Melchisedec did offer Bread and Wine not to Abraham only but to God, and as
a Priest did sacrifice them, rather then make an hospitable entertainment with
them, is this any foundation for the sacrifice of the Mass? If Christ did not
institute that at his last Supper with his Disciples, Melchisedec I hope did
not institute it with Abraham and his Soldiers. If the Prophet Malachi speaks
never so much of a pure offering, yet if Christ did not offer up himself in the
Sacrament, nor command the Apostles to offer him up there, Malachi's Prophecy
will not make the Eucharist to be a sacrifice or a pure offering, if Christ did
not make it so: nor will the Priests I suppos desire their power of sacrificing
either from Melchisedecs act or Malachi's prediction without Christ's
Institution; it is not only a presumption but a demonstration that those
Scriptures which they bring, do not really mean or truly speak of any such
thing, as The sacrifice of the Mass, when there is no such thing any where
instituted or appointed by Christ, and without such an institution there cannot
(as they confess) be any ground for it. All their little scattered forces
therefore which they rally and pick up here and there out of Scripture, and
which against their will they press into the service of the Mass-sacrifice are
hereby wholly cut off and utterly defeated, by having their main strength
without which they can do nothing of themselves, taken away from them, and I
shall examine them only to show the weakness of them, which they being very
sensible of themselves endeavor to make up their want of strength by the
greatness of their number; and surely never were so many places brought out of
Scripture to so little purpose, as what they produce for the sacrifice of the
Mass.

First then they go back as far as Genesis for it, and it is very strange they
should find it there; this will make it very primitive and ancient indeed, but
wherever they meet with bread and Wine, which are things of very great
Antiquity, they resolve to make a sacrifice of them; especially if there be but
a Priest by who has the power of Consecrating, for they suppose he must
presently fall to his office and put on his habit if bread and wine be before
him, and that he cannot like other men eat and drink them as his ordinary food
or entertain his friends and others with them, except he not only Religiously
bless them by Prayer and Thanksgiving which every good man ought to do, and it
was the custom even of the Heathens to do this before they ate, but he must
sacrifice and offer them up to God. This they will needs have Melchisedec do in
the 14. of Genesis 18. verse. Melchisedec King of Salem brought forth bread and
wine, and he was the Priest of the most High God. What is there here to show
that Melchisedec offered bread and wine as a sacrifice to God, the very word in
their own vulgar Latin answering to the Hebrew is protulit, he brought forth,
not obtulit, he offered; and if it were the latter, could not he offer bread
and wine to Abraham and his Company upon a Table, but must it necessarily be to
God upon an Altar? Abraham with his Three Hundred and Eighteen Trained
Servants, Ver. 14, 15.
had been by night pursuing those who had taken away his brother Lot Captive,
and when they were thus weary and hungry, Melchisedec hospitably and kindly
entertained them with provision to refresh them; and brought forth bread and
wine to them, thus it lies in the Sacred History and Context, and thus Josephus
(...). l. 1. c. 11.
relates it, and there is not the least mention or intimation of any sacrifice
as Cajetan Nihil hic scribitur de sacrificio sed de prolatione seu extractione,
quam Josephus dicit factam ad reficiendos victores, Cajetan in Genesis 14.
owns upon the place, and so do many of their own Authors, whom Possevine
Biblioth. l. 4. c. 13.
the Jesuit takes upon him to correct for it. Bellarmine indeed, as if he had
been by at the entertainment, and been one of Abraham's Soldiers, tells us,
they had ate and drank very well before, and therefore desires Melchisedec to
excuse them, for they had no need of his Bread and Wine at that time Quid
igitur opus erat pane and vino ijs qui spoliis abundabant and paulo ante
comederant and biberant? Bellarm. de Miss. l. 1. c. 6. D.
and yet in the same place owns that these were given to Abraham and his
Companions for food At nos non negamus data illa in cibum Abrahae and sociis,
sed dicimus fuisse prius Deo oblata and consecrata, and tum data hominibus ut
de sacrificio participarent, Ib.
but that they were first offered to God and then given to them to partake of
them as of a sacrifice: But why were they given as Food, if they had no need of
Food? Did Melchisedec know they had eaten? Or does the Scripture say so? Or
might not he treat them as a King though they had victuals of their own? How
does Bellarmine know they were first sacrificed when there is not the least
word of that? Ay, but it is said that he was the Priest of the most high God,
therefore it is likely he sacrificed, why else should that be added? It was
added because he was so, or because as it immediately follows, he blessed
Abraham, Ver. 19.20.
and Abraham gave him Tithes of all his spoils, this is more likely than
because he sacrificed, for there is no mention of that as of the other, and
it is not said he brought forth bread and wine because he was the Priest of the
high God, it is only a conjunctive particle, and, he was, not a causal for. It
is said also in the same place, that he was King of Salem, and why might not
his entertaining Abraham be as he was a King, because he is said there to be a
King, as well as a Priest, and yet I suppose a Priest may be said to treat his
Friends, as another man without officiating then as a Priest, though he be
called a Priest. Why Bellarmine should cite any Fathers for his Opinion I
cannot imagine, since the oldest of them are I suppose so much latter, and at
so great a distance from the times of Melchisedec, that they could no more know
what Melchisedec did at that time then we can now, and they are very improper
witnesses of a matter of fact that was so long ago, which nothing but the
Scripture history can give us any account of, to which itis not only precarious
but rash to add any of our own guesses and conjectures; however tho some of the
Fathers do by way of figure and allusion, make this bread and wine of
Melchisedec, to relate to the Sacramental bread and wine, as they make Manna,
and several other things which were not sacrifices, yet none apply it to the
sacrifice of the Mass, nor could they well do it since they believed no such
thing in the Romish sense, as I shall show afterward. But after all, what if
Melchisedec did sacrifice bread and wine? What service will this do to the
sacrifice of the Mass? The Priests do not there sacrifice bread and wine
according to this Mystical Type, nor did Melchisedec sure offer up Christ's body
and blood under the species of his bread and wine; if we allow all that can be
begged and desired that Melchisedec did sacrifice, and that this his sacrifice
was a Type and figure of another sacrifice, why may not that be of the
sacrifice of the Cross, which is the true and only proper Christian sacrifice,
when Christ the Bread of Life was offered up unto God for us? So that there is
no necessity to bring in the sacrifice of the Mass to complete and answer this
figure, were there any thing in it besides guess and fancy which I see no
manner of reason to believe there is, since there is nothing to countenance it
in the New Testament, and it is very presumptuous and ungrounded to make any
thing a true Type, or to have a Typical meaning farther then Gods Spirit, which
alone could know this, has given us warrant to do it by Revelation. Yet without
any such ground both Bellarmine de Missa l. 1. c. 6.
, and the Council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 1.
, make this to be the notion of Christ being a Priest after the order of
Melchisedec, that he was to offer up a visible and unbloody sacrifice of bread
and wine, and to appoint others to do this for ever, whereas as the Scripture
makes Christ to be a Priest after the Order of Melchisedec, not upon any such
account: for the Author to the Hebrews makes not the least mention of this in
his large discourse of this matter Heb. 5.7.
, but in his having no Predecessor nor no Successor in his Priesthood, as
Melchisedec is represented in Scripture without any account of his Family or
Genealogy, without Father, without Mother, without Descent, Heb. 7. v. 3. and
in the excellency of that in general above the imperfect Aaronic Priesthood,
and in the Eternity and Immutability of it, because he continues ever, and
has an unchangeable Priesthood, verse 24. How little the Melchisedecian
Priesthood of Christ, upon which they lay so much stress, will serve the
purpose of the Mass-sacrifice, nay how contrary it is to it, I shall endeavor
to manifest in a few particulars.

First then, Christ it is plain did offer up to God not an unbloody, but a
bloody sacrifice upon the Cross; I ask whether he did this according to his
Melchisedecian Priesthood? If he did, then Melchisedec probably as Priest of
the High God might offer the bloody sacrifices of living creatures, and if he
were Shem the Eldest Son of Noah, as is fairly conjectured by Learned men, he
might learn this of his Father, who after the Flood built an Altar unto the
Lord, and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered
burnt-offerings on the Altar, Genesis 8.20. but then how will this be reconciled
with what our adversaries pretend, that it was the proper and peculiar office
of Melchisedec to offer the pure and unbloody sacrifice of bread and wine? And
that according to that the Roman Priests are to do that, and that Christ did
that at his last Supper. Christ's Priesthood was the same at his Supper and upon
the Cross, if he acted therefore as a Priest of Melchisedec in one, he did so
in both.

Secondly, The Scripture mentions no Act or Office of Melchisedec's Priesthood
but in blessing Abraham, Genesis 14.18, 19. Melchisedec King of Salem brought
forth bread and Wine, and he was the Priest of the most high God, and he
blessed him, and said, blessed be Abraham of the most high God which has
delivered thine enemies into thine hand. And this the Author to the Hebrews
takes particular notice of chapter 7. v. 1.
, and this answers to what St. Peter says of Christ after his Resurrection, God
having raised up his son Jesus sent him to bless you Acts 3.26.
, which general word of blessing may include in it, whatever is done for us by
Christ's Priesthood after his Resurrection, particularly his praying and
interceding to God for us. Had it been any part of Christ's Melchisedecian
Priesthood to offer up bread and wine, much more had it wholly consisted in
this, it is strange the Apostle in a set and large discourse of this, should not
speak one word, nor take the least notice of it.

Thirdly, Christ is to have none to succeed him in his Melchisedecian
Priesthood, but he was himself to remain a Priest for ever; the Author to the
Hebrews makes this difference between the Aaronical Priests and Christ, that
they were to succeed one another, and they truly were many Priests, because
they were not suffered to continue by reason of death Heb. 7.23.
, but Christ was an immortal and so a perpetual Priest, but this man because he
continues ever, has an unchangeable priesthood Verse 24.
, (...), a Priesthood that passes not to others but is ever fixed and
appropriate to his own person, and he is made a Priest, after the power of an
endless Life Verse 16.
. That which belongs then to Christ as he is an immortal Priest, and continues
ever, and has none to succeed him, that it is which constitutes his
Melchisedecian Priesthood, and what that is the Apostle plainly informs us in
the very next verse to those I have quoted, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for us Verse 24.
. Christ's interceding with God by virtue of his sacrifice upon the cross, and
appearing in heaven in the presence of God for us, and there presenting his
sacrifice to his Father, and powerfully mediating on our behalf, this is his
proper unchangeable, eternal, intransitive Melchisedecian Priesthood, and it is
great arrogance for any to pretend to share with him or to succeed him
therefore in his proper Priesthood, and to call themselves as the Romanists do,
Priests after the order of Melchisedec, when none but Christ is so; This his
priesthood is not committed to any upon Earth, but is to be for ever executed
and discharged by himself in heaven, and he has left none to be proper priests
in this sense, but only to be Ministers to this great High priest, in
performing some lesser though peculiar Offices proper to them, as the Levites
under the Jewish dispensation had their proper work though they were not proper
priests.

The next thing they produce out of Scripture for the Sacrifice of the Mass, is
the Paschal Lamb, which they will needs have to be a figure of the Eucharist;
and since that was a sacrifice, therefore the Eucharist which was figured by it
ought to be so too; Now these figurative Arguments though they help to make
some show as they are dressed out by fancy, yet they have generally this fault
that they prove either too much or too little, and so either shoot over the
mark, or fall a great deal short of it, but seldom hit it. The Paschal Lamb,
and the Eucharist, the Christian Passover, do agree in this that they are both
solemn and religious Rites, commemorative of a great deliverance, and that they
are both Sacred and Mystical Feasts wherein something is to be eaten with joy
and thankfulness, and our Savior instituted one to succeed and take place of
the other, in these particulars they suit and have an agreeable Analogy with
one another; but figures are like Circles, which may touch one another in some
points but not in all, for if we go any farther they will necessarily divide
and differ. The paschal Lamb was to be eaten but once a year, the Eucharist
much oftener, that was a feast of visible and solid flesh, the Eucharist only of
bread and wine; or if there be any flesh, it is invisible and as like bread and
wine as can be, however ever this is the flesh, according to our adversaries,
of a living man, that of a dead and roasted Lamb, this is not to be slain but
eaten whole and alive, the other was, and therefore why may we not add, to go
no further, this is no proper sacrifice, that probably was, for it is not past
question whether it was or no, but yet such a sacrifice as was offered without
a priest by every Master of a Family: and if the Eucharist were to agree with
it in this, the priests would loose a great deal of their design in making it a
sacrifice, for then without hiring them every housekeeper would offer it
himself; besides the paschal Lamb was not a propitiatory sacrifice, I presume,
for the quick and dead, so then in correspondence to that neither is the
sacrifice of the Mass, but only an Eucharistic one: but after all the paschal
Lamb was not truly a Type and figure of the Eucharist but of Christ crucified,
so says St. Paul expressly, Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us 1 Cor. 5.7.
, and that not I suppose in the Sacrament, but upon the cross, the Paschal
figure was fulfilled, says their own Jansenius, when our true passover Christ
was immolated Impleta erat figura Paschatis quando verum nostrum Pascha
immolatus est Christus. Jansen. Harmon. c. 131. f. 895.
. and to show how exact a figure he then bare of the paschal Lamb, a bone of
him was not to be broken John 19.33.
, as it was not likewise of that Exd. 12.46. and this expressly remarkt, that
the Scripture might be fulfilled verse 36.
. The sacrifice of the paschal Lamb, and the other Jewish sacrifices wherein
atonement was made for sin by shedding of blood, without which under the Law
there was to be no Remission, were all as the Apostle says shadows of good
things to come Heb. 20.1.
, and Types of the more perfect sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, who was the
Lamb slain in Types and Figures as well as in design and intention from the
beginning of the world, and I cannot but think that from hence arose the
universal custom of sacrificing in all Religions over all the World, from an
original tradition of the sacrifice of Christ, and out of a primary regard and
respect to that, for I cannot imagine what else should be the reason or give
rise to expiatory sacrifices, and be the true cause of so general a practice;
but tha any of these sacrifices had relation to the Eucharist, or were intended
as figures of that is very precarious and ungrounded; Those Eucharistic
sacrifices indeed in which part of what was offered, was eaten by the offerers;
or in holocausts when the whole was consumed, where a peace offering was joined
with them which the sacrificers used to feast and partake of, as a token of
their peace and reconciliation with God, these may fairly relate and have some
respect to or at least resemblance with the Eucharist, which is a kind of
sacrificial feast, or sacramental feeding upon an oblatum, Christ's body and
blood offered for us upon the Cross, but that they were Types of this is more
then we can be assured of, for a Type is a sign or figure appointed and
designed by God to signify and mark out such a thing, and we cannot know that
God appoints or designs any such thing further then we have some ground from
Scripture and Revelation, and therefore we must restrain Typical matters within
those bounds and must not let fancy loose to make what Types it pleases. There
may be some similitude and likeness by which one thing may be compared with
another without its being a Type or a Figure of it as Justin Martyr in his
Dialogue with Trypho the Jew calls (...). Justin Martyr Dialog. cum Tryph. p.
260. Par.
, The meat offering of fine flour which the Leper was to bring for his
cleansing, Levit. 4.10. an Image or likeness of the Eucharistic bread which
Christ our Lord appointed to be brought in remembrance of his Passion whereby
our Souls are cleansed from sin and wickedness, and that we may hereby give
thanks to God the Creator. So that he makes the Eucharist to answer the Analogy
of that meat offering in three things in the Oblation of bread, and this in
commemoration of Christ's passion whereby we are delivered from sin, and as a
Thanksgiving to God, and in all these it does very well correspond with it,
though that it was strictly a Type of this, and so intended by God is still to
be questioned, and he that is acquainted with the Fathers and their Allegorical
way of explaining Scripture, and applying all things in the Old Testament to
matters in the New, will have great reason to doubt whether they did not give
too much scope to their fancy in many things, and whether solid Arguments may
be drawn from all their Allegorical discourses and applications, but yet none
of them that I know of, do make any of the ancient propitiatory sacrifices to
be Types and Figures of the Eucharist, but of the sacrifice of the Cross;
however if they should do this by some remote allusion and partial resemblance,
yet not as it is a proper sacrifice or truly propitiatory, therefore not at all
to the purpose of the sacrifice of the Mass.

The Prophecy of Malachi is one of the great Scripture proofs for this
sacrifice, but it can be at most but a collateral evidence, for if Christ did
not in fact institute any such sacrifice as I have proved he did not, this is a
much better argument to show there was none such foretold, then it can be to
prove he did institute it because it was foretold: Predictions are best
understood by the completion of them, and if no such thing was done as is
pretended from this prediction, this demonstrates that no such thing was
intended or meant by it, so that by taking away that first ground of the
Mass-sacrifice, I have taken away all these little underprops and supporters of
it; but let us see what seeming assistance this place of Malachi will afford
them. God having reproved the Jews for their undue and unfit offerings, tells
them that better and purer offerings shall be made him every where by the
Gentiles, For from the rising of the Sun even unto the going down of the same,
my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be
offered unto my name, and a pure offering, for my name shall be great among the
Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts Malac. 1.11.
. Thus it is both in the Hebrew and Greek Copies as Bellarmine owns, but it is
something different from both those in the Vulgar Latin, where it is, In every
place is sacrificed, and is offered to my name a pure Oblation In omni loco
sacrifi^atur and offertur nomini meo para oblatio.
. They are so in love with the Word sacrifice, that they choose to use that
above any other, as if wherever they meet with that in Scripture it must be
meant properly, and of an external sacrifice, and of no other but the
propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass. Tho the word here Mincha, from which some
of our Adversaries are so foolish as to derive the Latin word Missa, that
signifies only a dismission of the Catechumens and penitents before the Office
of the Eucharist, does not signify a propitiatory sacrifice but only a
meat offering which was merely Eucharistic, and whereas nothing is more
commonly meant by sacrifice in Scripture, then the spiritual sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving, and prayer, and the like when a pious and devout Soul
offers unto God Thanksgiving, and pays its vows unto the most high Psalm. 50.14.
; when the prayer of the Righteous is set forth as incense, and the lifting up
of his hands, as an evening sacrifice Psalm. 141.2.
. And this is the incense and pure oblation which the Fathers generally
understand to be meant in that place, to wit glorifying and blessing God, and
Praise and Hymns In Ecclesiis benedicite Dominum Deum, Psalm. 57. ut pariter
concurreret Malachiae prophetia, in omni loco sacrificium mundum, Gloriae sc.
relatio ^^ benedictio and laus and hymni, Tertull. contra Marcion. l. 3.
as Tertullian in so many words explains this place, and again, a pure offering
as Malachi speaks is an honest prayer from a pure Conscience Dicente Malachia
sacrificium mundum sc. simplex Oration de consciencia, pura Ib. l. 4.
and so in other places Adversus Judaeos, Ib.
he explains it altogether of spiritual sacrifices. Eusebius calls this pure
offering of Malachi, the incense of Prayers (...). Eusebius. Demonstrat. l. 1. c.
6.
St. Hierom upon the place says, the prophet, teaches that the prayers of holy
men should be offered to the Lord not only in the single Province of Judaea, to
which the Jewish sacrifice were confined, but in every place Docet orationes
sanctorum Domino offerendas esse non in una orbis provincia, Judaea, sed in
omni loco. Hieron. in Malach. 1.
There can be no sacrifice more acceptable to God, no offering with which he is
so well pleased, no incense that is of so sweet a savor as the prayers and
praises of a devout mind, and a pure and unblemisht Conscience, and especially
when these are kindled and enflamed to the highest degrees and ardors at the
blessed Sacrament, when the soul truly sensible of the Love of God, and the
infinite kindness of its dying Savior, when it has the symbol and
representation of his death before it, shall pour out its grateful and hearty
resentments, and thereby offer up a more pure and precious sacrifice, then
thousands of Rams, or ten thousand rivers of Oil. This is that incense, and
that pure offering of Christians which is foretold by the prophet, and this
especially offered in the most sacred office of our Religion, the blessed
Eucharist; and therefore some of the Fathers, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and St.
Austin apply this place to the blessed Sacrament, not as any proper sacrifice
is there offered, but only such divine and spiritual ones as these; and in what
sense they call that a sacrifice and we own it be so, I shall show afterward.

Why should our Adversaries then charge us with having no sacrifice, and
therefore as they charitably tell us no Religion when we have the best and the
noblest sacrifice that can be, that which will please the Lord much better then
an Ox or a Bullock that has horns and hoofs Psalm. 69.31. and 40.6. Isai. 1.11.
. God was never pleased with those external sacrifices for themselves, but he
often refuses and disregards them even under the Jewish dispensation, and they
were all to cease with that, and instead of such mean sacrifices and external
oblations which were to be offered then but in one place, there should in every
place under Christianity be offered the more pure and spiritual sacrifices, the
incense of prayer, and the pure oblation of praise and thanksgiving, and such
like Christian sacrifices as are often mentioned in Scripture, and which are
meant in this prophecy of Malachi, of which we shall have further occasion to
speak by and by. It Is a sort of Judaism then and a returning back to that less
perfect and less spiritual state to make the Religion of the Gospel consist in
any visible and external sacrifice which our Adversaries so earnestly contend
for, rather in those sacrifices which are more spiritual, and therefore more
truly Christian, and more agreeable to the spiritual Worship, and the spiritual
Economy of the Gospel.

There are some other places of the old Testament brought by Bellarmine, and
other defenders of the sacrifice of the Mass, which are so weak and impertinent
that they only serve to expose it, and therefore they are not at all mentioned
in the Council of Trent or in the Roman Catechism, such is that saying of the
prophet to Eli, 2 Samuel 2.35. That God would raise up a faithful priest, that
shall do according to that which is in my heart and in my mind, and I will
build him a sure house, and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever. This
new priest that was to succeed Eli was very probably to be a sacrificing
priest, but that he was to offer the sacrifice of the Mass, I leave those who
bring this place for it, to prove; for without doubt this was fulfilled long
before Christ, in Samuel who succeeded Eli, and in Zadoc who came in the room
of Abiathar who was of the Family of Eli, and who was thrust out by Solomon
from being priest unto the Lord, that he might fulfill the word of the Lord,
which he spoke concerning the house of Eli in Shilo, 1 Kings 2.27. as the
Scripture observes, and to make this figurative or prophetical of the Christian
priesthoods succeeding the Aaronical is great strength of fancy, but a very
weak argument however for the sacrifice of the Mass, unless that were the work
of the Christian priesthood which is hard to be made out.

The Second is that out of the 72, Psalm at the 16. v. There shall be an
handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the Mountains. This handful of
Corn is by such Rabbinical men as Galatinus made into a cake or Placenta, and
that must needs be the wafer cake, which being upon the top of the Mountains,
must be heaved and elevated over the head of the priests. This is such an
Argument for the sacrifice of the Mass as were sufficient to convert the Vicar
of Putney, who by the help of Galatinus can prove Transubstantiation out of the
Rabbis, and had the good fortune to be brought into the true Church, not by
Father P. or Father G. but by Rabbi Solomon, and those two other ancient
Rabbis of his, Midras, Coheleth, which writ such a Commentary upon
Ecclesiastes, that they are the very Commentary it self. It Is strange as he
says, Preface in Conse susveterum.
that the Hebrew Writers should long before Christ's time have such notions; but
it is more strange that some people since Christ's time should have no better
Arguments for the great principles of their Religion, but the wind, as he goes
on, blows where it lists, and some men have such a Wind Mill in their
Crowns that any thing will turn it. Whatever Feasts of sweet Meats and dainties
the Jews expected as foretold by this Psalm in the days of the Messiah, and
were willing to mean by this handful of Corn on the top of the Mountains, they
never dreamt of the sacrifice of the Mass.

The next is that of the Proverbs 9. chap. 2d. verse, Wisdom has killed her
beasts, she has mingled her wine, she has also furnished her table, but I am
sure she never made this Argument for the sacrifice of the Mass; I will improve
this place if they please for the proof of other things, as of priests
Celibacy, because in the next words it is said Wisdom has sent out her maidens,
verse 4. of the Church of Romes being the house that was built by wisdom,
because it is said in the first verse, She has hewn out her seven pillars,
which are as undoubtedly the seven Hills of Rome, as this Allegorical Banquet
is the sacrifice of the Mass. Our Adversaries sure could not be very serious
and in good earnest, when they produced such places as these, and therefore
they must excuse us for not being so in answering them.

I shall mention but one more which if it be not as ridiculous, yet is as
impertinent as the other, and that is out of Daniel, chapter 8. verse 11. where
it is said the daily sacrifice was taken away, by a great prince, that is there
prophetically described. It is plain that by the daily sacrifice there is meant
that of the Jews, and by the prince who should take it away Antiochus, who did
literally perform this by destroying the Jewist. Worship, and horribly
profaning the Temple; if by him was allegorically and prophetically meant the
Christian Antichrist, if I may so speak, spoken of by St. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and
by St. John, Rev. 13. described as a beast having seven heads and ten horns, as
Bellarmine will have it chap. 9. de Mis. l. 1.
, then whether this mark belongs not to him that sets up the sacrifice of the
Mass, and destroys as far as he has power, and takes away all the purer Worship
of Christ, and has a great many other characters upon him that look very
suspicious, will be a great question, for which I dare say there are a great
many more probabilities then that by the daily sacrifice here is meant the
sacrifice of the Mass.

I come now to the New Testament, where if there be any proofs for the
sacrifice of the Mass, it is more likely to find them then in the Old, yet they
produce twice as many such as they are, out of that than this, and like some
other people, are more beholden to dark Types and obscure prophesies of the Old
Testament to make out their principles, then to the clear light of the Gospel,
and to any plain places in the New, and yet if any such doctrine as this were
to be received by Christians, and if any such wonderful and essential part of
Worship were appointed by Christ, or taught and practiced by the Apostles, we
should surely have it more plainly set down in the New Testament then they are
able to show it.

The first place they urge from thence belongs no more to the sacrifice of the
Mass, then the first Commandment does in the Decalogue, and they had as good
have quoted our Saviors words to the Devil, Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and so have proved from thence that God ought to be Worshipped by the
sacrifice of the Mass, as those to the Woman of Samaria which Bellarmine de
Miss. l. 1. c. 11.
brings to this purpose out of John 4.21, 23. The hour comes when ye shall
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father, for the hour
comes and now is when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit
and in truth. From whence he infers that they must Worship him by sacrifice,
and that this must be the sacrifice of the Mass, and that this is to Worship
him in spirit and truth. If this be not all evidence and demonstration, there
is none in Euclid; and if we may not here cry out, (...) the Mass is found, we
are blind and obstinate, but I see very little more for it here then from the
other places I named, but rather something against it, for to Worship God in
Spirit and Truth, and that because he is a Spirit as our Savior there adds
verse 24. is not to Worship him by an external, visible, Typical sacrifice as
the Mass is, and as those of the Jews were, but by a more pure and spiritual
Worship of praise and thanksgiving, and prayer, such as that of Christians is
to be, as more suitable to the spiritual nature of God; and these spiritual
sacrifices of Christians are not to be tied to one place, as those more gross
and carnal ones of the Jews were, which was the thing our Savior here
designed. The greatest part of the public Jewish Worship was fixed to the
Temple and to Jerusalem; their Tithes, and Firstfruits, and Firstlings, and
Festivals as well as their sacrifices, and there may be divine Worship without
sacrifice as well as with it, and whatever the Worship be, which our Savior
here says was to be spiritual it was not like the Jewish, to be fixed to one
place, which is the true scope of those words to the Samaritan Woman in answer
to her question, v. 20. whether mount Gerizim or Jerusalem was the true place
of Worship, which was the great dispute between the Jews and the Samaritans;
our Savior determines for neither, but puts an end to the question, and says,
that now under the Gospel, the Worship of God was not local, and as to the
manner of it, that it was spiritual.

The second and principal Argument for the sacrifice of the Mass, is from
Christ's institution and first celebration of the Eucharist with his Disciples,
and here indeed is the true place to find it if there be any such thing, but I
have already shown page 8, 9, 10.
that Christ did neither then sacrifice himself nor command his Disciples to do
so, and have taken away that which is the very Foundation of the
Mass-sacrifice, and without which every thing else that can be said for it
falls to the ground.

There are but two other and those very weak ones behind, the one out of the
13th. of the Acts, where it is said of Saul and Barnabus, and the prophets and
Teachers of the Church at Antioch, that they ministered unto the Lord; but
could not they minister and perform the divine office and service without
sacrificing? it must be first proved that that was part of the religious office
before it can appear that it was m^^nt here; it is said they fasted and prayed,
and in that probably their (...), or Ministry consisted, or as St. Chrysostom
Homil. 37. in Act.
, and after him Oecumenius explain it in preaching, but that they sacrificed
there is not the least evidence. The word (...), does not signify to sacrifice
but to perform any proper function and therefore it is attributed in the
Scripture both to the Angels who are called ministering spirits (...), Heb. 1.14.
, and to the Magistrates who are called the Ministers of God (...), Romans 13.6
, and yet sacrificing I suppose belongs to neither of them, nor does their own
vulgar Latin so Translate it here.

The last is out of the 1 Cor. 10. for Bellarmine gives up that out of the
Hebrews 13. We have an altar of which they have no right to eat who serve the
Tabernacle, though it is as much to his purpose in my mind as any of the rest,
but some Catholic Writers, he says, do by altar mean there, either the Cross
or Christ himself Quia non desunt ex Catholicis qui eo loco per altar
intelligunt crucem aut ipsum Christum non urgeo ipsum locum, Bellarm. de Mis.
c. 14.
; but if it were meant of the Eucharist, that is but an Altar in an improper
sense, as the sacrifice offered on it is but improper and metaphorical as we
shall prove, but in the place to the Corinthians, the Apostle Commands them not
to eat of things offered to Idols, for to eat of them was to partake of things
sacrificed to Devils, and so to have communion with Devils, which was very
unfit for those who were partakers of the Lords Table, and therein truly
communicated of the Body and Blood of Christ, as those who are of the Jewish
sacrifices were partakers of the Jewish Altar. Now what is here of the
sacrifice of the Mass, or any way serviceable to it? Why, yes, the Apostle
compares the Table of the Lord with the Table of Devils, and eating of the
Lords supper with eating the Jewish and the Heathen sacrifices, therefore the
Christians ought to have an Altar as well as the Jews, and what they fed on,
ought to be sacrificed as well as the Heathen (...), but the Apostle says
nothing of this, nor makes any such comparison between them, but only shows the
unfitness of Christians eating of the Heathen sacrifices who partook of the
Lords Table; he does not call the Lords Table an Altar, nor the Eucharist a
sacrifice, nor was there any danger that the Christians should go to eat in the
Idol Temples, but he would not have them eat of their sacrifices brought home,
and the whole comparison lies here, the eating the Lords Supper did make them
true partakers of the Lords body and blood sacrificed upon the Cross, as eating
of the Jewish sacrifices did make the Jews partakers of the Jewish Altar, and
as eating of things offered to Idols was having fellowship with Devils, so that
they who partook of such holy food as Christians did, should not communicate of
such execrable and diabolical food as the Heathen (...). If indeed Christians
could not partake of Christ's body and blood in the Eucharist unless they first
made a proper sacrifice and oblation of them, then the Apostles discourse would
necessarily suppose and imply them to be thus offered, as the Jewish and
Heathen sacrifices were before they were eaten, but since Christ's body and
blood being once offered upon the Cross is a sufficient sacrifice and oblation
of them, and the Eucharist is a religious and Sacramental Feast upon the
sacrifice of Christ once offered, this is sufficient for the Apostles scope and
design in that place, where there is no other comparison made between the Table
of the Lord, and the Table of Devils, but that one makes us to be partakers of
the body and blood of Christ, and the other to have Fellowship with Devils, and
as to the Jewish Altar the Antithesis does not lie here as Bellarmine would
have it, between that and the Table of the Lord, that both have proper
sacrifices offered upon them, which are eaten after they are sacrificed; but
the Cross of Christ rather is the Antithesis to the Jewish Altar, on which
sacrifices were really and properly slain, which are not on the Christian
Altar, and the feeding and partaking of those sacrifices so offered, whereby
they were made partakers of the Altar, this answers to the sacramental feeding
upon Christ's body and blood in the Christian Altar whereby we are made
partakers of the Cross of Christ, and have the virtue and merit of his
sacrifice communicated to us.

Thus I have considered and fully answered whatever our Adversaries can bring
out of Scripture for their sacrifice of the Mass, I shall now offer some places
of Scripture that are directly contrary to it, and do perfectly overthrow it:
and though their cause must necessarily sink if the Scripture be not for it,
because without a Scriptural Foundation there can be no divine institution of a
sacrifice which is necessary by their own confession, and so essential a part
of worship ought surely to be appointed by no less an Authority then of God
himself, so that if it be destitute of Scripture-grounds it must like a Castle
in the Air fall of it self, and can have nothing else to support it. Yet I
shall show that Scripture is plainly against it and that so strong a battery
may be raised and levelled at it from thence, that none of their Arts or
devices can be able to withstand it; it is from those known places of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, from whence I have already shown how contrary their
Doctrine is to our Saviors Melchisedecian priesthood, I shall now urge those
places out of that Epistle wherein the Divine Author of it, who was probably
St. Paul, largely and designedly shows the excellency of Christ's sacrifice
above those under the Law upon this account, that it had so much virtue and
efficacy in it, that by one offering it obtained full and perfect Remission of
sin, whereas this was the great imperfection of the others, and showed their
great weakness and insufficiency that they were so often offered, and so
frequently repeated, every priest of the Jews stands daily ministering and
offering oftentimes the same sacrifices which can never take away sin, chap.
10.11. And it was plain they could not take away sin because they were so often
offered over again, either every day or every year, For the Law can never with
those sacrifices which they offered year by year continually, make the comers
thereunto perfect, chap. 10. verse 1. For then would they not have ceased to be
offered? because that the worshippers once purged, should have had no more
conscience of sins. But in those sacrifices there is a remembrance again made
of sins every year, verse 2, 3. Those sacrifices being but like the
acknowledgments of a Debtor, that he owed a great sum which he had no way
fully to pay off and discharge, but he raised and brought what he could, and so
owned the Debt, and that he had not where withal to take it quite off, nor to
make that solution and satisfaction which was necessary. But such was the value
of the sacrifice of Christ, that it was a perfect price and payment, and made
full satisfaction at once; so that By one offering he has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified, chap. 10. verse 14. and made such full atonement and
expiation by that, that there is no more need, nor remains no more sacrifice
for sins, but this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever
sat down on the right hand of God, verse 12. as having fully done the work of a
priest upon Earth, and having no need to offer any further sacrifice, nor yet
that he should offer himself often, as the high priest enters into the holy
place, every year with blood of others: chap. 9.25. (For then must he often
have suffered since the foundation of the world) but now once in the end of the
world, has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, verse 26.
and Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, verse 28. And we are
sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all, chap.
10. verse 10. So that Christ our high priest needs not daily, as those high
priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for himself, and then for the people: For
this he did once when he offered up himself, chap. 7. ver. 27. Nothing can be
said plainer against the sacrifice of the Mass, wherein Christ is often offered
and that as properly and truly, they pretend, as the Jewish sacrifices were, or
as he was upon the Cross, when it is here so much insisted upon that Christ's
sacrifice was but once offered, whereas those under the Law were often; and
this made an argument of their weakness and imperfection, and of the full
virtue and value of the other: Must it not appear very strange after this that
it should be made the great part of some men's Religion, to repeat the same
sacrifice of Christ every day, and to offer him up again every day upon the
Altar, as truly as the Jews offered their sacrifices day by day continually,
and as he once offered up himself upon the Cross, and to make this daily
sacrifice of him in the Mass have as true a virtue to propitiate God and
expiate sins as the other had, and to be every way as true and proper a
sacrifice as the other. I need not labor much to show how contrary this is to
this discourse of the Author to the Hebrews, and to the true scope and design
of it, it appears so evidently to be so, that our Adversaries are put to the
greatest streights and difficulties imaginable to make themselves think
otherwise, and to reconcile what the Apostle here says of the sacrifice of
Christ, with what their Church says of the sacrifice of the Mass, and that they
are perfectly inconsistent, notwithstanding all their pretenses and evasions, I
shall make appear by what follows.

First then, They tell us that their sacrifice of the Mass, is but the very
same with the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, and so it does not at all
take off from the virtue of that, or suppose that to be imperfect, since this
is no other, nor no new sacrifice, but only the same both in nature and virtue
with that; if it were another sacrifice indeed, or were supposed to have a
distinct virtue and efficacy from that of the Cross, it might reflect upon
that, and be injurious to it, but since they declare it to be the same, they do
not conceive how it is any way so. But the Apostles discourse (for it is
probable an Apostle was Author of this Epistle) in the forementioned places,
is about repeating the same sacrifices, and offering them up year by year
continually, and from hence he grounds the imperfection of them, and that they
could not make the comers thereunto perfect, chap. 10. v. 1. These sacrifices
indeed were many and of several sorts which they offered, but they still
offered them up again and again, both daily and yearly, and it was their often
offering of them as well as their multitude which the Apostle reflects upon,
their daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, chap. 10.
verse 11. whereas Christ by one sacrifice and that once offered, chap. 9. verse
28. did fully put away sin, so that had the same sacrifice of Christ been often
offered, as the same sacrifices of the Jews were, it had upon that account been
liable to the same charge of imperfection; for if by one offering it had for
ever perfected them that are sanctified, and had obtained perfect and plenary
Remission of sins, and had done the whole work, and had the whole effect of all
that sacrifices were intended for, then what need it be any further offered?
the offering up the same sacrifice, and continuing daily to offer it, shows
that it was not sufficient, nor did do the business at once offering, as the
frequent using the same medicine shows that it has not fully cured the wound,
nor yet perfectly done its work.

Secondly, The sacrifice of the Mass, they say, is only to apply the virtue and
merit of the sacrifice of the Cross; for though the sacrifice of the Cross like
a powerful medicament have sufficient virtue in it, yet what does that signify
unless it be applied to us, which it is by the sacrifice of the Mass? But is
there not another way to apply that to us? Is it not applied to us by Faith,
and by the common means of Christ's own institution, the Christian Sacraments,
and especially by the Worthy Receiving of the Lords Supper, wherein as the
Apostle says, The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of
the blood of Christ, and the bread which we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. We do hereby communicate and are made
partakers of Christ's Body as it was sacrificed for us, that is, of all the
virtues and benefits of his sacrifice by being as the Apostle adds, verse 17.
Made partakers of that One bread, that is surely by eating it sacramentally and
religiously as Christ has appointed; for it would sound very hard and be a very
odd expression, to say we are partakers of that one bread by the sacrificing or
offering up of that bread, when they will not own that the bread is sacrificed,
or if it were, could we well be thereby partakers of it, but it is the eating of
that bread which makes us partakers of it; and it is the eating Christ's Body,
and drinking his Blood in the blessed Sacrament, that communicates and applies
the virtue of his sacrifice of the Cross to us, and not the sacrificing of that
again, as the Apostle goes on verse 18. Are not they who eat of the sacrifices,
partakers of the Altar? it is eating and communicating, that makes us partakers
of Christ's sacrifice. We do then eat of the sacrifice, and so partake of it as
the Jews did of their sacrifices; the communion is a feasting upon a true
oblatum, the body and blood of Christ, as is excellently made out by a Learned
man of our own, we do not there sacrifice Christ's body, but only sacramentally
eat of it, as being already sacrificed and offered once for all, by Christ
himself upon the Cross. It is not at all necessary that it should be sacrificed
again by us to make us become partakers of it; for cannot a sacrifice be
applied without being sacrificed again? It seems a very strange and uncouth way
to sacrifice the same thing over and over in order to applying the virtue of
it, as if the Jews when they had slain the Paschal Lamb, must have slain
another Lamb in order to the partaking the virtue of it, no they were to eat of
it for that purpose, and so are we of Christ's sacrifice, and this is the way
whereby we do communicate of it, and have its full virtue applied to us. It was
the weakness and insufficiency of their sacrifices that made them so often
repeat them, and sacrifice them anew, but Christ's sacrifice being perfect is to
be but once offered, though it be often to be eaten and partaken of by us,
which it may be without being again sacrificed.

Thirdly, The Author of this Epistle makes not the least mention of Christ's
sacrifice being offered again upon Earth, or of its being repeated in the
sacrifice of the Mass, but after he himself had once offered it upon the Cross,
he immediately speaks of his presenting it to God in Heaven, and there by
virtue of it interceeding and mediating with him for us, that by his own blood
he entered into the holy place, having obtained eternal Redemption for us,
chap. 9. ver. 12. as the Jewish high priest on the great day of expiation after
he had offered the sacrifice of atonement for the whole Congregation upon the
Altar, carried the blood of it into the Holy of Holies, and there sprinkled it
before the mercy-seat, Levit. 16.15. This great Anniversary sacrifice for the
whole Congregation was the great Type and Figure of Christ's sacrifice for all
mankind, and the Holy of Holies was the Type of Heaven, and the High Priest, of
Christ, as is confessed by all; Christ therefore our great High Priest to whom
alone it belonged to offer this sacrifice of Atonement and Expiation for the
whole World, having done this upon the Cross he entered not into the holy places
made with hands which are the figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now
to appear in the presence of God for us, chap, 9. ver. 24. To appear there as
our Advocate and Mediator, and by virtue of his own blood there presented to
his Father to make a very powerful intercession for us. Now from this discourse
of the Apostle we have a full account of Christ's sacrifice that it was to be
once offered upon the cross, and then to be carried into the Holy of Holies in
Heaven, and no more to be offered upon Earth, for this man after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God, chap. 10.
ver. 12. The Apostle speaks not one tittle, nor gives the least hint or
intimation of this sacrifice being offered again by others upon Earth, this
lies cross to the whole tenor of his discourse, and the similitude and
agreement which he represents between the Jewish sacrifice of Atonement, and
Christ's is quite altered and destroyed by it, for besides the High Priests
offering this sacrifice, this makes every lesser Priest to be still offering
the same sacrifice upon the Altar, when the High Priest is entered with the
blood of it into the Holy of Holies; and though he cannot go in there, upon
which the virtue and the perfection of the sacrifice does in great measure
depend, yet still to offer the same sacrifice; and besides it makes this
sacrifice like to the Jewish, where every priest stands daily ministering and
offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which for the reason showed, they
could never take away sins, chap. 10. ver. 12. in opposition to which he says,
this man after he had offered, one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the
right hand of God, verse 13. that is, Christ's sacrifice was never to be
repeated as the Jewish were; for if it had been to be offered by others though
not by Christ himself, and the Christian Priests were to stand daily ministering
and offering the same sacrifice, both they and their sacrifice would have been
the same upon this account with the Jewish, and there had not been that
difference between them, which the Apostle does there plainly mean and declare.

Further it cannot but seem very strange that when this Divine Author does so
largely and copiously and designedly treat of the sacrifice of Christ and of
those of the Jews, and compare them so much together, and show the excellency
of the one above the other, that he should never say the least word of the
sacrifice of the Mass, when he had so much occasion to do it, that it can
hardly be imagined he should have so wholly omitted it, had it been as others
since account it, as true and proper a sacrifice as any of the Jewish or of
Christ's himself upon the cross.

Fourthly, The Apostle here plainly lays down a principle directly contrary
and wholly inconsistent with their Doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass, and
that is, that if Christ be offered he must suffer and that without shedding of
blood there is no Remission. Nor yet says he at the 25, 26. verses, and 9th.
chapter, That he should offer himself often, as the high priest enters into
the holy place every year with the blood of others. For then must he often have
suffered since the foundation of the world, but now once in the end of the
world has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. For then
must he often have suffered if he had been often offered, without suffering
then Christ cannot be offered and sacrificed, and indeed to sacrifice any thing
is to consume and destroy it, so that it be wholly parted with and given up to
God, and to sacrifice any thing that is living, is to take away its life and to
kill it, and so to make it suffer death, as a vicarious punishment in another
stead; this is the common and allowed notion of sacrifices, but Christ cannot
thus suffer in the Mass, therefore he cannot be truly offered or sacrificed,
since according to the Apostle if he be often offered he must often suffer; and
they would not I hope crucify to themselves the Lord of Life again, and put
him to death upon the Altar as the Jews did upon the cross, and yet without
this they cannot truly sacrifice him, or properly offer him according to the
Apostle. But this says their great Champion the Bishop of Meaux is done
mystically, Christ is mystically slain, and does mystically suffer death upon
the Altar, that is, by way of representation and resemblance, and the
mysterious signification of what is done there, as St. Paul says to the
Galatians, chap. 3. v. 1. Before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently
set forth crucified among you. Now so Christ may be crucified every time we
hear or read his crucifixion lively represented to us, as we may see a bloody
Tragedy without one drop of blood spilt, so Christ may be mystically slain in
the Sacrament when his body is broke, and his blood poured out in mystery and
representation, but this is not true and proper Offering which is necessary to
make a true and proper sacrifice as they will have that of the Mass to be; if
they would be contented with a mystical sacrifice to represent and commemorate
Christ's death, that they know we are willing to allow, and then a mystical
suffering that is not a real and proper, would be sufficient for a mystical
that is not proper sacrifice, but the suffering must be as true and proper as
the sacrifice, and if the one be but mystical, the other must be so too; if the
Bullock or Goat of the sinoffering which was to be offered on the great day of
Atonement had been only Mystically slain, and Mystically offered upon the
Altar, they had been as really alive for all that as any that were in the
Fields, and had been no more true and proper sacrifices of atonement and
expiation then they were, for without sheding of blood, as the Apostle says,
there is no Remission, Heb. 9.22. it was the shedding or pouring out the blood
in which the Life was supposed to be, and therefore the taking away the Life of
the sacrifice that did really make the sacrifice to be truly propitiatory or
available before God, as a price and recompense for the remission of sins; and
how then can the sacrifice of the Mass be truly propitiatory, when the blood is
not truly shed, when according to themselves it is Incruentum sacrificium, an
unbloody sacrifice, and therefore according to the Apostle it cannot be pro
pitiatory for the Remission of sins, as will be further insisted upon
afterward. Thus we see how much there is in those clear places of Scripture
against the sacrifice of the Mass, and how little there is for it in those dark
ones, which are produced by our Adversaries.

Thirdly, It has no just claim to Antiquity nor was there any such Doctrine or
Practice in the Primitive Church; this is greatly boasted and vaunted of, and
although their cause runs very low in Scripture, yet they pretend it carries
all Antiquity before it, where nothing is more common than to have the name of
Oblation, and Sacrifice, and Host, and Victim attributed to the blessed
Eucharist, and to have it said that we do there offer, and immolate and
sacrifice unto God; this we readily acknowledge, and though we can by no means
allow Antiquity to take place of Scripture, or to set up either an Article of
Faith, or essential part of Worship which is not in Scripture, and our
Adversaries seem to agree with us in this, that there must be a divine
Institution for a sacrifice, or else it can have no true foundation; so that if
Scripture fails them, it is in vain to fly for refuge to Antiquity, yet we
doubt not but that Scripture and Antiquity will be fairly reconciled and be
made very good Friends in this point; and both of them against the sacrifice of
the Mass, as it is taught and practiced in the Church of Rome.

The name of Sacrifice and oblation is often given both in Scripture and
Antiquity, in an improper general and metaphorical sense, thus it is applied to
the inward actions of the mind, to penitence and sorrow for sin, The sacrifices
of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, O God thou will not
despise, Psalm. 51.17. To the outward Thanksgivings of the mouth, when we render
unto God the Calves of our lips, Hosea 14.2. When we offer unto him
Thanksgiving, Psalm. 50.14. or as the Apostle more fully expresses it when he
commands Christians, to offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that
is the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name, Heb. 13.15. where the
Metaphor is carried on in several words; and in the very next verse it is
applied to works of Mercy and Charity and beneficence to others, but to do good
and to communicate, forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased,
verse 16. and St. Paul in another place calls the Philippians Charity, an odor
of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God, Philip. 4.18.
Nay he calls preaching the Gospel, a (...), which our Adversaries earnestly
contend to mean nothing less then a sacrifice, and the converting the Gentiles
he calls a (...), an offering acceptable to God, Romans 15.16 (...)
. And in another place he calls the Faith of Christians a sacrifice, Philip.
2.17 (...).
. And his own Martyrdom an Oblation, Ib. 1 Timothy 4.6. St. Peter not only calls
works of Piety, Spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ,
but he ascribes a holy Priesthood to all Christians to offer these up, 1 Pet.
2.5. and upon that account St. John also gives them the Title of Priests, Rev.
1.6. Now as the holy Spirit of God often chooses to use this phrase, and
metaphor which is very easy and natural, so from hence and in accommodation
probably both to the Jews and Heathens, the greatest part of whose Religion was
sacrifices, the ancient Writers also do very frequently make use of it, and
apply it both to actions of morality, and to all parts of Religious Worship,
but especially to the blessed Eucharist, which is the most sacred and solemn of
all other, but they do not do this in the strict and proper sense of the word
sacrifice, as is plain from the foregoing instances, but in a large, and
general, and metaphorical one, so that though our Adversaries could muster up
ten times as many places out of the Fathers wherein the Eucharist is called a
sacrifice and oblation, and in the celebrating of which we are said to offer
and immolate to God, with which they are apt to make a great show, and to
triumph as if the victory were perfectly gained against us, yet they are all to
no purpose, and would do no real execution upon us, unless they can prove that
these are to be taken in a strict and proper sense, which it is necessary they
should be to make a proper sacrifice, and not in a large and Metaphorical one
as we are willing to allow, and in which the Scriptures, we see, do understand
them, and so do the Fathers, as I shall evidently demonstrate. Upon what
accounts and in what sense the Fathers do call the Eucharist a sacrifice and
oblation, and apply the phrases of immolating and offering and the like to it,
I shall now particularly consider. And

1. They do this, upon the account of those oblations of bread and wine, and
other things which it was the custom for Christians to bring when they came to
the Communion, out of which a part was consecrated for the Eucharist, and the
remainder was for a common Feast of love and a Religious entertainment, or for
the maintenance of the Clergy, and the poor, to whom they were afterward
distributed. This Custom the Apostle take notice of the, 1 Cor. 11. and the
Ancient Writers expressly mention it in several places, after the (...), or
Feasts of Love were for some abuses laid aside; Clemens Romanus in his first
Epistle, the most ancient and most unquestioned piece of Antiquity we have,
speaks expressly of these (...), Oblations, and joins them with the sacred and
Religious Offices (...). Clemens Ep. 1. aa Corinth. p. 85. Edit. Oxon.
, and commends those who make these their oblations orderly, and at the
appointed times (...) Ib. p. 86.
. The Apostolic Canons that go under his name though their credit is not so
authentic, speak very particularly of these offerings, and of their being
brought to the altar for a sacrifice (...). etc. Canon. 3.
. Ignatius speaks also of offering and of bringing the sacrifice (...). sc.
absque Episcopo. Epist. ad Smyrn.
Justin Martyr mentions, these offerings as accompanied with prayer and
thanksgiving, and as the way by which Christians worshipped the Creator instead
of the bloody sacrfices and libations, and incense that were offered by others
(...). -- Justin Martyr Apolog. 2.
and these, says he, we account the proper way of honoring him, not by
consuming his gifts in the fire, but by thus offering them for the poor, and
for our selves. Irenaeus says, The Church offers to God, who affords us food,
the first fruits of his Gifts, and the first fruits of his Creatures, not as if
he wanted but that we may be grateful Ecclesia, -- offert Deo, ei qui nobis
alimenta praestat primitias suorum munerum, -- primitias Deo offerre ex suis
creaturis non quasi indigenti sed ut ipsi nec infructuosi, nec ingrati sint.
Iraen. advers. Haeres. l. 4. c. 32.
And though Fevardentius in his Notes upon this and the other places of
Irenaeus, wherein he speaks of this oblation would have it meant of the
oblation of Christ himself in the Eucharist, yet that is clearly disproved by
his so often calling it the offering to God of his own Creatures, and the
first fruits of his Creatures Primitias earum quae sant ejus creaturarum
offerentes, -- offerens ei ex gratiarum action ex creatura ejus. Ib. c. 34.
which must be no other then of bread and wine and the like, and from hence he
proves against the marcionites that Christ was Quomodo autem constabit eum
parem inquo gratiae actae sunt -- si non ipsum sabricatoris mundi filium
dicant, Ib.
the Son of the Creator and Maker of the World, because that his creatures were
offered in the Eucharist. St. Cyprian condemning and blaming some of the rich
Women who came to the Sacrament without bringing these oblations, thou come,
says he, into the Lords house, without a sacrifice and take part of that
sacrifice which the poor has offered in Dominicum sine sacrificio venis, quae
partem de sacrificio, quod pauper obtulit sumis. Cypr. de Oper. and Eleemos.
St. Austin insists upon the same thing and bids them offer the oblations which
are consecrated upon the Altar, a man who is able ought to blush if he eat of
another oblation Oblationes quae in altari conseer antur offerte, erubescere
debet homo idoneus, si de aliena oblatione communicet. Aug. Sermon. 13. de Temp.
without offering himself. These oblations are expressly called a sacrifice in
the Apostolic Canons, in Ignatius, and in St. Cyprian, as Alms, and Works of
Charity are in the Epistle to the Hebrews chap. 13. ver. 16. and these in our
Churches prayer before the Sacrament we beg God to accept of. In the Apostolic
Constitutions where we have the largest if not earliest account of the
Eucharistic office, the oblation is thus described, We offer to thee King and
God according to thy appointment, this bread and this cup, and we beseech thee
to look graciously upon these gifts set before thee, O thou God who want
nothing, and send thy holy Spirit upon this sacrifice (...). Apostol. Constit.
l. 8. c. 12.
i. e. upon these oblations, and make them to be the body and blood of Christ,
i. e. Sacramentally and Vertually. In the Ordo Romanus, and in the Canon of the
Mass it self Te igitur Clementissime Pater per Jesum Christum Filium tuum
Dominum nostrum supplices rogamus at petimus ut accepta habeas and benedicas
haec dona, haec munera, haec Sancta Sacrificia illibata in primis quae tibi
offerimus, -- Hanc igitur oblationem servitutis nostrae sed and cunctae
familiae taae quaesumus Domine ut placatus accipias -- Quam Oblationem tu Deus
in omnibus quaesumus benedictam, escriptam, ratam, rationabilem,
acceptabilemque facere digneris: ut nobis curpus and sanguis fiat dilectissimi
fiui tui Domini mostri Jesu Christi. Ordo Romanus p. 62. Edit. Hittorp. Canon
Missae.
there is this prayer over the oblations, that God would accept and bless these
Gifts, these Presents, these Holy and undefiled sacrifices which we offer to
thee, etc. and another to the same purpose said by their Priest with his hand
stretched over the oblata, This oblation therefore of our service and of thy
whole Family, we beseech thee, O Lord, mercifully to receive, etc. And again,
This oblation, O Lord, we beseech thee to make blessed, etc. signing upon the
oblata, That it may be to us the body and blood of thy dearest Son our Lord
Jesus Christ. All these prayers over the oblations whereby they are presented
to God, are made before Consecration, so that the oblations which are here
called Holy and pure Sacrifices are thought worthy of that Name before they are
become the Body and Blood of Christ, and so made a proper sacrifice in the
present sense of the Church of Rome, the Canon of the Mass is Older then their
New doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass, and affords plain evidence for
applying the name of sacrifice to the Eucharist, upon the account of those
offerings and oblations that were made there.

2. The Eucharist is called a sacrifice by the Ancients upon the account of
those religious Acts and Pious Exercises which are there performed by the
devout Communicants, and which are called sacrifices both in Scripture and in
the Fathers, thus our Prayers may be as well a morning as an evening sacrifice,
Ps. 141.2. And therefore as Irenaeus says speaking of the Eucharist, God would
have us continually offer a gift at his Altar, to wit, our Prayers and
Oblations, which are directed to the heavenly Altar Vult nos quoque sine
intermissione offerre munus ad altare^est ergo altar in coelis, illucenim
preces and oblationes nostrae diriguntur. Iren. l. 4. advers. Haers. c. 33.
, though they are made at the Earthly. So our Praises and Thanksgivings which
are then raised to the highest pitch when we have the greatest instance of the
Divine Love offered to our minds, are that sacrifice which we are then to offer
to God giving thanks to his name, Heb. 13.15. Namely for that Miracle of
kindness Christ dying for us, from which the Eucharist has its name, and for
which reason it is called a sacrifice of Praise in the Ordo Romanus Memento
Domine samulorum famularumque tuarum and omnium circumadstantium, quorum tibi
fides cognita est and nota devotio qui tibi offerunt hoc sacrificium laudis
prose suisque omnibus pro Redemptione animarum sucrum, pro spe salutis, etc. --
tibique reddunt vota sua, Ordo Romanus p. 62.
, viz. for our Redemption and hope of Salvation, and also for those vows which
we then render unto God, when we present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy
and acceptable unto God, Romans 12.1. as the Apostle speaks; and as St. Austin
expresses it, the Church is then offered to God, and is made one body in
Christ, when we are made to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. and this is
the sacrifice of Christians Hoc est sacrificium Christianorum, multi unum
corpus sumus in Christo, quod etiam sacramento altaris fidelibus noto
frequentat Ecclesia ubi ei demonstratur, quod in ea oblatione quam offert ipsa
offeratur. August. Civitate Del, l. 10. c. 6.
not only a sacrifice of Praise as it is called by Eusebius Demonstrat. l. 1. c.
10.
St. Basil Liturg.
St. Austin Ad Pet. Diac. c. 9.
and other Fathers, whereby we offer up unto God the calves of our lips in the
Scripture phrase, but wherein we offer and present unto God our selves, our
souls and bodies, to be a reasonable holy and lively sacrifice unto him, and
though we are unworthy to offer unto him any sacrifice, yet beseech him to
accept this our bounden duty and service, according to the Prayer of our Church
in its excellent office of the Communion. Melchior Canus, in his Defense of the
sacrifice of the Mass, has unawares confessed this Truth, That Christ did only
offer up at his last Supper a sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, For to give
thanks, says he, after the Jewish manner, and take the Cup into his hands, and
lift it up, is truly to offer a sacrifice of Thanksgiving. When Christ
therefore said, Do this, he plainly commanded his Apostles that what they saw
him do they should do also by offering up a sacrifice of Eucharist, that is, of
giving of Thanks Ritu quippe Judai^so gratias agere calicem in manibus
accipiendo, and levando vere est hostiam gratiarum actionis offerre, Quum
itaque dixit Dominus, hoc facite, plane jussit Apostolis ut quod ipsum facere
cernebant, id queque illi farerent Eucharistiae hoc est gratiarum actionis
hostiam exblbendo. Canus in locis Theolog. l. 12. p. 806.
and he expressly speaks against Christ's offering up a Mass-sacrifice for sin
then when the day of the bloody sacrifice was now near, and the very hour
approaching, and when their general sacrifice was nigh by which it pleased the
Father to forgive all sins -- Christum in caena sacrificium non pro peceato
quidem sed gratiarum tamen actionis obtulisse, -- quod cum sacrificii cruenti
dies instaret jam plane, aut certe jam appropinquaret hora, non oportebat
hostiam in caena pro peccato Mysticam exhibere, cum impenderet generalis hosiia
illa in qua Patri complacuit omnia peccata resolvi. Ib. p. 834.
which is to make the Eucharist what we are willing to own it a sacrifice of
Thanksgiving, and is in a few words to cut the very throat of their Cause, as
to this Controversy.

3. The Eucharist is called a sacrifice as it is both a Commemoration and a
Representation of Christ's sacrifice upon the Cross, so it is a commemorative and
representative sacrifice, as we call that a bloody Tragedy which only
represents a Murder, and we give the name of the thing to that which is but the
resemblance and likeness of it. The Jews called that the Passover which was but
a memorial of it, and the Apostle says, we are buried with Christ in Baptism,
and rise with him, Col. 2.12. when those are but remotely signified, thus
Christ is immolated and sacrificed in the Eucharist, as St. Austin speaks, when
according to the Gloss upon his words, his immolation is represented and there
is made a memorial of his passion Christus Immolatur i. e. Christi immolatio
repraesentatur and fit memoria Passionis. de Consec. Did. 2.
Christ, says he, was but once offered and yet in the Sacrament he is daily
immolated, neither does he lie who says Christ is immolated, for if Sacraments
had not the likeness of those things whereof they are sacraments, they would be
no sacraments at all, but from this likeness they received the names of the
things themselves Nonne Christus semel oblatus est and tamen in Sacramento
quotidie populis immolatur, nec mentitur qui dicit Christum immolari, si enim
sacramenta non haberent similitudinem, earum rerum quarum sunt sacramenta,
nulio modo essent sacramenta, sed ex similitu line saepe nomina earum
accipiunt. August. Ep. 120. ad Honorat.
Thus as he there gives several instances, wherein that which is the memorial
of a thing, does for its similitude to that thing of which it is a memorial
receive its name. When Easter approaches, we say to morrow or next day is the
passion of Christ, and on the Lords day, we say this day Christ arose, when
Christ's passion was but once and that several years ago, and that day is said
to be Christ's Resurrection which yet it is not Illud quod alicujus memoriale
est propter similitudinem saepe ejus rei cujus memoriale est nomen accipiat, ut
appropinquante Paschate, dicimus cras aut perendie est passio Christi, cum
semel tantum ante multos annos sit passus, and die Dominica dicimus, hodit
Christus resurrexit, propter similitudinem enim dies ille id esse dicitur, quod
tamen non est. Ib.
What we call then a sacrifice is a memorial or a sign and a representation of
a sacrifice, as he says in another place Quod appellamus sacrificium signum est
and repraesentatio sacrificii. August. de Civit. Dei l. 10. c. 5.
We offer the same sacrifice that Christ did, for the passion of Christ is the
sacrifice? which we offer, Passio enim Dimini est sacrificium quod offerimus.
Cypr. Ep. 3.
in St. Cyprians words; or rather we perform a remembrance of a sacrifice as
St. Chrysostom speaks (...). Chrysostom. in Heb. 10. Hom. 17.
, and after him Theophylact, We always offer him or rather we make a
remembrance of his offering (...). Theophylact. in Heb. 10.
don't we offer unbloody sacrifices, yes, we make a remembrance of his bloody
death (...). Ib.
so that instead of a sacrifice, i. e. a proper one, he has commanded us
perpetually to offer up a memorial, as Eusebius more strictly words it (...).
Eusebius. Demonstrat. l. 1. c. 10.
. If we come down to the Elder Schoolmen before the sacrifice of the Mass was
understood in so strict and proper a sense as it is now in the Church of Rome,
and in the Council of Trent, we shall find them calling it a sacrifice only
upon this account that it is, a memorial and representation of the true
sacrifice, and of the sacred immolation made upon the Altar of the cross, which
are the very words of Peter Lombard Ad hoc breviter dici potest illud quod
offertur and consecratur a sacerdote vocari sacrificium and oblationem quia
memoria est and repraesentatio very sacrificii, and sanctae immolationis factae
in ara crucis. Lombard. l. 4. Did. 12.
Master of the Sentences, and Father of the Schoolmen; whom Thomas Aquinas
seems wholly to follow, and more largely thus to explain the reason why the
celebration of the Sacrament may be called a sacrifice and immolation of
Christ, because, says he, first it is an image of Christ's passion, for as St.
Austin says to Simplicius, Images used to be called by the names of those
things of which they are Images, as when we look upon a painted Table or Wall,
we say this is Cicero and this is Salust, but the celebration of this Sacrament
is a representative image of Christ's passion which is the true immolation.
Another way as to the effect of Christ's passion it may be called a sacrifice,
because by this Sacrament we are made partakers of the fruit of the Lords
Passion Tum quia hujus sacramenti celebratio imago quaedam est passionis
Christi, tum etiam quia per hoc Sacramentum participes efficimur fructus
Dominicae passionis -- convenienter dicitur Christi immolatio. Primo quidem
quia sicut Augustinus ad Simplicium, solent imagines earum rerum nominibus
appellari quarum imagines sunt, sicut cum intuentes tabulam aut parietem
pictum, dicimus ille Cicero est, and ille Salustius, celebratio autem hujus
Sacramenti imago quaedam est repraesentativa passionis Christi, quae est vera
ejus immolatio -- alio modo quantum ad effectum passionis Christi quia sc. per
hoc sacramentum participes efficimur fructus Dominicae passionis. Thom. Aquin.
sum. 3. pars qu. 83.
Had the Church of Rome gone no further then this and not made the Eucharist a
sacrifice in any other sense then as it is commemorative and exhibitive of
Christ's true sacrifice and immolation upon the cross, we had not blamed them,
nor had there been any controversy between us in this matter; or had they been
contented to have used the word sacrifice in a large and figurative and
improper sense as the Fathers do, when they call the Eucharist a sacrifice, and
therefore they immediately correct themselves as it were with this addition, or
rather a remembrance of a sacrifice, and explain the reason why they give it
that name; but this would not serve our Adversaries purpose, this would not
make it a true proper propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and dead, this would
not give it those virtues which they assign to it as a proper sacrifice in it
self distinct from its being a sacrament, this would not make it so applicable
to others who never partook or communicated of it, and so would not make it of
so great price and value, that is, so marketable to themselves, and therefore
the Council of Trent condemns this notion of its being a sacrifice of Praise,
and Thanksgiving or a mere commemoration of Christ's sacrifice upon the cross
and not a propitiatory one, or that it profits only him that takes it; or that
it ought not to be offered for the quick and dead, for sins, for punishments,
for satisfactions and other necessities Siquis dixerit Missae sacrificium
tantum esse laudis and gratiarum actionis aut nudam commemorationem sacrificii
in cruce peracii non autem propitiatorium vel soli prodesse sumenti, neque pro
vivis and defunctis, pro peceatis, paenis, satisfactionibus and aliis
necessitatibus offerri debere, anathema sit. Council. Trid. de sacrif. Missae.
Canon 3.
They make it to have the true virtue of a sacrifice in its self, as a true
price and (...), and compensation to God for sin, and a true satisfaction to
divine Justice for the punishment thereof, as much as the sacrifice upon the
cross, and that they have the power of applying this whenever, and for
whomsoever they offer it, which is to have the greatest treasure in the World
in their hands, and to be able to make a proper propitiation for sin, which
belongs only to Christ; but they can offer Christ, as truly as he offered
himself, and set him upon the Altar as true a sacrifice as he hung upon the
cross. Christ I own is in some sense offered up to God by every communicant in
the Sacrament when he does mentally and internally offer him to God and present
as it were his bleeding Savior to his Father, and desire him for his sake to
be merciful to him and forgive him his sins, this internal oblation of Christ
and his passion is made by every faithful Christian in his particular private
devotions, and especially at the more solemn and public ones of the blessed
Sacrament. When he has the sacred symbols of Christ's death before him, and does
then plead the virtue of Christ's sacrifice before God, not of the sacrifice
then before him, but of the past sacrifice of the cross. This is all done by
the inward acts, the Faith, the devotion of the mind, whereby as St. Austin
says, Christ is then slain to any one when he believes him slain Tum Christus
cuique occiditur cum credit occisum. August. quaest. Evang. l. 2.
and when we believe in Christ from the very remains of this thought Christ is
daily immolated to us Cum credimus in Christum ex ipsis reliquiis cogitationis
Christus nobis quotidie immolatur, Id. in Psalm. 73.
as St. Hierom says, when we hear the word of our Lord, his flesh and blood is
as it were poured into our Ears cum audimus Scrmonem Domini caro Christi and
sanguis ejus in auribus nostris funditur. Hieron. in Psalm. 147.
and so St. Ambrose, calls the virgins minds those Altars on which Christ is
daily offered, for the Redemption of the Body Vestras mentes considenter
altaria dixerim in quibus quotidie pro Redemptione corporis Christus ossertur,
Ambr. de Virg. l. 2.


The Minister also does not only offer to God the oblations of the faithful at
the Altar, and their spiritual sacrifices of prayer and praise which it is his
proper duty in their names to present unto God, but he does offer as it were
Jesus Christ and his sacrifice for the people by praying to God for the people
as a public Minister, in and through the merits of Christ's death and passion,
and by consecrating and administering the blessed Sacrament; which is hereby
made not only a commemorative sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, but does
with the outward sign, really exhibit the thing signified to the people. So
that it is no. wonder to meet with the words offering, and offering Christ's body
and blood as attributed peculiarly to the Minister, as in those known places of
Ignatius his Epistles, it is not lawful for the Priest to offer without the
leave of the Bishop. And in Tertullian, when the Priest is wanting, thou
baptizest and offerest, and art a Priest to thy self, and in the Council of
Nice, where Deacons are forbid to offer the body of Christ, Can. 14. To offer,
and to offer Christ's body and blood is made the peculiar office of the Priest,
as he alone is the steward of these Mysteries of God, and the proper Minister
to consecrate and celebrate this Holy Sacrament, and in that to offer up the
peoples requests to God in the name of Christ and his meritorious cross and
passion, and by virtue of that to mediate for the people, and present as it
were Christ's sacrifice on their behalf; that is Christ's body and blood as an
objective sacrifice in heaven, and as formerly truly offered upon the cross,
and now sacramentally and improperly upon the Altar, but not as an external
visible proper sacrifice, subjectively present and placed upon the Altar by the
hands of the Priest, and by a visible and external action presented to God, and
offered up as the Jewish sacrifices used to be by any consumption or alteration
as they hold the sacrifice of the Mass to be. No such can be found in any of
the Fathers or ancient Ecclesiastic Writers though they speak often of
sacrifices and oblations, and sometimes of offering Christ, and the body of
Christ in the Eucharist, yet not at all in the present sense of the Romish
Church, or according to the doctrine of the Council of Trent, or the Writers
since that; which how contrary it is to Antiquity I shall show by a few general
Remarks and Considerations.

1. Had they had any such sacrifice they might have given another answer, to
their Jewish and Heathen Adversaries, who charged them with the want of outward
Sacrifices and Altars as with a great impiety; to which they made only this
return in their Apologies, that they had indeed no proper Altars, nor visible
and external sacrifices, but instead of those they offered the more spiritual
sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving, and of an honest and good mind, and of
virtuous and holy actions which were the only sacrifices of Christians, and
more acceptable to God then any other: this is the answer which runs through
all their excellent Apologies in return to that accusation of their having no
sacrifices, which they owned to be true in the sense their Adversaries urged
it; that is, that they had no proper external visible sacrifices, such as the
Jews and Heathens had, and such as the Roman Church will needs have the Mass to
be, but their sacrifices were of another nature, such as were so only in an
improper and metaphorical sense which the Romanists will by no means allow that
of the Eucharist to be. We are not Atheists, says Justin Martyr, as they were
chargged to be, because they had not the visible Worship of sacrifices, but we
Worship the maker of all things who needs not blood, or libations, or incense,
with the Word of Prayer and Thanksgiving, giving him Praise as much as we can,
and counting this the only honor worthy of him (...). Justin Martyr Apolog. 2.
and we are persuaded he needs no material oblation from men (...). Ib.
And in another place he says, Prayers and Praises made by good men are the
only perfect and acceptable sacrifices to God (...). Dialog. cum Tryph.
We are charged by some with Atheism, says Athenagoras, who measure Religion
only by the way of sacrifices, and what do ye tell me of sacrifices which God
wants not, though we ought to bring him an unbloody sacrifice, and to offer
him a rational Worship (...). Athanag. Legate. pro Christ.
where the rational worship explains the meaning of the unbloody sacrifice.
Tertullian in his Apologetic answering that charge, That Christians did not
sacrifice for the Emperors, it follows says he by the same reason we do not
sacrifice for others, because neither do we do it for our selves Pro
Imperatoribus sacrisi la non penatis, sequitur ut eadem ratione pro allis non
racrificemus quia nec pro nobis ipsis. Tertull. Apologet. adversus gentes, c.
10.
but in answer to this he declares how Christians prayed for the Emperor, c.
30. and in another place, he says, they sacrificed for the Emperors health,
that is, with a pure prayer as God has commanded Sacrificamus pro salute
Tmperatoris, i. e. pura prece sicut Deus praecepit, Idem ad Scapul.
and I offer to God, says he, in the same Apologetic speaking against other
sacrifices, a rich and a greater sacrifice then he commanded the Jews, Prayer
from a chaste body, from an innocent soul proceeding from the Holy Spirit Ei
offero opimam and majorem hostiam quam ipse mandavit, orationem de carne
pudica, de amma innocenti, de Spiritu sancto profectam. Ib. Apol. c. 30.
This is the Host to be offered, says Minutius Felix, a good mind, a pure soul,
a sincere conscience, these are our sacrifices, these are the sacred things of
God, in answer to their not having Altars and Shrines Cum sit litabilis hostia
bonus animus and pura men's and sincera conscientia -- haec nostra sacrificia,
haec Dei sacra sunt -- Minuc. Octav. Sc. delubra and aras non habemus. Ib.


which objection made also by Celsus is after the same manner replied to by
Origin, Our Altars are the mind of every one that is righteous from whence is
truly sent up sweet smelling sacrifices, to wit, Prayers from a pure conscience
(...). Origin contra Celsum. l. 8. p. 389.
Lactantius when he proposes to speak of sacrifice, shows how unsuitable any
external one is to God, and that the proper sacrifice to him, is praise and an
hymn, blessing alone is his sacrifice, we ought therefore to sacrifice unto God
by word, the chief way of worshipping God is Thanksgiving out of the mouth of a
just man directed to God Nunc di sacrificio ipso pauca dicemus, -- sacrificium
laus and hymnus -- hujus sacrificium sola benedictio, verbo ergo sacrificari
oportet Deo -- summus igitur colendi Dei ritus est, ex ore justi hominis ad
Deum directa laudatio. Lactantius de wero cultu l. 6.. 25.
Could those excellent Advocates for Christianity have no other ways assoiled
the charge drawn up against them, that they had no sacrifices like all other
Religions, but by flying to such spiritual and improper sacrifices as Praise
and Thanksgiving? this plainly demonstrates that they had no proper and visible
sacrifice, which indeed in so many express words they deny when the word
sacrifice was understood strictly and properly Quid ergo sacrificia censetis
nulla esse omnino facienda? nulla. Arnob. disput. adversus Gent. l. 7.
Had they so accounted the sacrifice of the Mass as our Adversaries do now,
this might have been given in as the Christian sacrifice instead of all others,
(...). Clemens Alexandrin. Strom. l. 7. p. 707. Par.
and yet it is strange they scarce ever mention the Eucharist in those
discourses of theirs, wherein if it had been a sacrifice it had been most
proper and pertinent to have spoke of it, and the sacrifice of a man under the
species of bread and wine had outdone all the Jewish and most of the Heathen
sacrifices, and had been a full answer to the objection as it was made by them;
but say our Adversaries they would not speak of so great a mystery as the
Eucharist to unbelievers which they were used to conceal even to Catechumens
that were not yet perfectly initiated into the Christian Rites; but surely they
would not have told a downright lie, and denied that they had any proper
sacrifices, had the Eucharist been one, as we see they did, neither did they
keep the service of the Eucharist so secret as not to let the Heathens be
acquainted with it, as is plain from Justin Martyrs Apology, where he largely
discourses of its whole performance to Antoninus the Emperor Apolog. 2. versus
finem.
; and to take off this little subterfuge of our Adversaries, I shall add one
thing more on this head, which shows beyond all dispute that the Primitive
Church had no such opinion of the Eucharists being a sacrifice, and that is the
same charge of Julian the Apostate who very well understood Christianity and
had been a Reader of it in the Church, who notwithstanding objected the same
thing to the Christians with the Jews and Heathens, namely that they had no
Sacrifices, and that they did not erect altars to sacrifice upon to God (...).
Julian apud Cyril. Alexand. contra Jul. l. 10. p. 343.
. He knew too well the Mysteries of their Religion, so as not to be ignorant
that the Eucharist was a proper sacrifice had it really been believed to be so
by the Church at that time, and Cyril's answer to him plainly shows that it was
not, for he owns the charge, and pleads only that we have spiritual and mental
sacrifices which are much better (...). Ib. p. 345.
and instead of Sheep and Oxen, and the like visible sacrifices, we offer, says
he, for a sweet savor Faith, Hope, Charity, Righteousness and Praise (...). Ib.
but not a tittle of offering the sacrifice of the Mass which would have been
greatly to the purpose had there been any such thing, and there was no reason
to have refused the mentioning it to Julian who had once been a Christian, and
so must certainly have known it, had there been any such thing in the Christian
Church.

2. When the Fathers do call the Eucharist a sacrifice, they add such Epithets
and Phrases to it as do quite spoil the Roman notion of it, for they call it a
spiritual sacrifice, (...) as it is in Eusebius Demon ftrat. Evangel. l. 5. c. 3.
Cyril of Jerusalem Mystagog. Catech. 5.
Theodoret Histor. Relig.
and others besides the Greek Liturgies, and the Apostolic Constitutions,
where the word spiritual is generally added to it. Now a spiritual sacrifice
they must own is not a proper one, for it cannot be an external and visible
one, nor is there any matter or substance to be destroyed. So it is called also
(...), a reasonable sacrifice Constitut. Apost. l. 6. c. 23. Cyril Cat. mystag.
5. Chrysostom. Hom. 11. in Heb.
so then it cannot be an outward bodily one, which the Priest takes up in his
hands and sets upon the Altar, it is called an unbloody one, not only by the
Fathers but themselves, but if it be Christ's body it is not without blood, and
though it be unbloody in the manner of oblation, yet it could not be called so
generally and in it self. It Is called a mystic and symbolic sacrifice, and that
is very different from a true one, Christ, is said, to be there sacrificed
without being sacrificed (...) diatypos. Council. Niceni apud Gelas. Cyzic.
, i. e. in figure and representation, he is offered in Image as St. Ambrose
expressly says Offertur in imagine, Ambros. de Officiis l. 1. c. 48.
and as it is in the book of sacraments attributed to him, this oblation is for
a figure of the body and blood of Jesus Christ Quod fit in figuram corporis and
sanguinis Domini nostri Jesu Christi; de Sacram. l. 4. c. 5.
if it be a figure it cannot be the thing it self, no more then a man is his
own picture; it is called also a memorial and commemoration of the sacrifice of
Christ as St. Austin says, Christians by the holy oblation at the Eucharist,
and by partaking of the body and blood of Christ celebrate the memory of the
same sacrifice that was accomplished Jam Christiani peracti ejusdem sacrificii
memoriam celebrant sacrosancta oblatione and participatione corporis and
sanguinis Christi. August. contra Faust. l. 20. c. 18.
We offer, says Chrysostom, but it is by making a remembrance of Christ's death
and we offer the same sacrifice or rather a remembrance of a sacrifice (...).
Chrysoit. in Heb. Hom. 17.
And Eusebius in his Demonstrations giving an account why Christians do not
offer sacrifices to God as the Jews did, says, Christ having offered an
admirable sacrifice and an excellent victim to his Father for the salvation of
us all, has ordered us to offer always to God a memorial instead of a
sacrifice (...). Eusebius. Demonstrat. Evang. l. 1. c. 10.
or in the place of a sacrifice, as the word and drift of the discourse clearly
imply. If it be then a memorial of a sacrifice, it cannot be the sacrifice it
self, for the thing remembered must be distinct from that which is to remember
it by; and if it be performing a remembrance of a sacrifice rather then a
sacrifice, and the memorial of a sacrifice in stead, or in the place of a
sacrifice, these accounts of it do most perfectly destroy and are wholly
inconsistent with that other notion of its being in it self a true and proper
sacrifice.

Thirdly, The Novelty of private Masses which were brought in by making the
Eucharist a sacrifice to God instead of a sacrament to be partaken by
Christians, is a plain Argument of the late and novel Doctrine of the sacrifice
of the Mass, as they are a certain consequence of it, for when it began to be
believed that the Eucharist was a true sacrifice that was beneficial and of
extraordinary virtue merely as it was offered to God without being received by
themselves, then the people left off frequent communicating according to the
Primitive custom in which there is no such thing to be found as is now
introduced into the Church by this new Doctrine, namely, the Priests
communicating alone without the people, and celebrating Mass without the
Communion of others. Bellarmine owns, that there is no express instance to be
found of this in any of the Ancients, but this he says may be gathered from
conjectures Nam etiamsi nusquam express legamus a veteribus oblatum
secrificium sine communione alicujus vel aliquorum praeter ipsum sacerdotem
tamen id possumus ex conjecturis facile colligere. Bellarm. de Missa l. 2. c. 9.
, but how groundless they are, and how contrary these private Masses be to the
Primitive practice, I shall show from certain and undeniable Authorities.
Justin Martyr in his account of the Christian Assemblies, and their manner of
celebrating the Lords Supper, says, the Deacons give to every one of those that
are present to partake of the blessed Bread and Wine (...). Juitin Martyr
Apolog. 2.
. Ignatius who was before him says, one bread is broken to all, and one cup is
distributed to every one (...) Ignat. Epist. ad Philadelph.
; the Apostolic Canons command, All the Faithful who were present at the
Prayers and Reading of the Scriptures, to continue also at the Communion, or
else commands them to be turned out of the Church Canon 9.
. So do the Ancient Canons of the Council of Antioch Excommunicate all those
who come to the Church, and Prayers with their Brethren, but refuse to
communicate of the Holy Eucharist (...). Council. Antioch. Can. 2
. So great a crime was it for any not to keep to constant Communion, which was
to be done as much by all the faithful as by the Priest himself; every
Christian in those devout ages who was baptized, and had not notoriously
violated his baptismal Covenant, so as to be put into the state and number of
the public penitents did always communicate as often as there was any
Sacrament, which was I believe, as often as they assembled for public Worship,
and he that had not done that in those first and purest times would have been
thought almost to have been a Deserter and to have renounced his Christianity.
All the Catechumens indeed or the Candidates for Christianity, who were
admitted to the Prayers and Sermons, but were not yet baptized, they were
commanded to withdraw when the Mass or Communion-service began; and so were the
Penitents and the Energumeni; and this is the true meaning of the word Missa,
the Deacon in the Latin Church, crying out, Ite, Missa est, when they came to
the office of the Eucharist. In the Apostolic Constitutions l. 8. c. 6, 7, 9.
he speaks to them particularly, and dismisses them in these words, (...) so
that only the (...), faithful who received the Communion were allowed to be
present at the celebration of it, which is a very good Argument against our
Adversaries opinion of the sacrifice of the Mass, for had they believed the
Eucharist though received only by the Priest had done good as a sacrifice to
those who were present although they did not partake of it, as they now do in
the Church of Rome, what need they have put out and excluded all those who were
Non-communicants; the Jews did not shut the people out of the Temple when the
sacrifice was offering. If the Eucharist as a sacrifice had been a part of
Worship only to God, an oblation to him, and not a Sacrament to be received by
themselves, why might not they have been present at it as well as at the
Prayers which were offered to God, and at all the other parts of their
Religious Worship? The most ancient accounts we have of the manner of
celebrating the Eucharist, and the most ancient Liturgies or Eucharistic forms
have not the least shadow of any private Communion by the Priest alone, but
always speak of the communion of others with him; in the Apostolic
Constitutions there is a Relation in what Order all the Faithful received.
First the Bishop, then the Priests and Deacons, then the Deaconesses, and
Virgins, and Widows, then all the whole people in order, and after all have
received then the Deacons take away the remainder. St. Cyril speaks plainly of
numbers receiving the Eucharist and not of a single person, for he mentions the
Deacons speaking to them at first to embrace each other, ((...),) and give the
kiss of Charity: those very ancient Forms and Responses, Lift up your hearts,
and the answer, we lift them up unto the Lord (...).
, Let us give thanks unto our Lord God, It is just and meet so to do, and
afterward (...), these all show that the Priest did not communicate alone but
had always the company of others at the Sacrament to join with him. St. Denis
called the Areopagite speaks of the Priests exhorting others at the Cummunion,
and praying that they who partake of these Mysteries, may partake of them
worthily. The same is in all the Lyturgies which go under the name of St.
James, St. Mark, and St. Peter, in which there are the distinct parts of the
people, as well as of the Priest, as when the Priest is to say peace be with
you all, the people are to answer, and with thy spirit, and the service is so
framed as to suppose and require company in Communicating, or else it would be
nonsensical and ridiculous for the Priest alone to pray to God to breathe upon
us his servants that are present, to grant that the Sacraments may be to all us
that partake of them, the Communion of the blessedness of eternal Life; and
after the Communion is over, after all have received, for the priest to give
the blessing to all, and pray, God to bless and protect us all who were
partakers of the Mysteries; The same form of speaking in the plural is in the
more Authentic Liturgies of St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom, where it is very
odd for the Priest to exhort others to pray, to give thanks and the like, and
to pray God that they may be worthy partakers of the Sacrament, if none were to
partake of it but himself. The Roman Missal which is much older then these
private Masses, or then the Doctrine of the Mass, as I shall presently show,
speaks after the same manner, and makes the Priest pray for all that are
present, and that all who have communicated may be filled with all heavenly
benediction and Grace. These must be all very improper for the Priest to say
when he communicates by himself, and he may with as good reason make a
Congregation by himself alone, as make a Communion. Private Masses then which
sprang up from the sacrifice of the Mass, and are wholly suited and agreeable
to that Doctrine, these being so contrary to the best Antiquity, show that that
Doctrine also on which they are founded, and from whence they arose is so too.
And I have the more largely considered these because they are another great
corruption of the Eucharist of the Roman Church, tho they are originally
derived from the sacrifice of the Mass.

Fourthly, The very Canon of the Mass, as it is at present in the Roman Church,
has very little in it agreeable to this new Doctrine of the sacrifice of the
Mass, but though it is somewhat difficult to give a certain account of the time
of its composition, it being made at first by an unknown Author, whom St.
Gregory calls Scholasticus, who is supposed by some to be Pope Gelasius, though
had St. Gregory known this he would hardly have given him that name; and it
having a great many additions given to it by several Popes, as is owned by
their own Writers upon the Ordo Romanus Walafrid. Strabo de rebus Eccles. c.
22. Micrologus de Ecclesiast. Observat. c. 12. Berno. Augiensis, c. 1. and alii
in Collectione, Hittorpii.
, yet it is no doubt much ancienter then their present Doctrine of the
sacrifice of the Mass, which is very near as late as the Council of Trent. The
first manner of celebrating the Communion was very plain and simple, so that
St. Gregory tells us, The Apostles consecrated the host of oblation only with
the Lords Prayer Mos Apostol^rum fuit ut ad ipsam solummodo orationem Dominicam
oblationis hostiam conscerarent. Gregorii Regist. Epistol. 64. l. 7.
, if they did so, and used no other form in that sacred Office, it is certain
they could not make a sacrifice of the Eucharist nor offer it as such to God,
because there are no words or expressions in that prayer, whereby any such
thing should be meant or signified, so that this is a most authentic testimony
against any such Apostolic practice, but the present Canon Missae or Communion
Office of the Roman Church does not fully come up to, nor perfectly express or
contain the present Doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass, there is no offering
of Christ's body and blood under the species of Bread and Wine in any formal
words as might be expected in conformity to their Trent Doctrine, nor is there
any mention of Christ's being there in his natural body or offered to God by the
Priest as a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and dead, for sins, for
punishments, and for other necessities. Neither this nor their great Doctrine
of Transubstantiation is contained in their present office, so that it is to me
a plain evidence of the novelty of both of them, and that they are a great deal
later then the Canon of the Mass; there are several prayers indeed that make
mention of a sacrifice and of an oblation, but most of them, and the most
express of them are before consecration, so that they plainly belong to those
Gifts and Oblations, which according to the Primitive custom were brought by
the Communicants, and which as I have shown were one great reason of the
Eucharist's being called a sacrifice, God is desired to accept and bless these
gifts, these presents, these holy and pure sacrifices which we offer to thee,
for thy holy Catholic Church -- together with thy servant our Pope N. and our
Bishop N. and for all the Orthodox, and for all those that hold the Catholic
and Apostolic Faith See Canon Missae.
, and then follows the commemoration Prayer, Remember O Lord, thy servants and
thy handmaids, N. and N. and all those who are present, whose Faith and
Devotion is known to thee, for whom we offer to thee, or who offer to thee this
sacrifice of praise for themselves, and for all others, for the Redemption of
their Souls, for the hope of their Salvation and their safety, and render their
vows to thee the Eternal, Living and True God, then after the memorial of the
Saints, We beseech thee O Lord, that thou would mercifully receive this
Oblation of our service and of all thy Family, and dispose our days in peace,
and command us to be delivered from eternal damnation, and to be numbered in the
fold of thine Elect, through Jesus Christ our Lord; then immediately follows
this prayer, which Oblation thou O God, we beseech, vouchsafe to make
altogether blessed, ascribed, ratified, reasonable and acceptable. Ascripta and
Rata are words which they are as much puzzled to understand as I am to
Translate. All these prayers are before consecration so that they cannot belong
to the sacrifice of Christ's Body, but only to the oblation of the gifts, and
the sacrifice of praise, as it is there expressly called; and yet these are a
great deal more full and large then the prayers after consecration, wherein
there is no manner of mention of offering Christ's Body and Blood, but only
offering the consecrated Elements as they were offered before when they were
unconsecrated, We offer unto thy excellent Majesty of thy gifts and presents, a
pure host, an holy host, an immaculate host, the holy bread of Eternal Life,
and the cup of Eternal Salvation. The first Composers would have used other
words then Bread and Cup had they meant thereby Christ's very natural Body and
Blood, and it is plain they were not those by what follows, Upon which
vouchsafe to look with a propitious and kind countenance, and to accept of them
as thou did accept the gifts of thy righteous child Abel, and the sacrifice
of our Patriarch Abraham, and that which Melchisedec thy High Priest offered to
thee, an Holy Sacrifice, an immaculate Host. Now to compare Christ's very Body
and Blood with the sacrifices of Abel, Abraham and Melchisedec, and to desire
God to look upon his own Son, in whom he was always well pleased with a
propitious and kind Countenance is very strange and uncouth, to say no worse of
it; and to desire according to what follows, that God would command these to be
carried by the hands of his holy Angel, into thy sublime Altar, in the presence
of thy Divine Majesty. These cannot be meant or understood of Christ's natural
Body and Blood, which is already in heaven, and is there to appear in the
presence of God for us, as Menardus expressly owns in his notes upon this prayer
in Gregory's Sacramentary Jube haec perferri) non Christi corpus sed memoriam
passionis, fidem. preces and vita sidel^^^. Menardi nota and observat. in lib.
Sacrament. Gregori^ Papae. p. 19.
, and if so, as we have the confession of the most Learned Ritualist of their
own Church, then there is nothing at all in the Canon of the Mass, that does
truly belong to these, or that does any way express or come up to the new
Tridentine Doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass; so that we need go no further
then their own office to show the Novelty of this, and as in other things,
namely in their prayers to Saints they are forced to use very gentle and
softning interpretations to make the words signify otherwise then what they do
in their proper and literal meaning, so here they must put a more strong and
hard sense upon them, then they will really bear or was at first intended to
make them speak the new meaning of the Mass-sacrifice; so that they must here
contrive a way to raise the sense of the Church as they do in other cases to
let it down, or else their Prayers and their Doctrines will never be brought to
suit well together. The commemoration for the dead has nothing in it but a mere
Remembrance and a Prayer, that God would give to them a place of refreshment,
light and peace through Jesus Christ our Lord, not through the merit or virtue
of that sacrifice which is then offered, there is not the least mention or
intimation of any such thing nor any expression that looks that way. The Priest
indeed a little before he communicates prays Christ, to deliver him from all
his sins, and from all evils by this his most sacred Body and Blood, which he
may do without its being a sacrifice, and I know no Protestant would scruple
the joining in such a petition. There is a prayer indeed at the last by the
Priest to the Holy Trinity, that the sacrifice which he has unworthily offered
to the eyes of the Divine Majesty may be acceptable to it, and through its
mercy be propitiable for himself, and for those for which he has offered it,
and this seems the fullest and the most to the purpose of the Mass-sacrifice,
and yet it may very fairly be understood in a sound sense without any such
thing, as it is a sacrifice of prayer and as God is thereby rendered merciful,
and propitious both to our selves and others, but it is to be observed that
this prayer is not in the old Ordo Romanus where the others are, nor in the
Gelasian or Gregorian Missal, nor in any other ancient one put out by
Thomasius, Menardus, Pamelius, Cardinal Bona or Mabillon, but was I suppose
added of later days to those old Forms.

Fifthly, The new Addition to the form of Ordination in the Roman Church,
whereby Accipe potestatem offerre sacrificium Deo Missasque celebrare tam pro
vivis quam pro mortuis.
power is given to the Priest to offer sacrifice to God, and to celebrate
Masses both for the dead and living, this discovers the novelty of their
Doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass; for there was no such form of Ordination
in the primitive Church, nor is there any such thing mentioned in any Latin or
Greek Ordinale for near a thousand years after Christ; The most ancient account
of the manner of Ordaining is in the fourth Council of Carthage, where there is
nothing else but, Presbyter cum Ordinatur, Episcopo eum benedicente and manum
super caput ejus tenente, etiam omnes Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt manus suas
juxta manum Episcopi super caput illius tenent. Canon 3. Council. Carthag.
the Episcopal Benediction and Imposition of hands by the Bishop and all the
Priests. In the Apostolic Constitutions, there is a pretty long prayer of the
Bishops over the Priest who is to be Ordained, (...). Constitut. Apostol. de
Ordinat. Presbyt. l. 8. c. 16.
that God would look upon his servant, chosen into the Presbytery by the vote
and judgment of all the Clergy, and fill him with the spirit of Grace and
Wisdom to help and govern the people with a pure heart -- that he may be filled
with healing operations, and instructive discourse, and may teach the people
with all meekness, and may serve God sincerely with a pure understanding, and a
willing Soul, and may perform the sacred and pure Offices for the people
through Jesus Christ. And this with laying on of hands is all the Form of
Ordination which is so anciently prescribed; St. Denis who is falsely called the
Areopagite, but was a Writer probably of the fifth Century before the Council
of Calcedon, he has acquainted us with much the like manner of Ordination in
that time, (...). Dionys. Hierarch. Eccles. c. 5.
The Priest kneeling before the Altar with the Holy Bible and the Bishops hand
over his head was consecrated with holy Prayers. Only there was then added the
sign of the cross, and the kiss of peace, but no such thing as the receiving of
power to offer sacrifice, and to celebrate Masses for the living and the dead.
This was a thing unheard of in the ancient Church either Greek or Latin,
neither was it brought into the Latin till about the year 1000 as is confessed by
Morinus de sacris Ordinat. pars 3. c. 6.
, nor is it to this day used in the Greek. In that age of Ignorance and
Superstition when Transubstantiation and a great many other Errors and
Corruptions crept into the Latin Church, this new Form of Ordination was set
up, and the Priests had a new power given them, and a new work put upon them,
which was to sacrifice and say Masses for the quick and dead, which, had it
been agreeable to the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, and had there been any
such opinion then of the Mass-sacrifice as there is now in the Roman Church,
there would no doubt have been the same form of Ordination, or something like
this would have been specified in the consecration of a priest. They now make
this the great and proper office of the priest, and these words with the
delivery of the holy Vessels or sacred Instruments is made the very matter and
form of the Sacrament of Orders, and it is made a charge by them against our
Ordinations, that we want this essential part of priesthood, which is to offer
sacrifice, but since the primitive Church had no such Form as is fully made out
by Morinus, a man of great Learning and Credit among themselves who has made a
great collection of the most ancient Ordinale's to show this, and there is no
such thing now in the Greek Churches as appears from Habertus on the Greek
Pontifical, we have hereby not only a full defense of our own Orders without
any such Form, but a plain demonstration of the novelty of that in the Roman
Church, and consequently of that Doctrine which is brought in by it, or perhaps
was the occasion of it, of the sacrifice of the Mass.

4. It is in it self unreasonable and absurd, and has a great many gross Errors
involved in it. As

1. It makes an external visible sacrifice of a thing that is perfectly
invisible, so that the very matter and substance of the sacrifice which they
pretend to offer is not seen or perceived by any of the senses, for it is
Christ's body, and not the Bread and Wine which is the subject matter and the
sacrifice it self. Now this is the strangest sacrifice that ever was in the
World, a visible oblation of an invisible thing; had the Jews offered their
sacrifices in this manner, they had offered nothing at all, and had Christ thus
offered himself to God upon the cross only in phantasm and appearance as some
Heretics would have had him, and not in the visible substance of his body, it
would have been only a fantastic sacrifice, and we had been redeemed by a
shadow. It Is contrary to the nature of all proper sacrifices to have the thing
offered not to be seen, and not visibly presented to God; an invisible
sacrifice may as well have an invisible Altar, and an invisible Oblation, and
an invisible Priest, for why the one should be more visible then the other, I
cannot imagine. Bellarmines definition of a sacrifice is this, which we are
very willing to allow of, but how it agrees to the sacrifice of the mass I
cannot see; Sacrificium est oblatio externa facta soli Deo, qua ad agnitionem
bumanae insirmitatis and professionem divinae Majestatis a legitimo Ministro
res aliqua sensibilis and permanens ritu mystico consecratur and transmutatur.
Bellarm. de Miss. l. 1. c. 2.
A sacrifice is an external Oblation made to God alone, whereby for the
acknowledging of humane infirmity, and owning of the Divine Majesty, some
sensible and permanent thing is by a lawful Minister, and by a Mastic Rite
consecrated and changed. Now Christ's Body and Blood being the res sacrificii,
the matter of the sacrifice, and that being offered to God, I cannot understand
how that is a res sensibilis, a sensible thing in the Eucharist, and therefore
how according to him it is a sacrifice; so necessary is it for a great man to
blunder in a bad cause when he must either weigh in a false balance, or
whatever he says will quickly be found light.

2. It makes a proper sacrifice without a proper sacrificing Act; the
Consumption and Destruction of the sacrifice was always necessary, as well as
the offering and bringing it to the Altar, and without this it was not properly
given to God, but kept to themselves as much as it was before, if it were not
either poured out, or burnt, or slain, which was parting with the thing and
transferring it wholly to God; and this consumption is so Essential to all
sacrifices that Bellarmine puts it into the definition of a sacrifice ut supra.
, and says, ad verum sacrificium requ^ritur ut id quod offertur Deo in
sacrificium plane destruatur. Id. de Miss. l. 1 c. ^.
that to a true sacrifice it is required that that which is offered to God in
sacrifice be plainly destroyed. But how will this now belong to Christ's body in
the sacrifice of the Mass? Is that destroyed there? is not that the sacrifice?
and is not that now in a Glorious, impassible State that can suffer no
destruction? Bellarmine is in a sad plunge to get out here, and let us see how
he throws himself about, but sticks fast still in the mire. By consecration,
says he, the thing which is offered is ordained to a true real and outward
change and desiruction, which was necessary to the being of a sacrifice, for by
consecration the Body of Christ receives the Form of food, but food is for
eating, and by this it is ordained for change and destruction; Is the Body of
Christ then destroyed by eating? If it be they are true Cannibals or
Capernaitical feeders that eat it: I had thought that Christ's body was not thus
grossly to be broke by the Teeth, or chewed by the jaws of the priest, or
Communicants, so as to be destroyed by them. The Gloss upon Berengarius his
Recantation says this is a greater Heresy then his, unless it be understood of
the species and not of the body it self; and they generally disown that Christ's
body is thus carnally eaten, but only the Sacramental species, but the species
are not the sacrifice, and therefore it is not sufficient that they be
destroyed, but the sacrifice, that is the body of Christ must be so. Christ's
body as it is food is not a sacrifice but a Sacrament, they make two distinct
things of it as it is a sacrifice, and as it is a Sacrament, as it lies in the
Pix, or is carried to the sick it is food and a Sacrament but they will not
allow it to be then a sacrifice, and on Maunday Thursday, it is eaten but not
accounted a sacrifice Feria sexta majoris hebdomadae non censetur sacrificium
Missae proprie celebrari licet vera hostia adsit and frangatur and consumatur.
Bellarm. de Miss. l. 1. c. 27. B.
. The Consumption then by eating belongs to it not as a sacrifice but a
Sacrament, and the body of Christ is not then consumed but only the species,
nay the body of Christ is not then consumed under the species, for the real
consumption belongs only to the species and not to the body of Christ, which is
no more truly consumed with them, or under them, then it is as sitting in
heaven, no more then a man's flesh is consumed when only his clothes or his
mantle is tore tho he were in them. What though it ceases to be really on the
Altar, and ceases to be a sensible food, as he farther explains, or rather
intangles it; Is Christ's body ever a sensible food? And is its ceasing to be
upon the Altar, a consumption of it? Then Isaac was consumed when he was took
off from the Altar on which Abraham had laid him, and if his Father had been as
subtle as our Roman Sophisters and Sacrificers, he might only have covered him
with the skin of the Ram, and have consumed that as an external species by
fire, and so Isaac had been both sacrificed, and consumed, and destroyed too,
and yet have been as live as ever for all this. Such absurdities do they run
into when they will make their notion suit of a true sacrifice and that which
is not one, and a man of sense must yet destroy his sense one would think
before he can talk at this rate.

They are most sadly nonplust and most extremely divided among themselves about
the Essence of this their sacrifice of the Mass, and wherein they should place
the true sacrificial act, whether in the Oblation of the Elements, or in
consecration of them whereby they suppose them turned into Christ's Body and
blood, and so in the express Oblation of those to God, or in the fraction and
commistion of the consecrated Elements, or in the manducation and consumption
of them: Suarez and Vasquez and others are for the last of all; the Council of
Trent seems to be for Oblation; Bellarmine is for consecration, whereby instead
of Bread and Wine Christ's Body and Blood are placed upon the Altar, and ordered
for consumption. Melchior Canus is for all the four last, and he tells us it is
the Doctrine of Thomas Aquinas, docuisse Thomam sacrificium ante fractionem
hostiae esse peractum, sumptionemque spectare proprie ad sacramentum,
oblationem vero ad sacrificium. Can. Loc. Theol. l. 12. p. 833.
that the sacrifice is performed before the fraction of the Elements, and that
the sumption of them belongs properly to the Sacrament, the Oblation to the
sacrifice; so that they know not what to pitch upon to constitute it a
sacrifice, and if we examine them all we shall find no true proper sacrificial
act in any of them; the Oblation of the Elements before consecration can by no
means make such a sacrifice as they design, for that is but an offering of
earthly things not of Christ's body, neither are they thereby changed or
consumed, and tho they are an offering, they are not a proper sacrifice, though
in some sense they are a sacrifice and were accounted so by the Fathers, as I
have shown. The Fraction of the Elements after they are consecrated which is
done by the Priest, not for distribution, for they give them whole to the
people, but for another mystical reason, this is not the formal Essence of the
sacrifice, for Christ they own did not break them in this manner at his last
Supper, when yet they will have him sacrifice, and this is sometimes omitted by
themselves; neither is manducation, for this is performed by the people as well
as the priest when they communicate, and sacrificing does not then belong to
them, nor is it ever their work but only the Priests, and yet they then eat and
consume the sacrament as well as the priest, so that sacrificing cannot
properly lie in this, neither can it be proved that Christ did himself eat when
he is supposed to sacrifice; and besides both this fraction and manducation
belongs only to the species, they are the only proper subject of those actions,
but it is the Body and Blood of Christ that is sacrificed and not the species.
For this reason therefore consecration it self cannot well pass for the formal
act of sacrificing, for it is the Bread is consecrated, not Christ's body: it is
the bread only is changed by consecration, that is supposed indeed to be
destroyed when it is consecrated, and if this be sacrificing it is sacrificing
of nothing, or at most it is but sacrificing of bread which is a meaner
sacrifice then many of the Jewish, neither is this change of it visible and
external, but they will needs have the sacrificing action to be sensible and
external or else the sacrifice will not be so, and if it be only a spiritual
and internal and mental offering up of Christ's body and blood to God this is
not proper sacrificing of it again, but only by inward Faith and Devotion which
we are very willing to allow. But consecration must set Christ's body upon the
Altar and put it into the hands of the priest and then it must be visibly
offered to God, and visibly consumed, and this is the true way of sacrificing
it, for Bellarmine takes in consumption as necessary together with
consecration; the oblation he owns is not verbal, neither did Christ thus offer
his Body and Blood at his last Supper but after he had blessed and brake the
bread he gave it to his Disciples, but placing this upon the Altar by the words
of consecration is a real Oblation of it, and then eating and consuming it
there formally constitutes the sacrifice. The Bishop of Meaux in his Exposition
seems to make the whole Essence of the sacrifice consist in Consecration alone
without any manducation or destruction, which Bellarmine makes absolutely
necessary; Christ, he says, is placed upon the holy Table, clothed with those
signs that represent his death in virtue of the words of consecration which are
the spiritual sword that make a mystical separation betwixt the Body and the
Blood. Now if Christ be thus only sacrificed mystically and by representation,
he is not sacrificed truly and properly, nor is there any true and proper
propitiation made hereby, which is the true state of the Controversy between
us; Christ may be sacrificed representatively, as Caesar may be slain in a
Tragedy, without being really present, and if he were present and placed upon
the Altar, as they will needs have him, yet he is no more sacrificed by the
mystical representation then if Caesar's Picture were stabbed and he were behind
it unhurt. I see no reason why Christ's presence should be necessary to make
such a mystical representative, or commemorative sacrifice, and if Christ were
present I see not how he is more sacrificed then if he were absent. So that
they only confound their thoughts to make a proper sacrifice where there is
none, and when they have boasted of a true proper visible external sacrifice,
they know not where to find any such thing, and it comes to no more at last
then a mere commemorative and representative one, or in plain words to a
sacramental and Mystical representation and remembrance of a past sacrifice,
which there is neither any need nor any possibility of renewing.

Their differences about the proper sacrificial act whereby they do with good
success destroy one another notions of it, and so taken together destroy the
thing it self, these are the more considerable because it is not the res
sacrificii which makes the sacrifice, though that were never so truly present,
but the sacrificing Act, or the Actual sacrificing it, for as Bellarmine says,
Nam non res illa, sed rei illius oblatio proprie est sacrificium, sacrificium
enim est a (...) no^ res permanens. Bellarm. de Miss. l. 2. c. 4. D.
A sacrifice is an action not a permanent thing, and it is not the thing it
self, but the offering it is properly the sacrifice. So that though Christ's
natural Body and Blood were never so much present in the Eucharist even
according to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation it self; yet so long as there
is no proper action there to sacrifice it, or no sacrificing act, it would
signify nothing to the making it a sacrifice.

3. This Doctrine of the Mass makes a living body a sacrifice which requires it
should be dead, and yet at the same represents it dead when it supposes it
present in a state of life, which is as odd a jumble as making a man to be by
at his own funeral, and at the same time bringing in the person alive, and yet
dressing up his picture to remember him dead and in the habit of death it self.
The Eucharist is to remember and represent Christ in a state of death, his body
and blood as separated from one another, and the one broken and the other
poured out, and the words of consecration are the spiritual sword, as the
Bishop of Meaux calls them, that are to do this, and so to constitute the
sacrifice, but whilst this is a doing, nay by the very doing this thing, the
same spiritual sword becomes a spiritual word, and raises the same body living,
and sets it in that state upon the Altar, so that by this means it destroys the
sacrifice a great deal more then it made it before, for it makes it be then
truly living, whereas it only represented it before as dead. So that it is at
the same time a dead representative sacrifice, and a living proper sacrifice,
which is in truth no sacrifice at all, for a living sacrifice is just as much
sense as a dead Animal, that is, it is a contradiction, and one of the Terms
destroys the other. If a Jewish Priest had knocked down the Ox with one hand,
and raised him up with the other, or restored him to life after he had slew
him, this would have made but a very odd sacrifice; and to make Christ dead by
the sacramental signs, and to sacrifice him thus in Effigy, and to make him
alive again under the sacramental signs, and so to sacrifice him truly this is
a strange and unaccountable riddle. I would ask whether the consecrated species
of Bread and Wine by which Christ's blood is shed mystically, and death
intervenes only by representation, as the Bishop of Meaux phrases it, whether
these would make a real sacrifice without Christ's living body under them? if
not, it is not this mystical representation of death makes the sacrifice? Or
whether Christ's living body without those species and signs of his death would
be a sacrifice? If not then it is not the placing that upon the Altar and so a
real Oblation of it there makes the sacrifice, and then what is it that does
so? Is it not very odd that the same person must be there seemingly dead, and
yet really alive at the same time to make up this sacrifice?

4. The making it truly propitiatory is a very great Error, and inconsistent
with it self. All our Religious Duties and all our virtuous actions may in a
large and improper sense be said to be propitiatory, as they are said also in
Scripture to be sacrifices, for no doubt but they make God kind and propitious
to us, and incline him to have Mercy upon us; and the blessed Eucharist as it
exhibits to us all the graces and benefits which Christ has by his death
purchased for us, whereof Pardon and Remission of fin which is hereby sealed to
us, is a very great one, so far may be called propitiatory, and it may be
instituted for the Remission of sin, so far as it is to apply to us the virtue
of Christ's body and blood and make us partakers of his sacrifice upon the
Cross, but this it may do as it is a Sacrament without being any sacrifice,
much less without being a propitiatory one as the Council of Trent has
determined it, to be truly propitiatory Vere propitiatorium esse, hujus quippe
oblatione placatus Dominus. Council. Trident. Sest. 6. c. 2.
by the oblation of which God is appeased, and this in opposition to a
sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving Si quis dixerit Missaesacrificium tantum
esse laudis and gratiarum actionis -- non autem propitiatorium, Ib. Can. 3.
Now as it is a sacrifice of Praise and spiritual Devotion, it is no doubt, in
the Bishop of Meaux's words, acceptable to God and makes him look upon us with
a more propitious eye Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, p. 35.
Is this then all the meaning of its being propitiatory? Did ever any
Protestant deny it to be thus? And is not this to explain away the true meaning
of the word, and to give up the Controversy? The true notion of a propitiatory
sacrifice is this, that it suffers a vicarious punishment in another stead,
that by it the punishment is transferred from the offender to that, and so he
is discharged from it, and God is pleased for the sake of that not to be angry
but kind and propitious to him; this I think cannot be denied, and let us see
if this will fit to the Eucharist; If Christ be really present there, yet does
he suffer any punishment there in our stead? does he pay any price there for
our sins? If not, there cannot be any true propitiation then made, nor can the
sacrifice be truly propitiatory; Christ did once upon the Cross, where he
suffered as our (...) a vicarious punishment for our sins by his one oblation
of himself once offered make a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice for the
sins of the whole World Prayer of Consecrat. in Commun. Serve.
, and Bellarmine is forced to own, That it is the sacrifice of the Cross, is
properly meritorious and satisfactory, because Christ when he was then mortal
could merit and satisfy, but the sacrifice of the Mass is properly only
impetratory, for Christ being now immortal can neither merit nor satisfy Nam
sacificium crucis fait meritorium, satisfactorium and impetratorium vere and
proprie, quia Christus tunc mortalis erat and mereri ac satisfacere poterat,
sacrificium Missae proprie solum est Impetratorium quia Christus nunc
immortalis nec mereri nec satisfacere potest. Bellarm. de Missa l. 2. c. 4. C.
. Thus truth will out at last, though there be never so much art used to stifle
and conceal it, and this is very fairly to give up the question, and surrender
the cause; for he owns it is not properly propitiatory and gives a very good
reason for it, because Christ in his immortal state cannot merit or satisfy or
be a true propitiation for us; the Bishop of Meaux was aware of this and
therefore he makes Christ's presence upon the Altar to be not a propitiation,
but a powerful Intercession before God for all mankind, according to the saying
of the Apostle that Jesus Christ presents himself, and appears for us before
the face of God, Heb. 9.24. So that Christ being present upon the holy Table
under this figure of death, intercedes for us, and represents continually to
his Father that death which he has suffered for his Church Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.
. But how comes this Intercession of Christ to be upon Earth? Is it not to be
in heaven, and is not Christ there to appear in the presence of God for us? Is
not Christ entered into the heavens for that purpose as the High Priest went
into the Holy of Holies with the blood of the great sacrifice of Atonement
after that was offered upon the Altar? Does not the Apostle thus represent it
in that place in allusion, and with relation to that Jewish Economy, and could
any but Monsieur de Meaux have brought that place to show that Christ
intercedes for us by being present upon the Altar, when the Apostles discourse
is as directly contrary to that as can be, and makes him to appear only in
Heaven, or in the presence of God for us, and there present himself and his
sacrifice to God, as the Jewish High Priest carried the blood of the
Anniversary sacrifice of Expiation into the Holy of Holies, and there sprinkled
it before the Mercy-seat. Christ is not entered into the holy place made with
hands which are the figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear
in the presence of God for us. Christ therefore making Intercession for us only
in heaven and propitiation only upon the Cross, how the sacrifice of the Mass
should be either Intercessory, which is a new way of de Meaux's or propitiatory
as the Council of Trent has determined it, I cannot understand. Some of them
tell us it is propitiatory only relatively, and by application as it relates
and applies to us the propitiatory virtue of the sacrifice of the Cross, but
this it may do as a Sacrament, and then it is not propitiatory in it self, for
sins, for punishments, and for satisfactions, as the Council declares it, and
as propitiatory sacrifices used to be, which were in themselves (...),
satisfactory payments and prices for sins, and for the punishments due to them.
Bellarmin having owned it not to be properly propitiatory, he says, Cum autem
dicitur propitiatorium vel satisfactorium id est intelligendum ratione rei quae
impetratur, dicitur enim propitiatorium quia impetrat remissionem culpae,
satisfactorium quia impetrat remissionem poenae. Bellarm. de Miss. l. 2. c. 4.
C.
When it is called propitiatory or satisfactory, this is to be understood by
reason of the thing which is impetrated by it, for it is said to be
Propitiatory, because it impetrates Remission of sin; Satisfactory because it
impetrates Remission of punishment: But thus our Prayers may be said to be
propitiatory because by them we beg and obtain Mercy and Pardon at the hands of
God, but a propitiatory sacrifice is to do this not only by way of petition and
impetration but by way of price, and payment, and satisfaction; so that after
all this improper sacrifice of the Mass is but very improperly propitiatory,
and when they come closely to consider it they are forced to confess so, and
cannot tell how to make out their Councils Doctrine, that it is truly
propitiatory for sins and for punishments.

5. Let us consider next how it is impetratory, if they mean only that it is so
upon the account of those Prayers which are there made, and which are more
efficacious in that solemn office of Religion, as the Eucharist has relation to
the Cross, and the sacrifice of Christ upon it, which is the foundation of all
our Prayers, and by virtue of which we hope to have them heard and answered by
God, so in that solemn, Religious and express memorial of it, we may suppose
them to have a greater virtue and efficacy; if this be all they mean, who will
deny it, and why may not this be without the Eucharist's being a sacrifice,
it is only Christ's sacrifice and offering upon the Cross that gives virtue and
power to our prayers at that time when we are devoutly celebrating the
remembrance of it, and it is not any offering of him up then any otherwise then
by Faith and the inward devotion of our Mind that makes our prayers the more
powerful either for our selves or others.

We are to make Prayers and Supplications for all men, and for theirs and our
own wants and necessities in this solemn and public office of our Religion,
and so did the first Christians pray then for Kings and all that were in
Authority as the Apostle commands, and as we find they did at large in St.
Cyril Catech. Mystag. 5.
, and the Apostolic Constitutions l. 8. c. 12.
, and it was in the Sacrament they used their Litanies or general Supplications
for all men, and for all things; as is evident beyond all dispute from those
places where they prayed not only for the Church and the Bishops, Presbyters,
and Deacons, and all the faithful, but for the King or the Emperor where they
lived, for the City and all its inhabitants, for the sick, for the Captives and
banished, for all that Traveled by Sea or by Land, and so for all things, for
the peace of the Church and for the quiet of the Empire, and for all temporal
mercies, as well as spiritual, for the fruits of the Earth, and for the
temperature of the Air, and for all things they stood in need of. Now they did
not think the Eucharist did as a sacrifice impetrate all this, or as a real
instead of a verbal prayer as Bellarmine represents it to be Ipsa enim oblatio
tacita quaedam sed efficacissima est invocatio. Bellarm. de Miss. l. 2. c. 8. B.
; but they made particular and express prayers for these in the Eucharist, and
did not think that was to supply the place of prayer or be a prayer in action,
or in dumb signs instead of words, neither did the primitive Church ever say a
Mass for to quench a fire or stay an Earthquake, much less to cure the Murrain
in Cattle, or to recover a Sheep, or a Cow, or Horse when they were sick, as is
scandalously and shamefully done by those who ascribe such an impetratory power
to it that it shall do the work in all cases.

6. To make it a sacrifice truly propitiatory in its self and yet only
applicatory of the virtue of another sacrifice is, if not a contradiction, yet
a great absurdity, for if it only apply the virtue and efficacy of another
sacrifice, viz. That of the Cross, which is the only sacrifice of Redemption
that made true expiation for sin, how can this then be called truly
propitiatory, if only that other be propitiatory and this is but applicatory of
that other? A certain (...) or infallible medicine for all Diseases is given
and applied to us by such a vehicle, is the vehicle therefore that applies this
the Medicine it self? Or has that an infallible virtue because the Medicine
that is applied by it has such a virtue? Is laying on a Plaster or applying it
to the wound the same thing with the Plaster it self that was made up or
compounded long before? If the Mass-sacrifice be truly propitiatory it must be
a sacrifice of Redemption, if it be only Applicatory, and not a sacrifice of
Redemption in it self then it is not truly propitiatory. The Eucharist we all
say does apply to us the sacrifice of the Cross, or the benefits of Christ's
death as it is a Sacrament, but it is not therefore propitiatory as it is such,
nor is it any way necessary it should, and as a sacrifice it cannot be
applicatory, for it must be offered to God, and therefore as such it could not
apply any thing to us, for our giving it up or sacrificing it to God is quite
another thing and very different from Gods giving or applying it to us. God
gives Christ's body and blood to us in the Eucharist as it is a Sacrament, but
as it is a sacrifice we must give it to him, and that would be as strange a way
of applying it to our selves, as a Patients returning his Physic or making a
present of it to the Doctor, would be a new and strange method of taking it
himself. And that the Priests intention should apply this is still as strange,
for the Priests intention in the Mass is to consecrate and so to sacrifice, and
that is giving the thing to God and not applying it to others; if he gives them
the sacrament indeed to eat then he applies the sacrifice of Christ's body and
blood to them; but how he can do this when he does not give it them but only
give it to God, that is, sacrifice it, I do not understand: The Jews had the
virtue of their sacrifices applied to them by eating of them, or by having the
blood sprinkled upon them or by some such Ceremony to make them partakers of
them, but that another sacrifice was offered or the same sacrifice reiterated
in order to applying of them is a thing unknown and unheard of Christ's
sacrifice is applied to us by the sacrament of Baptism and therefore that also
is called a sacrifice as it both represents Christ's death, and confers to us
the benefits of it, thus Chrysostom expounds that place of Scripture there
remains no more sacrifice for sin Heb. 10.26.
, that is, he can be no more baptized Chrysostom. Homil. 16. in Epist. ad Hebr.
, and Bishop Canus says, hinc illi (antiqui) baptisma translatitie hostiam
nuncuparunt. Can. loci commun. l. 2. c. 12.
the ancients from hence called Baptism a sacrifice, but figuratively, and not
properly, and just thus indeed they called the Eucharist: Bellarmine was so
sensible that this would destroy the notion of the Eucharists being a proper
sacrifice, that he absolutely denies that Nusquam Patres haptismum vocant
sacrificium, hostiam -- Bellarm. de Miss. l. 1. c. 15.
the Fathers do ever call baptism a sacrifice, but he is shamefully mistaken,
as appears from the confession of Bishop Canus, and because I will not wholly
depend upon that I will produce one or two plain Authorities for it out of St.
Austin, Holocaustum Dominicae passionis eo tempore pro se quisque offert, quo
ejusdem Passionis fide dedicatur. August. in Exposit. ad Roman.
Every one, says he, does offer for himself the sacrifice of Christ's passion,
at that time when he is dedicated in the Faith of his passion. And the
sacrifice of our Lord is in a certain manner offered for every one then when in
his name he is signed by Baptism Holocaustum Domini tunc pro unoquoque offertur
quodammodo cum ejus nomine baptizando signatur. Ib.
. Baptism is then called a sacrifice as well as the Eucharist, though it is
only properly a Sacrament, and the sacrifice of Christ is there plainly applied
to us without a sacrifice, and so it may be as well in the Eucharist.

7. They suppose it to be the same sacrifice with that of the Cross, but not to
have the same virtue and efficiency, which as Bellarmin says, seems very
strange mirum videtur cur valor sacrificii hujus sit finitus, cum idem sit hoc
sacrificium cum sacrificio crucis. Bellarm. de Miss. l. 2. c. 4. F.
, for the Council of Trent declares it to be one and the same sacrifice with
that of the Cross, and one and the same offerer namely Christ by the Ministry
of the Priests, and to be differing in nothing but in the manner of offering
Vna enim eademque est hostia idemque offerens sacerdotum ministerio -- sola
offerendi ratione diversa. Council. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 2.
. Now if the manner of offering be not such as makes it a sacrifice, it can be
no sacrifice at all, if it be, it can make no difference as to its value and
efficacy, for it is not the way of offering but the worth of the thing offered
that gives value to the sacrifice. The Beasts were slain upon an Altar and had
their blood spilt there as Christ's was upon the Cross, but his being the blood
of a person of the greatest dignity even of the Son of God, this made his
sacrifice once offered to be of infinite value and efficacy, and sufficient to
propitiate God and make expiation for all the sins of the World, now if the
same sacrifice be as truly offered in the Mass though not after the same
manner, and Christ does by the hands of the Priest as truly offer himself there
as he did upon the Cross, why should not this be of as infinite value and
efficiency as the other, but if it were says Bellarmine, what need so many
Masses be offered for the same thing Nam si Missae valor infinitus esset,
frustra multae Missae praesertim ad rem eandem impetrandam offerrentur. Ib.
, so many thousand for example to get a soul out of Purgatory, which if it were
not, it would quite spoil the market and utterly destroy the Trade of them; but
surely this is but like paying the same full sum of a debt so many times
over, when one payment amounts to the whole, and it is but the same is brought
so many times again; It is to be feared that it is not accepted by God or else
it need not be so often tendered, and paid again and again so many several
times, but as Bellarmine says, both the sacrifice it self, and Christ who then
offers it are infinitely acceptable to God Ipsa hostia and offerens Christus
infinito modo sunt Deo grata. Ib.
. What account then can be given of this? He is the most miserably put to it
that ever good guesser was at this unaccountable thing, and with a salvo to
better judgment Videntur mihi, salvo meliore judicio, tres esse causae hujus
rei. Bellarm. de Miss. l. 2. c. 4. F.
, which is a squeamish piece of modesty that he is seldom guilty of at other
times, he offers at three reasons, though he owns the cause of it is not
certain Causa non est adeo certa. Ib.
. The first is, in respect of the sacrifice it self which is offered, in the
sacrifice of the cross, says he, Christ in his very-natural being, and human
form was destroyed, but it is only his sacramental being is so in the Eucharist
Prima sumitur ex part hostiae quae offertur, nam in sacrificio destruebatur ad
honorem Dei ipsum esse natural Christi in forma humana, in sacrificio Missae
destruitur tantum esse sacramentale. Ib.
, but Christ I hope is as much in his natural being in the Eucharist as he was
upon the cross, else what becomes of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; and he
is offered as truly to God in his natural being there, why should not then his
natural being be as valuable in the one as in the other, if his natural beings
not being destroyed there makes it to be no true sacrifice as one would think
he had it here in his thoughts, then indeed he gives a good and a true reason
why the one is not a sacrifice nor upon that account so valuable as the other,
but for fear of that he quits this reason and goes to the next, which is,
Secunda sumitur ex part offerentis, nam in sacrificio crucis offerens est ipsa
persona filii Dei per se at in sacrificio Missae offerens est filius Dei per
ministrum. Ib.
in respect of the offerer, because in the one the offerer is the very person
of the Son of God by himself, but in the other the offerer is the Son of God by
his Minister, but surely if the oblation be the same, of the same worth and
value, the offerer will by no means lessen and diminish it, and how often do
they tell us that Christ himself is the offerer of the sacrifice of the Mass,
when we charge them with the great boldness and presumption of having a mortal
man offer up Christ, and so consequently purchase our Redemption, and make
propitiation for sin, which none but Christ can do; to avoid this the Bishop of
Meaux says, That Christ being present upon the Table effers up himself to God
for us in the Eucharist Exposition of the doctrine of the Catholic Church.
. So that the Priest is only to set him upon the Table according to him by the
words of consecration, and then Christ offers up himself to God, and Christ
being present upon the holy Table under this figure of Death, intercedes for
us, and represents continually to his Father that death which he has suffered
for his Church Ib.
. And the Council of Trent says, It is the same offerer as well as the same
sacrifice that was upon the cross, and the difference between that and the
sacrifice of the Mass is not at all upon the account of the offerer, but only
the manner of offering Vna eademque hostia, idemque offerens, sola offerendi
ratione diversa. Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 2.
. This therefore can be no true reason of the different value of the two
sacrifices and oblations.

The Third is taken from the will of Christ, for though Christ Tertia ratio
sumitur ex ipsa Christi voluntate, nam etiamsi possit Christus per unam
oblationem sacrificii incruenti sive per se, sive per ministrum oblati
quaelibet a Deo and pro quibuscunque impetrare, tamen noluit petere nec
impetrare nisi ut pro singulis ^olationibus applicetur certa mensura fructus
passionis suae sive ad peccati remissionem sive ad alia beneficia, quibus in
hac vita indigemus. Bella. de Miss. l. 2 c. 4. H.
could by one oblation offered either by himself or his minister obtain any
thing or for any person, yet he would not otherwise desire or impetrate this,
but only that in every oblation a certain measure of the fruit of his passion
be applied either to Remission of sin, or to other benefits which we want in
this Life, but where does this will of Christ appear? Christ may dispose of his
merits and the fruits of his passion as he pleases, but how do they know that
he intends thus to parcel them out, and to distribute them in such small
measures and scantlings as they think fit and as serves only for their purpose?
If the sacrifice and oblation be the same, it ought to be without doubt of the
same infinite value with that upon the Cross, and though it be very bold and
precarious to guess at Christ's will without some declaration of it from
himself, yet I cannot see how it was possible that it should be Christ's will to
have it the same sacrifice, and yet not have the same virtue, which is as if a
Physician should have an Universal Medicine, that by once taking would
certainly cure all Diseases whatever, and yet should for some reasons so order
the matter that the very same Medicine should if he pleased have only a limited
virtue, and cure but one Disease at a time, or only some lesser and smaller
illnesses, and that even for those it must be often taken; This would certainly
bring a suspicion either upon his Medicine or himself, and no body but would
doubt either that it had not such a virtue in it at first, or that it was not
the same afterward, nor made truly by him as he pretended.

8. They make the Priest in the Mass-sacrifice, to do all in the name of
Christ, and to act as his Agent and Deputy, and so they say it is the same
Priest who offers, as well as the same Sacrifice which was offered upon the
Cross, and that he pronounces those words of Consecration, This is my Body in
Christ's name, not by an Historical reciting of them, but as speaking
authoritatively in the Person of Christ himself, and that this makes the
Sacrifice great and valuable, as it is thus offered to God by Christ himself. I
ask then whether all the sacrificial Acts in the Mass, are performed by Christ?
Does Christ consecrate his own Body? for Consecration is the most principal
part of the sacrificing Action, if not the whole of it; or if as some think,
the Consumption of the Sacrifice is the great thing that makes it perfect and
consummate, I ask whether Christ does then eat his own Body every Mass, when it
is eaten by the Priest; If as Bellarmine owns the Consumption of the Sacrifice
be absolutely necessary to make a sacrificial Oblation, and the true Offerer be
Christ himself, as the Council of Trent says, then Christ himself must consume
the sacrifice, that is, he must eat his own body: Bellarmine is really pincht
with this difficulty, and he has so wisely managed the matter, that as he
brought himself into this straight, so he knows not how to get out of it, but
he is forced to confess, Tamen ipse dici potest consumere sacramentum. Bellarm.
de Miss. l. 1. c. 27.
That Christ may in some sense be said to consume the Sacrament, i. e. himself,
for it is Christ's body and blood is the Sacrament, and not the species, at least
not without those. We always thought it a prodigious if not a horrid thing for
another to consume Christ's real body, but now for Christ himself to be made to
do this, is to expose, Christ shall I say? or themselves? or that cause which
is driven to these Absurdities, and which can never avoid them whilst it makes
the Mass a true sacrifice, and Christ himself the offerer of it.

9. The Offering this Sacrifice to redeem souls out of Purgatory, as it is made
one of the greatest ends and uses of this Sacrifice of the Mass, so is one of
the greatest Errors and Abuses that belong to it, for besides that it contains
in it all the foregoing Errors and Absurdities of its being a proper Sacrifice,
and so benefitting those who do not at all receive it as a Sacrament, and being
properly propitiatory at least for lesser sins, and for the temporal pains that
they suppose due to greater sins after they are forgiven, which is another
cluster of Errors that grows likewise to this Doctrine, though it belongs to
another place to consider them. I say besides all those Errors it takes in also
the groundless and uncomfortable and erroneous opinion of Purgatory, whereby a
great many departed Souls are supposed to be in a sad state of extreme pain and
torment till they are delivered from it by these Masses and sacrifices which
are offered for them to that purpose. And this is indeed the great advantage of
them, I mean to the Priests that offer them, who hereby make Merchandise not
only of the Souls of Men, but of Christ's Body and Blood, and are made by this
sacrifice a sort of Mony-changers in the Temple, and instead of Doves sell
Christ himself, and the souls in Purgatory are redeemed out of it by such
corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, which are to purchase Masses, that is,
Christ's body and blood at a certain price. This is a most horrible abuse of
Christianity, which exposes it to infinite scandal and reproach, the selling of
Masses and Indulgences is so visible a blot in Popery that though nothing has
more enriched, yet nothing has more shamed it then these have done; both those
have relation to Purgatory which is an unknown Country in the other World,
that has given rise to those two profitable Trades and to all that spiritual
Traffic that is carried on by it. A Late excellent discourse has so fully
considered that subject, that I am no further to meddle with it here then as
the sacrifice of the Mass is concerned in it. Our Adversaries most plausible
and specious pretense for both those Doctrines is taken from the ancient custom
of oblations for the Dead, which cannot be denied to be of great antiquity and
general use even very near the beginnings of Christianity, and to have had a
long continuance in the Christian Church. Tertullian mentions them as made on
every Anniversary of their birth Oblationes pro defunctis pronatalitiis annua
die facimus. Tertul. de Corona militis, c. 3.
, i. e. on the day wherein they died to this World, and were born into
immortality. St. Cyprian speaks of them as so generally used for all persons,
that it was made the punishment of him who should leave a Clergyman his
Executor, and so take him off from his sacred employment to secular Troubles
and Affairs, that Ac siquis hoc fecisset non offerretur pro eo nec sacrificium
pro dormitione ejus celebraretur. Cyprian Epist. l. 1. Edit. Ox.
no offering should be made for him, neither should any sacrifice be celebrated
for his departure, Episcopi antecessores nostri religiose considerantes and
salubriter providentes censuerunt nequis frater excedens adtutelam vel curam
Clericum nominaret, etc. Ib. Contra formam nuper in Concilio a Sacerdotibus
datam.
and this was an Order, he says, made by former Bishops in Council, and
therefore he commands that Geminius Victor, who had made Geminius Faustinus
Tutor to his Will, or his Executor, Non est quod pro dormitione ejus apud vos
fiat oblatio, aut deprecatio aliqua nomine ejus in Ecclesia frequentetur, Ib.
should have no oblation made for his departure nor any Prayer used in his name
in the Church. St. Austin gives it in as the custom of the Universal Church in
his time, that a sacrifice was offered for the dead, Non parva est Ecclesiae
Vniversae quae in hac consuetudine claret, authoritas --, si nunquam in
Scripturis veteribus scriptum legeretur -- sc. oblatum pro mortuis sacrificium,
August. cura pro mortuis.
and this, he says, is sufficient authority for it, though there were nothing
of it in Scripture; and having shown that what happens to the dead body is of
no concern to the departed soul, Non existimemus ad mortuos pro quibus curam
gerimus pervenire, nisi quod pro eis sive altaris, sive orationum sive
eleemosynarum sacrifi^iis soleaniter supplicamus. Ib. versus finem.
none of our care, says he, can reach the dead but only that we supplicate for
them by the sacrifices of the Altar, of Prayers or of Alms, and the same thing
he mentions in several other places of his works, and in his own oblations at
the Altar for his Mother Monica after she was dead. Now what can we think of
these Oblations unless with the Papists we allow such a state of departed souls
as they call Purgatory, that is, neither Heaven nor Hell; for if they were
either in the one or the other of those, these oblations would signify nothing
to them, and how plain is it that they thought them to be some way benefitted
or relieved by the sacrifice of the Mass or Altar. I answer that neither of
those Opinions as they are now held, and received in the Church of Rome do
follow from the Primitive Custom of offering for the Dead, but that they were
of another nature then what they account them, and this I shall evince from the
following considerations.

1. Then these Oblations were made for departed Souls who were not supposed to
be in a state of pain, as they now believe Purgatory to be, but in a state of
ease and happiness, as St. Austin believed his Mother to be when he offered for
her, and when he prayed for her, and credo qu^^ jam feceris quod te rego, sed
voluntaria oris mei approba Domine, August. Confess. l. 9. c. 12.
he did believe that God had already granted her what he prayed for, but he
begged him to accept these free Will offerings of his mouth. It was not then a
doubt of her state but only the voluntary expressions of his Love and Duty
which he designed by his Prayers and Oblations for her, and those Olations were
made even for Saints and Martyrs, and the most holy Christians of whose future
happiness there was no manner of question, and for all indeed who dyed in the
Communion of the Church. And therefore

2. They were an honorary Testimony given to them of their good state, and of
their dying in the Peace and Communion of the Church: to have their names
recited at the Altar service out of the Diptychs or folded Tables was an
honorary memorial and mention of them as members of the Church, and 'twas a
disowning them as such to expunge, or blot their names out of those Diptychs;
and so the making or receiving Oblations for them at the Altar, was an
acknowledgment of their right to the Altar, and to the Christian Communion, and
therefore no oblations were received of the (...) and (...) of those who were
not Communicants, or had not a right to Communion, of those who were guilty of
scandalous sins or of those who were in a state of Penance for them, as may be
seen in the Apostolic Constitutions l. 4. c. 5. l. 3. c. 8.
, and in one of the most ancient Councils, Episcopum placuit ab eo qui non
communicate, munera accipere non debere. Council. Eliber. c. 28.
which forbids the Bishop to take oblations from him who does not communicate.
Petavius has largely made this out in his Notes on Epiphanius Animadvers. in
Epiphan. Exposit. fid.
and produces a Council which provides Council. Vasense. Ib.
that the Oblations of those penitents should be received, who were surprised
by a sudden death in a journey. Which was a receiving them into the Churches
Communion, quasi ex Postliminio.

3. By having these Oblations received and offered for them they were made
partakers of the prayers that were made for them at the Altar: what ever
benefit these prayers were believed to be of to departed souls, which I am not
here to examine, that did accrue to them by having these oblations made and
received for them; for by this means they were particularly mentioned and
recommended in the Prayers at the Altar, and thus both Tertullian, St. Cyprian
and St. Austin explain the sacrifices and oblations which they mention as made
for the dead. Vxor pro anima desuncti maritiorat and ossert annuis diebus
dormitionis ejus. Tertull. de Monogam.
The Wife prays for her husbands soul and offers on his Anniversary. And again,
Neque enim ad altar meretur nominari in sacerdotum prece qui ab altari
sacerdotes and ministros suos avocari voluit. Cypr. Ep. 1.
He deserves not to be named in the prayer of the Priests at the Altar of God,
who takes off Gods ministers from the Altar, in the forementioned case of
making a Clergyman Executor. Vbi in precibus sacerdotis quae Domino Deo ad
ejus altar funduntur, locum suum habet etiam commendatio mortuorum. August.
cura pro mortuis.
And in the prayers of the Priest which are poured out to God at his Altar, the
commendation of the dead has place. So that the good they had by these
oblations was upon the account of these Prayers, and not by any virtue in these
oblations as they were a sacrifice, distinct from the benefit of the Prayers;
as they were Alms indeed together with prayers they thought the dead benefitted
by them together with the prayers, and so St. Austin in the fore-quoted place
mentions the sacrifices of the Altar which he explains by prayers and Alms,
both which he calls sacrifices sive altaris, sive orationum, sive eleemosynarum
sacrificiis supplicamus. ut supra.
, but not in a proper and strict sense as our Adversaries must acknowledge. For
these sacrifices I hope were not true and proper ones such as the sacrifice of
the Mass is held to be, nor were they properly propitiatory for their sins, nor
did the Ancients who prayed for the dead at the Altar and made oblations for
them, think that these oblations were properly propitiatory, or satisfactory
for their sins, as the Church of Rome believes the sacrifice of Mass now to be:
there is nothing that amounts to this in any of those places where they speak
of offerings for the dead, nor would St. Cyprian or the Bishops who ordained in
Council that no offerings should be made for him who appointed a Clergyman
Executor to his Will, have inflicted so severe a punishment upon so small a
fault, had they thought this would have deprived his soul of a true and real
propitiation for his sins, nor would blotting out of the Diptychs have been so
commonly put in use, had this been consigning the soul to the punishments of
another World.

There was therefore no such thing meant as our Adversaries would now draw from
that ancient custom of Oblations for the Dead; and yet that this quickly
degenerated into superstition and has been farther improved in aftertimes and
is now come to very great perfection in the Roman Church we willingly own; and
that the first beginnings of this were laid in this unscriptural custom, as
the Worship of Saints was from the Anniversary memory of the Martyrs is not to
be denied: But corruptions in Religion like Diseases in the body might proceed
at first from very small causes, but by neglect and carelessness grow
oftentimes very great and dangerous, especially when the Physicians that should
have cured them, thought it for their purpose and interest rather to heighten
and increase them.

10. The sacrifice of the Mass must either be unnecessary, or else must reflect
on the sacrifice of the Cross, if it be not necessary for obtaining the pardon
and remission of any sin, or for the relief of any spiritual want and necessity
for which there has been no provision made by the sacrifice of the cross, then
it is wholly useless and unprofitable; if it be necessary for any such purpose
then the sacrifice of the cross is not perfect and sufficient for all those
ends, but requires this sacrifice of the Mass to make up what is lacking, and
behind of the sufferings of Christ upon the cross, which is a great diminution
to the infinite value of them. It is impossible to avoid these inconveniences,
for if the merit of the cross be so great as to expiate all manner of sin, and
to take away all kinds of punishment that are due to it, and to supply all the
spiritual wants and necessities whatever of all Christians, then what possible
need can there be of any other sacrifice? And if Christ's sacrifice once offered
upon the cross can do all this, why should there be any new offering or any
reiteration of the same sacrifice, when by being once offered it has done the
whole business that it can do were it offered never so often: but if there be
any kinds of sins, which because they are daily committed by us therefore
require a daily sacrifice, as they pretend, to be offered for them, which
implies that the constant and abiding virtue of the cross cannot reach them,
which is yet as efficacious to all Christians now as the first day it was
offered, or as it could be if it were offered every day by Christ himself; or
if there be any such temporal remains of punishment after the eternal guilt of
them is pardoned, which are not discharged by Christ's sacrifice upon the Cross,
but there is this small Handwriting still however against us and continues
uncancelled notwithstanding the Death of Christ, then we are not perfectly
redeemed from all punishment, and from the whole Curse of the Law by the
sacrifice of the cross, but there is something more necessary to deliver and
save us if not from Hell yet from Purgatory, and whatever Christ has done for
us yet the Mass sacrifice must still help us, not as an instrument of Religion
to work upon us and make us better, but as a sacrifice to God to prevail with
him to free us from punishment, or else we are in a miserable condition, which
is the true contrivance of the sacrifice of the Mass, that necessarily renders
it very injurious to the most perfect and sufficient sacrifice of the cross.

I might add many other Errors belonging to this Doctrine of the sacrifice of
the Mass, such as saying their Masses in an unknown Tongue, putting confidence
in the mere opus operatum, offering up Masses to the honor of the Saints, and
the like, but those do more properly fall under other heads of controversy,
and are the peculiar subjects of other Treatises that are written on purpose
upon those matters; for though these all run into this Doctrine of the
sacrifice of the Mass, which is the great Lake into which most of the Popish
Errors empty themselves, yet the first head and rise of them is not from hence,
and so I shall not take them in here.

The Mass sacrifice contains in it a whole Legion of Errors, but it is only the
principal one which I have endeavored by this Discourse to cast out, and that
is its being a proper and truly propitiatory sacrifice, which I have shown to
be founded upon two monstrous Errors, to have no true foundation in Scripture,
nor no just claim to Antiquity, but to be plainly contrary to both those, and
to be in it self very absurd and Unreasonable, which is enough in conscience
against any one Doctrine or any Church that maintains it, however Infallible
they may both of them pretend to be, if this be clearly and strongly made out
against them, as has been Attempted in this Treatise.

FINIS.
Books Sold by Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil.
A Discourse concerning the Adoration of the Host, as it is Taught and
Practiced in the Church of Rome; Wherein an Answer is given to T. G. on that
Subject, And to Monsieur Boleau 's late Book, De Adoratione Eucharist.

A Discourse of the Communion in One Kind: In Answer to a Treatise of the
Bishop of Meaux 's, of Communion of both Species.

An Answer to a Book, Entitled, Reason and Authority: Or the Motives of a Late
Protestant's Reconciliation to the Catholic Church: Together with a brief
Account of Augustine the Monk, and Conversion of the English.

A Request to Roman Catholics, To Answer the Queries upon these their
following Tenets. Sect. 1. Their Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue. 2. Their
taking away the Cup from the People. 3. Their withholding the Scriptures from
the Laics. 4. The Adoration of Images. 5. The Invocation of Saints and Angels.
6. The Doctrine of Merit. 7. Purgatory. 8. Their Seven Sacraments. 9. Their
Priests Intention in Baptism. 10. The Limbo of unbaptized Infants. 11.
Transubstantiation. 12. The Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass. 13. Private
Masses. 14. The Sacrament of Penance. 15. The Sacrament of Marriage, with the
Clergies Restraint therefrom. 16. Their Sacrament of extreme Unction. 17.
Tradition. 18. That Thredbare Question, Where was your Church before Luther?
19. The Infallibility of the Pope with his Councils. 20. The Pope's Supremacy.
21. The Pope's Deposing Power. 22. Their Incharitableness to all other
Christians.


