A LETTER FROM Dr. P to the Bishop of R -- IN VINDICATION OF HIS SERMON ON
Trinity Sunday.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Cumberland, at the Angel in St. Paul's-Church
Yard, 1696

A LETTER, etc.
My Lord,
I Was amazed at such a Letter as I received from your Lordship, and some of my
Brethren: -- I assure your Lordship, I have as hearty Designs to serve God, and
Religion, and the Church too, as any of you, and aimed at nothing else in my
Sermon, but to vindicate Christianity, and our common Faith, from the bold
Objections of some modern Deists and Socinians, and particularly from a late
Book called, Christianity not Mysterious. I perceived at our first Meeting,
that few of my Brethren then present, had troubled themselves with those
things, or with the reading those sorts of Books, so much as my self, and
therefore could not so well Judge either of the manner how, or the reason why,
they should be answered: When I am satisfied that it is for the Honor of God,
and the Service of Christianity, as well as for the peace and safety of the
Church, not to consider or answer our Adversaries, but to let them write on,
and triumph on the ruins of our Christian Faith; I will take up, and live by
the wise and quiet rules of the Monk, (whether of Wirtenberg or Westminster)
not to trouble my self or the World with impertinent Studying, or Writing, but
to go oftener into the Cellar, or the Refectory, than into Library. But I was
unhappily put upon examining, and managing this Controversy, as formerly the
Popish, by my Superiors of the greatest Note and Eminence; and my present Lord
of Canterbury lately desired me to answer the fore mentioned Book of Mr.
Toland's, and 'twas against this I chiefly directed my Sermon, and that with a
design to publish it. In order to these ends I applied my self to consult, and
read carefully the best Antiquity, from whence I have taken all my Thoughts and
Notions about those Matters; and this I suppose to be the best Method, to take
the Controversy as it lies there, before it fell into the Hands of Nice School
men, who perplex and entangle every thing. I am very willing to learn further
of my more learned Brethren of Westminster, but am loath to be injured by the
Mistakes and Misunderstandings of any, and indeed of One or Two of them, from
whence your Lordship and others have received some mistaken Accounts, and undue
Prejudices against my Sermon on Trinity Sunday; they, it seems, had drawn up a
Paper, and were ordered to write to me, and to acquaint me with those things
that were objected against it, and this was a fair and right Method; and since
you were not satisfied with what we talked, as I thought you had, I desired
this might be pursued; but upon this, your Lordship and they thought fit, for
some secret Reasons, to alter these Measures at another Meeting, which had been
agreed on before; so that I cannot have the favor to get a Copy or sight of
that Paper, but am informed by those who saw it, that it is about these Three
things, The Quotation out of Bishop Pierson, the word Equivocal, and something
about Specifical and Numerical Essence; which latter was never mentioned (...).
Theod. Abncara, quoted by Bishop Pierson, and to be found in Bibli. Patr.
Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesians.


(...).

Et sic tenus Deus Pater ostenditur, Iren. L. 5.
qui est super omnia, and per omnia, and in omnibus, super omnia quidem Pater,
and Ipse est Caput Christi.

(...). Athanas. contr. Sabel. Gregal. -- ad Adelp. -- ad Serap.


(...).

(...).

(...). De Sp. Sancti Basil. O^a^. 27. contra Sabell. Greg. Naz. O^at. 29.


(...).

(...). Epiphan. Haeres. 57.


(...). Eusebius. de Eccl. Theol. l. 1. c. 11. Ib. Id. l. 1. c. 17. Id. l. 2. c. 7.


(...).

(...).

(...).

Ideo autem dicitur Deus Pater quia ipse est ex quo -- Ambros. de dignat. Con.
Hu.


Non enim Patri adimitur quod Deus Unus est, Hilar. de Trin. c. 1.
quia and Filius Deus sit, ob id unus Deus quia ex se Deus. August. de Trin. l.
6. c. 9.


-- Tanquam hoc insinuare voluerit, (Joh. 17.3. qua solus Pater verus Deus est.

-- Hinc Justino, Bull. Defens. Fid. Nican. p. 433.
caeterisq. scriptoribus Ante-Nicaenis solenne est Deum Patrem (...) appellare
nunc Deum absolute, nunc unum illum Deum, nunc Deum Patrem juxta Scripturas, 1
Cor. 8.4. Ephesians. 4.6. Joan. 17.3.

Deniq. veteres Deum Patrem eo quod Principium Causa, Id. p. 438.
Auctor and Fons Eilii sit, Unum illum, and solum appellare non sunt veriti,
sic enim ipsi Patres Nicaeni, etc.

Unus enim Deus ac Pater omnium appellatur, Petav. Dog. Theol. l. 3. c. 4.
Ep. 4.6. propter Originis ac Principii praerogativam.

Ingenue tradimus (...) Dei nomen Patri proprie ascribi. Calv. in Proth. Va^e^t
Gent. Z^^^. de tribus Eloh. l. 5. c. 5
Patrem sic vocari Unum, and solum Deum (...) quia totius est Deitatis sons.

Solum Patrem, and summum Deum, utpote Deitatis foutem. Con en. Resut. Irenie.
Irenie.


Christus Filium Dei se nominavit (and Deum Patrium) and non Deum, Cardinal
Cusa in Cribrat. Alcoran, l. 1 c. 11.
cum nominatio Dei sit nominatio Patris Christi.

Observandum autem est, Flac. ^^v^ic. Claris Scriptur. in Voce Deus.
quod plerumque Paulus in suis Epistolis nomen Dei Patri, Domini autem Christo
seu Edio Dei tribuit. -- Ideo quod in mysterio Redemptionis Patri summa
dignitas ut vero Deo tribuitur. -- Haec est causa quod in Novo Testamento
plerumque tantum prima Persona vocetur Deus.


in Discourse, but only the Two former; I shall therefore endeavor to give you
full satisfaction about those.

1. As to the First, The Quotation out of Bishop Pierson, to charge that as
unfaithfully made, which it seems was done, is to question not only my Honesty,
and my Understanding, but even my Eyesight too: The Words were these, The Name
of God taken absolutely, is often in Scripture spoken of the Father, and in
many Places is to be taken particularly for the Father, -- and from hence he is
styled One God, the True God, the Only True God; and this, he says further, is
a most necessary truth, for the avoiding Multiplication and Plurality of Gods,
he laying the Unity mainly here, as I have done; though I take in also Unity of
Essence and Essential Perfections, and of inseparable Emanation from the
Father, and inexistence in one another. I did not wonder at other Cavils made
against my Sermon, when I heard of that made against this Quotation: Any one
that has Bishop Pierson on the Creed by him, may examine whether those Words be
not there, and whether the Sense be any thing altered by the abreviature; but
since a Learned Elder Brother upon my repeating those Words of Bishop Pierson,
seemed to dislike what the Bishop said, and to speak against it, so that so
great a Man would hardly have escaped Censure, had he now Preached them; and
since I laid so great a stress in my Sermon upon the same Notion, That the Term
God, and one God, was predicated eminently, and absolutely of God the Father in
Scripture, and that this was observed by a great many others, as well as by
Bishop Pierson, and is a very necessary Truth, as he says, for avoiding
Multiplication, and plurality of Gods, and so for answering the Charge of
Tritheism, I shall now produce sufficient Vouchers, and undeniable Authorities
for it, and give you on the other side, some of those Quotations, which I did
not think so fit to repeat in the Pulpit, and they I hope, if duly considered,
will set this matter right, and clear both Bishop Pierson, and the Quotation
out of him, and my self, and the Notion I proposed.

2. The Second thing objected is the word Equivocal, this was the great
Offense, and indeed it was a very high one, as charged upon me, viz. That I
should say that Christ, and the Holy Ghost, were God only Equivocally; but this
is the falsest thing, and the greatest Mistake in the World; I told your
Lordship so at first, when you mentioned it to me, and I do now most solemnly
profess it to be so, even in Verbo Sacerdotis, since that has been put to me: I
cannot think any of my most prejudiced Hearers will affirm that I said those
Words, if they do, I am sure it is not true; there are not any such in my Notes,
which I showed and read quickly after to Your Lordship and Dr. B --, and also
to Dr. Br --, at Dr. H -- k's House. This I thought might have given
satisfaction to Your Lordship, and to them, and I supposed it had done so, at
the last Chapter just before I went to the Commencement. I little expected to
have heard any thing more of this again, but in my absence it seems you thought
fit to renew it, and I shrewdly guess by whose Instigation, by those who are of
late very angry, and concerned for the loss of something else, besides the
Christian Faith.

But I did use the word Equivocal, and that even about the Term God, and the
Trinity and Unity; and this sounds ill, and gave occasion to some of my
Hearers, and especially to my Two offended Brethren, as the Letter calls them,
to conceive, and to collect, for it can be no more, that I asserted that
Christ, and the Holy Ghost were God only Equivocally: I cannot help their
conceiving or imagining, or collecting this; I am sure no such Words were said
by me, nor any thing from whence any such Consequence or Collection should
follow, or be made by them, they might as well have conceived and collected,
and as truly have charged me, that I should say that God the Father was God
only Equivocally, as Christ or the Holy Ghost: There was the same Reason and
ground for this Charge from the word Equivocal, and from any thing I said about
it, as from the other, and it related as much to the one as to the other. What
I said, I read to them afterward, That the Word God, and his being One, and
Three, and when it is said, God the Father is one God, and that all the Three
persons are one God, that those Terms are not to be taken in the fame sense,
the same respect and consideration, but in different, and so are Equivocal. I
think no Orthodox Divine of Learning and Understanding in those matters will
gainsay this, nothing being more common among them, than the word God to be
taken either (...), or (...), Essentially or Personally, or sometimes Eminently
and Absolutely for God the Father, sometimes for the Divine Persons together,
and sometimes for one alone. Crellius indeed is very angry, and displeased with
these Distinctions, these different and Equivocal Senses, and he had good
reason, for they are the true and the only Answer to his labored Book, De Uno
Deo; Dixerit forte aliquis aliter accipi vocem Deus cum singulis Personis
praedicatur, aliter cum absolute ponitur; illic hypostatice sumi, seu
personaliter, hic essentialiter, equidem non crediderim acutiores ex
Adversariis sic responsuros. Crellius de Uno Deo. L. 1. S. 1. Cap. 1.

Dei nomen interdum pro Persona quapiam sumi velut prima in qua Naturae totius
est principium, interdum vero Naturam significare nulla in certa persona
subsistentem, sed in aliqua trium, vel in ipsis tribus vaga, and infinita
notione comprehensis. Petav. Dogm. Theol. L. 3. C. 3.

Dei quippe nomen alias communiter, and (...) alias secundum proprietatem
ultimi principii, atque fontis, equo cetera personae proficiscuntur. Id. L. 3.
C. 2.

Nomen Deus proprie ac direct Divinitatem, Naturamve Divinam indicat,
adsignificat autem eandem ut in quapiam persona subsistentem, nullam de tribus
express designans, sed confuse, and universe interdum vero Deus certam de
tribus personam determinat, ut Damascen observat. ut in Ps. 44. Unxit se Deus,
ubi Pater intelligitur. Id. L. 3. C. 4.

Si Pater intelligatur per Deum summum, Dei Nomen and Notionem usurpari (...)
non (...). Id. L. 3. C. 9.

Nec aliud evincunt Crelliana Sophismata quam quod ultro damus Catholici, non
esse alium Deum summum ex quo omnia, quique sit a nullo praeter Unum Patrem.
Id. L. 3. C. 2.

-- Quare solius, vel Unius and si quae sunt aliae notionis ejusdem duplicitur
usurpari possunt, aut secundum Personarum proprietatem, aut secundum communem
naturam, illo modo solus Pater Deus est. Ib.

Nam voces Jehovah, Deus, Adonai, etc. vel sumuntur proprie, and communiter and
sic nunquam vel Filius, vel Spiritus Sanctus distinguitur a Jehovah Deo, aut
Adonai, vel sumuntur, improprie, and specialiter, and sic saepius ponuntur pro
solo Patre, adeoque Filius, and Spiritus Sanctus ab eo distinguntur. Inepte
autem argumentatur, a significatione vocis restrictae ad communis
significationis exclusionem. Bisterfield contra Crell. in Synop.


I shall put some of his Words, and of Petavius's both, upon this occasion, on
the other side, which will give a great deal of light to this matter, of the
Term God being taken differently and ambiguously. Neither of my Brethren, nor
your Lordship objected any thing against the word Equivocal, thus used by me,
when I read the Passage to you, with what immediately went before, and what
just followed after, which did sufficiently explain my meaning about it; and
this my Brother H -- k who heard it, expressly declared at that time; and it
seems did so again at the meeting in Chapter before your Lordship and my
Brethren then present, which might have spared you the trouble, one would have
thought, of the severe Letter you sent me.

The word Equivocal should not have provoked you so much, which was so
innocently used by me, and so signicantly as I thought, and very much to the
purpose, viz. to take off the Contradiction objected to us by our Socinian
Adversaries, with so much triumph, and so unanswerably as they pretend of our
holding One God, and Three Gods, when we say, The Father is God, the Son is
God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and yet there is but one God: If this be said
in the same sense and consideration, it will be very hard to get off from the
Contradiction of affirming and denying the same thing, in the same sense: But
if the Affirmation and Denial be not in the same sense and meaning, but in
different, which I take to be the meaning of Equivocal, then the Contradiction
vanishes, and is presently answered, according to that Maxim of the Schoolmen,
Ubi est diversa significatio, non est contradictio affirmantis and negantis,
Aequivocatio enim impedit contradictionem, Aquin. S. P. 1. Q. 13. From hence I
took the Hint of this offensive word Equivocal, which yet is often either
expressly and literally, or in the same sense to be found in the Schoolmen,
and in other Divines of all sorts, on the like Occasion, (applied to God and
the Trinity) as I shall largely show in the Quotations on the other side Sicut
in divinis non dicitur generatio uni voce cum generatione que est in Creaturis,
sic quoad Naturam per generationem communicatam est ibi plusquam Univocatio,
sed quoad proprietatem personam constituentem formaliter est ibi quasi
Aequicatio, Durand. in Sentent. l. 1. d. 4. q. 1.

Vide Qu. 2. Utrum Deus genuit Deum, ubi sic Deus importat suppositum habens
divinam naturam. -- Deus est terminus discretus, et Deus est terminus communis
-- alii dicunt, quod hoc nomen Deus proprie loquendo, non est universale nec
singular, sed habet aliquid de ratione universalis, et aliquid de ratione
singularis. -- Cum hoc nomen Deus stet pro supposito habente divinitatem,
potest de eo aliquid vere enunciari pro uno supposito, et negari pro alio --
Ubi in una natura sunt plura supposita de termino significante naturam in
concreto possunt contradictoria verificari ratione alterius et alterius
suppositi, ut haec Deus generat et Deus non generat -- dicendum quod verum est
uno modo et uniformiter accepta utpote si referant tantum Essentiam vel tantum
Personam, sed si referant utramque simul, utrumque potest falsificari de altera
part. -- Ideo cum Deus in antecedenti stet pro persona, eodem modo stat in
consequente relativo cum dicitur Deus qut est personaliter Pater, quod non est
verum, aut Deus qui non est Pater personaliter, and hoc est verum; et si
inferat ergo non tantum est Unus Deus, non sequitur absolute, quia plus negatur
in consequente quam in antecedente. -- Si autem inferretur cum determinatione,
been sequeretur dicendo sic, Deus genuit Deum qui est Deus Pater, ergo non est
tantum Unus Deus personaliter, quod verum est, Durandus in Sentent. Ib.

Nomen substantiae aequivocatur apud nos cum quandoque significat Essentiam,
quandoque Hypostasin. Aquin. S. P. 1. Q. 29.

Nec Univoce nec pure aequivoce, sed analogice dicitur Deus in praemissis
tribus significationibus. Id. Qu. 13. Art. 10. Sed philosophus largo modo
accipit aequivoca -- Ib.

Nomen substantiae est aequivocum nam potest, and naturam, and substantiam
significare, Suarez. T. 1. Lib. 3.

Propter aequivocationem vocabuli substantiae quia interdum sumitur pro
essentia divina, interdum pro quocunque ente reali -- Molina Comment. in Thom.
qu. 29. Artic. 2. disp. 1.

An essentia dicatur de Deo et Creaturis Univoce, Aequi voce vel Analogice? Q.
29. Art. 2. Ibid.

Aliter se habent hoc nomen essentia, sive Divinitas cum attribuitur personis,
aliter hoc nomen Deus, nam hoc nomen Deus attribuitur personis ut quod est,
sive ut habens divinam naturam, et ideo habet supponere personam; hoc vero
nomen essentia attribuitur personis, ut quo persona est, Alexand. Alensis. Sum.
P. 1. Qu. 50.

Hoc Nomen Deus nec est proprium nec appellativum, sed aliquid habet proprij
aliquid appellativi, habet enim significationem proprij et suppositionem
appellativi, and ita illa propositio Deus generat vel generatur, partim est
singularis, et partim indefinita, Ib.

Iste terminus Deus positus in subjecto, supponit personaliter, and hoc quod
significat essentiam personaliter, sed hoc modo falsa est haec, Deus est
Trinitas, Ib.

Vide Petrum Alliac. qu. 5. in prim. Sentent.

Bellarmin de Christo, L. 2. C. 7, 8.

Alteram principalem rationem qua conatur probare vim verborum significare,
Deum illum unum esse solum Patrem jam examinemus. Quamvis enim direct
Responsionem nostram non petat, utpote qui concedamus, unum Deum a quo illa
omnia solum Patrem esse, tamen veritatem ipsam aggreditur, nosque statuimus
recte dici, Pater est unus Deus prout sumitur vox Deus, V. 4. -- Rationem suam
dilemmate confirmat. Haec enim Locutio, inquit, Unus;ille Deus est Pater, vel
est synecdochica, vel propria, ita ut ea salva, etiam liceat dicere, unus ille
Deus est Filius, unus ille Deus est Spiritus Sanctus; si statuis prius contra
sic argumentari licebit, Deus ille unus est tota Trinitas, atqui Pater est Deus
ille Unus,;ergo Pater est tota Trinitas. Verum hoc sophisma nititur
Aequivocatione phraseos, Deus ille Unus, vel potius vocis Deus: Nam vox Deus
sumitur vel absolute, essentialiter, and communiter sic, Deus est Pater, Filius
et Spiritus Sanctus, vel sumiter relative, personaliter ac restricte, sic Deus
non est tota Trinitas: Itaque licet Pater sit Unus ille Deus, tamen non est
omne id, quod est unus ille Deus. Diversus autem significandi modus quo eadem
vox jam communius jam specialius sumpta sibi opponitur etiam de alijs usurpatur
in Scriptura. -- Bisterfield de Uno Deo contra Crell. lib. 1. sect. 1. C. 2. p.
43.

Bellarminus C. 2. de Christo taxat eos qui filium Dei vocant (...), oritur
autem erroris suspicio ex aequivocatione vocabuli, nam (...) duplicem sensum
habet -- Divinitatem considerari dupliciter ratione sui esse, ratione modi
habendi, etc. Meisneri philosoph. sobr. part 2. sect. 1. c. 2. qu. 2.

Facit tamen in Trinitate primatus originis atque ordinis -- ut nomen Dei de
Patre Antonomastice usurpetur, Vogelsang. exercitat. Theolog. p. 353.

Veruntamen aequivoce duo predicamenta Deo aptari substantiam and relationem,
Junij Cath. doct. de Trin. defens. l. 1.

Unus est, inquis Samosatene, Deus, verissimum, sed recte intelligendum, nam et
in subjecto et in predicato positae sunt adversus imprudentiores tendiculae,
nisi attenderint, et ex ijs falsa conclusio adstruitur, Deus enim aut absolute
et indeterminate dicitur, aut etiam determinate, priore modo de essentia,
posteriore de aliqua una persona dicitur, Secundum priorem modum Christus
dicebat Deus est Spiritus, Joan. 4.24. Secundum posteriorem Paulus unus Pater
omnium, Ephesians. 4.6. Hic autem Deum absolute and indeterminate enuncias, de
essentia igitur praedicatio est and ita accipimus, tu de persona accipis
Aequivoce and idem concludis contra praedicationum and argumentationum leges,
Id. Def. 2.

Obj. Quod Unum est id Trium esse non potest Deus Unus est, Deus igitur Trinus
esse non potest?

R. Illudis Samosatene, tum equivocatione (ut vulgo dicitur) tum etiam elenchi
ignoratione -- Aequivocationem committis cum dicis Unum, unum, inquies, ecquid
minus aequivocum esse quam unum potest? tibi forte non videtur, sed tamen si
veritati credis, me demonstrantem audies, unum duobus modis dicitur, absolute
et relate -- etc. Ib. p. 78.

Ob. Non possunt contraria gradibus excellentibus in eodem subjecto simul
existere, Deus autem Unum et Trinum esse tam sunt contraria quam Spiritum esse
et Corpus, aeternum et non aeternum, Deus ergo Unus and Trinus esse non potest.

R. Majorem ut negemus absit, sed Assumptio tua aequivocatione and elenchi
ignoratione fallit, eadem plane quam in superiore tua argumentatione reteximus.
Junii Defens. 2. P. 80.

Ob. Quod expressum est imagine and imago exprimens, non sunt idem, Christus
est imago Dei invisibilis, Christus ergo et Deus invisibilis non sunt idem.

R. Aequivocatio in nomine idem manifesta est, nam aut idem essentia dicitur
neutro genere, aut idem persona masculino. Ib. P. 87.

Ob. Quod ejusdem est aeternitatis et majestatis cum Deo, nihil omnino ab eo
accepit, non vitam, non gloriam. Filius ejusdem est --

R. Majorem Samosatene de industria facis aequivocam, -- Deum non ignoras a
nobis aut absolute de essentia dici, -- aut relate de una aliqua persona. Ib.
P. 90.

-- Praeterea nomen Dei, quod essentiale, personaliter accipis aequivoce. P. 91.

Ob. Marc. 13.32. Fallis, -- vocis Pater aequivocatione, -- Patris nomen hoc
loco essentiale ac non personale est. -- Fefellit te et hypotheseos et
aequivocationis illius ignoratio, quam aequivocationem post resurrectionem
quoque servavit Christus dicens non vestrum est scire quae Pater posuit in
potestate ipsius, Act. 1.7. Ib. P. 96.

Ad Obj. de Christi subjectione, 1 Cor. 15.24. ex quo Christum sibi subjectum
fore, sic ait omnino constat nomen Christi de persona sive in sese, sive in
Mysterio enunciatum, dici aequivoce. Ib. P. 101. and P. 182.

Antecedentis duo sunt aequivoca, primum enim Deus appellatur Pater, aut
essentialiter respectu creaturarum, aut personaliter respectu Filij et
relationis internae, etc. Id. Defens. 3. P. 185.

Now that there is necessarily understood this latitude of Variety, in the
sense of several of the Words of the (Athanasian) Creed, is apparent from the
consent of those that do subtilize this Mystery to the utmost curiosity, for it
is impossible for them or any else to think, that the Godhead of the whole
Trinity is one in the same sense, that the Father considered alone is one, or
the Son and Holy Ghost so considered. -- So when the Father is said to be
omnipotent, the Son omnipotent, and the Holy Ghost omnipotent, it is evident
that omnipotent has not the same sense in all, for the Father has the power of
Eternal Generation. -- And the like may be said of the term God; by which if
you understand that which is first of all, in such a sense as that all else is
from him, and he from none, the Son and Spirit cannot be said to be God in this
signification, because the Father is not from them, but they from the Father.
More 's Mystery of Godliness, Book 9. Cap. 2.

And we must still profess, that we take none of those words to be proper,
formal, univocal terms. Baxters Cath. Theology, Sect. 1.


, and the Pages following.

Whether also this might not be applied to defend the Athanasian Creed, The
Father Eternal, the Son Eternal, and the Holy Ghost Eternal, and yet not Three
Eternals, but One Eternal, as well as Aquinas his taking them adjectively, and
substantively, which Petavius dislikes, (being willing to allow tres Aeterni,
and tres habentes Deitatem, and tres Divini) and whither also in those
Scholastic Questions, and sayings, Utrum nomina Essentialia approprianda
personis, and nomina Essentialia in divinis concreta nonnunquam pro Essentia,
aliquando pro una persona, aliquando pro tribus supponunt. I offer to the
Consideration of my more Learned Brethren. This I hope will, if not justify,
at least excuse the word; and if any of them will please to teach me a better
way to take off the objected Contradiction, I promise never to make use of that
word again.

But after all, could Malice it self, though never so blind, if it had but Ears,
and heard that Sermon of mine, charge me with saying, that Christ and the Holy
Ghost were God only Equivocally, and not properly, truly and naturally, when I
so often, and so fully, plainly and directly asserted the contrary, through the
whole Sermon, and in several such passages as these following, That the Mystery
of Christian Faith lay in God the Father's having a Son, and an Holy Spirit,
distinct Persons from himself, the one begotten of him from all Eternity, and
so his only Son, the other proceeding from him and the Son both, and these two
still in the Father, Naturally, and Inseparably united to him, as to the
Fountain of their being, one with him in the same Divine Nature and Essence,
and all three together contriving and accomplishing the Redemption of mankind.
-- That God the Father Almighty has one only begotten Son, of the same Nature
and Essence with himself, Who is the Brightness of his Glory, and the express
Image of his Person: And that there is also a Holy Ghost proceeding from both,
and sent by both, who has the Characters and Attritributes of Divinity plainly
ascribed to him, and who is joined with the Father and the Son in the Office of
Baptism, and in the Form of Christian Blessing, and against whom the most
unpardonable sin may be committed..

That the Son and Holy Ghost have the same Divine Nature and Essence with the
Father, derived and communicated to them. Though the Name of God taken
absolutely, is eminently predicated of God the Father in Scripture, and he is
called God, the One God, eminently, though not exclusively, ( To us there is One
God the Father, -- I I believe in One God the Father Almighty, etc.) yet the
other two Persons having the Divine Nature, and the Divine Attributes and
Perfections belonging to them, may each of them properly be called God, and the
Divinity does certainly belong to each of them.

After all these Passages and Expressions in my Sermon, which I hope they who
have not a memory only on one side will please to remember and own, besides,
the whole drift and design of it, which was to lay down as plainly, and to
vindicate as strongly as I could, the Mystery of Christian Faith, and of the
Blessed Trinity; could any fair and candid Hearer, or indeed any one without
those Epithets have the least reason or pretense to charge me with asserting,
that Christ and the Holy Ghost were God only Equivocally, and not truly and
properly, or could they upon hearing, and misunderstanding that word as applied
to the Terms God, Trinity and Unity, One and Three, God's being One in Person
in one sense, and Three in Person in another; could they with any more Reason,
and not without the greatest Mistake imaginable, and one would think a wilful
one, (though I am willing to think otherwise, having never given either of them
reason for that) charge this as belonging to Christ and the Holy Ghost, and not
as much to God the Father, and the whole Trinity, when I used and applied this
Term in general to the Name of God, his being One, and Three, being taken
either Essentially or Personally, sometimes Absolutely and Eminently, for One
Person singly, sometimes for all the Three Persons together, and so upon the
account of those different significations these terms were Equivocal,
Hononymous and Ambiguous, as many, I have shown, and particularly a Lutheran
Professor in Homonymia in voce unus -- in vocabulo tres. Botsac. Anti-Crellius,
Lib. 2. Sect. 1. C. 1. Expressa latet ambiguitas in voce Deus, quae modo
personaliter, usurpatur modo essentialiter, Id. Lib. 2. S. 1. C. 7.
answer to Crellius had long ago asserted before me, and this only to take off
the Contradiction of One and Three, and to answer that Jewish, Pagan,
Mohammedan, Sabellian, Samosatenian, Photinian, Arrian, Macedonian, Socinian,
Muggletonian Objection of Tritheism, against the Doctrine of the Trinity.

The Father is the only self-existent, unoriginated Being, whom the Ancients
call (...) of the other two, and so in the words of a Right Reverend and
Excellent Person, God in the highest sense, whom the Scriptures, Creeds, Credo
in Deum Patrem omnipotentem.

Orientales Ecclesiae omnes pene ita tradunt, credo in unum Deum Patrem
Omnipotentem. Ruffin. in Symbol.

(...), -- Irenaeus, l. 1. c. 2.

Cum teneamus autem nos regulam veritatis, i. e. quia sit unus Deus omnipotens,
qui omnia condidit per verbum suum, Id. c. 19.

-- In unum Deum credentes fabricatorem Coeli et Terrae, et omnium quae ijs
sunt, per Christum Jesum Dei Filium, Id. L. 3. C. 4.

Regula est autem fidei, -- illa scilicet qua creditur unum omnino Deum esse,
nec alium praeter Mundi Conditorem, qui universa de nihilo produxit, per verbum
suum primo omnium imissum, id verbum Filium ejus appellatum. Tertull. praescr.
adv. Haeres. C. 13.

Nos unicum quidem Deum credimus sub hac tamen dispensatione, quam (...)
dicimus, ut unici Dei sit et Filius sermo ipsius, qui ex ipso processerit, per
quem omnia facta sunt. -- Id. adv. Praxeam C. 2.

(...). Symbol. Vetustis. Eccles. Hieros. apud Cyrill in Cateches. 6.

(...), -- Euseb-Caesar Confess. in Synod. Nicaen apud Socrat. H. E. l. 1. c 8.


and Christian Offices Haec Patris (...) in omnibus Catholicae Ecclesiae
Lyturgijs hodie agnoscitur, nam et in (...) Deum Patrem, (...) (ut Justinus
loquitur) glorificamus, et preces plerasque ad ipsum dirigimus. Bull. Def. Fid.
Nicaen P. 208.

Veteri ex usu pleraeque preces ad Patrem referuntur, atque ita decretum
legimus in Carthaginensi tertia Synodo, Canone 23. ut cum ad altar assistitur,
semper ad Patrem dirigatur oration. Petav. Dogm. Theolog. de Trin. L. 3. C. 7.

Instabunt illi forte cum quibus nunc agimus, et dicent se idem aliquo modo
statuere, Patrem enim solum ideo vocari Deum verum, quia fons sit Divinatis, ac
porro quandam prae Filio, ac Spiritu Sancto praerogativam ratione Divinitatis
habens, siquidem Filius, ac Spiritus Sanctus Divinam Essentiam ab ipso habeant,
ipse a Nemine, quam ob causam Patrem nominatim (...) appellant, et ea ratione
Filio, et Spiritui sancto opponunt, sed qui ita respondent, vel sibi
contradicunt, vel nihil dicunt, nudaque nobis verba pro rebus obtrudunt. Crell.
de Uno Deo, L. 1. C. 1.

Dei vero Nomen aut omnibus, aut plerisque omnibus primam omnium rerum causam
significat, aut quod a nullo sit, et a quo sint omnia, id quidem convenit
(...), si vel causae nomen proprie sumatur, vel cum creaturis conferatur, cum
enim creatus non fuerit, per eum omnia quaecunque sunt facta, sed si collatio
instituatur Patris cum (...), seu Filio, quia a nullo est Pater, a Patre est
Filius, propterea Pater peculiari quadam ratione Dei nomen sibi vendicat, nam
si Dei nomen ens designat quod a nullo est, a quo caetera, id Patri convenit
non modo ratione Naturae Divinae, quae nullius causae proprie dictae sit
effectum cum omnium creaturarum sit causa, quo sensu etiam (...) Dei Nomen
participant, sed etiam ratione Personae quae ab alia nulla ducit orginem ullo
modo cum ab ea, aeterna quadam, et incomprehensibili ratione procedant (...) et
Spiritus sanctus. Placaei refutat. Crell. p. 252. Vide Crell. Ib.

Deus summus vel Essentiae, et Naturae, vel (si ita loqui fas est) muneris
ratione, priore modo Deus summus est quicunque praeditus est essentia divina,
posteriore is tantum qui cum sit praeditus essentia divina personam, et parts
supremi atque independentis totius Mundi Monarchiae sustinet in Negotio salutis
nostrae, i. e. Pater. Ib. p. 326.

Ut igitur formaliter Respondeam, Deo altissimo nihil dignius, nihil
excellentius ulla ratione cogitari potest, hoc verissime dicitur de Deo
altissimo comparato cum omnibus alijs entibus; at si Deus altissimus, hoc est
una persona comparetur, cum Deo altissimo, h. e. alia Persona divina quae cum
ipsa sunt Deus altissimus distinctione opus est, est enim excellentia
essentialis et excellentia personalis. Ib. p. 28.

Ex veterum sententia cui ratio communis suffragatur, si duo in divinis essent
Ingenita, sive principia a se pendentia, consequens foret ut non modo Pater sua
privaretur (...) qua Divinitatem a seipso hoc est, a nullo alio habet, verum
etiam ut duo Dij necessario statuerentur, contra posita subordinatione, qua
Pater solus a seipso Deus, Filius vero de Deo Patre, Deus esse docetur,
putarunt Doctores tum illam Patris (...), tum Divinam Monarchiam in tuto iri
collocatam; quod idem et ad tertiam Divinitatis personam, Spiritum nempe
sanctum extendi voluerunt, quem quod a Patre per Filium ipse suam habeat
originem, (...), sive tres Deos neutiquam inducere crediderunt, Bull. Def. Fid.
Nic. Sect. 4.

Vocabulum Deus duobus modis in sacris scripturis repraesentari deprehenditur,
ut absolute primum inoriginatum, et a nullo alio esse habens, a seipso ita
subsistens, ut prorsus originem essendi aliunde non agnoscat, omnia a se et ex
se habeat; inoriginatum, et origo ac principium absolute omnium eorum sit, quae
in Coelo et in Terra sunt, etiam ipsius Filij et Spiritus Pater est, qui
emphatice, passim constanter et in Novo Testamento ita vocatur, Joan. 17. 1
Cor. 8. Ephesians. 1.3, 4. Apoc. 1.6. et in omnibus ferme Novi Testamenti libris;
ne semel autem toto novo Testamento (...) Deus, expresso textu ad Patrem,
Filium et Spiritum sanctum simul determinatur cum unus Deus appellatur, ut ista
tria unum illum Deum esse dicatur, sed ad priorem sensum in voce Dei a Spiritu
sancto intendi palam sit, in veteri Testamento unus est altissimus Creator
omnium ait Siracides cap. 1. and alibi. 2. Ut proxime ex et ab illo primo
originatum, derivatum, deductum, ortum illi debens, etiam summum ens, sed ortum
et derivatum, proxima veluti summi illius subsistentis propago, et emanatio ut
veteres dixerunt, genitura et spiratura ejus, in esse, nomine, auctoritate,
opere, attributis et cultu Patri par, hoc modo Dei vocem sumendo Deus etiam
Filius et Spiritus Dei est. Henricus Nicolai Professor Lutheranus in Methodo
Trinitatis. Thesi. 47.

Jehovah deducitur ab Hava vel Hajah, quod significat esse, cum Deus sit
Essentia omnium Essentiarum -- Nec incommode statuitur hanc vocem ex c. 3.
Exodus v. 14. ubi Deus dicit Ehejeh Ascher Ehejeh -- solus Deus esse suum habet
a seipso vel rectius est suum esse, reliqua entia dependent, ab hoc summo ente,
solus Deus est (...), Gerhard de Natura Dei, loci communes.


call so absolutely, and by way of Eminence and Prerogative. The Son is
produced of the Father, and so is not (...), or God in that sense, as the
Father who is from none, but is God of God, and is very God, as having the
Divine Nature and Perfections naturally belonging to them, but derived and
communicated from the Father, as the Holy Ghost from both: So that the one is
Deus Ingenitus, the other Deus Genitus, and the third Deus procedens; all
Divines allow that the words are taken thus differently, and in these several
senses and meanings, and why then may they not be called Aequivocal? Since Sum.
p. 1. q. 13.
Thomas Aquinas says, Quicquid praedicatur de aliquibus secundum idem nomen,
and non secundum eandem rationem, praedicatur de ijs aequivoce. But Deus as it
signifies a self-existent, unoriginated Being, and is often taken in that sense
only by Divines, Solus Deus (...), Gerard. loc. com. de natura Del. Deum esse a
seipso, hoc est neque ab alio, neque ex alio. Amesij Medul. Theol. l. 1. Deus
qui semper est, nec habet aliunde principium ipse sui origo est, suaeque causa
jubstantiae. Hieron. in Epist. ad Ephesians. c. 3. (...). Helych Suidas.
is predicated only of God the Father, and not secundum eandem racionem, or
upon the same Account of the other two Divine Persons, neither of which are
self existent and unoriginated, The Learned Mr. Hill calls the Father Original
God, p. 163. Vindication of Primitive Fathers; and p. 113. takes the term Mind
(relating to the Trinity) equivocally in different senses. The Father alone is
Originally that Deity which Christ originally is not, for Christ is God by
being of God, Hooker's Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 54. So Dr. More in the same place
forequoted.
nor God in the highest sense of (...), but the one is God begotten, (...), not
(...); and the other God proceeding, (...), as they are frequently called, but
both properly, and truly, and naturally, and eternally God in these senses,
both having the true Divine Nature and the same Divine Essence with the Father,
belonging to them, and so being (...) with him, but yet he being the fountain
of Divinity, the Principium, Fons, (...), etc. of the other two who were
produced from him, sent by him, and some are not afraid to say sub-ordinate to
him Vide Bull de Subordinatione Filij ad Patrem Defens. Fid. Nicaen. Sect. 9.
, is called eminently and absolutely, and by way of Excellence and Prerogative,
the one God, and in the words forequoted, God in the highest sense, which is a
Notion Crellius was extremely angry and provoked at Instabunt, etc.
, but others of known Orthodoxy pleased with, as an Answer to him and to
Tritheism. This though not said thus expressly in my Sermon, yet was all could be
aimed at and designed, and the utmost possible meaning of the word Equivocal,
as used by me, which was but once transiently mentioned, and applied to the
Terms God, One and Three, Deus unus et trinus, to take off the contradiction of
them. Ambiguitas tollenda nominis hujus summus Deus. Etenim si is intelligatur
summus, qui a nullo ducit originem, cum ab eo ducant Personae caeterae hoc
sensu solum Paarem summum esse Deum non negamus, hoc est primum principium, and
supremum ad quod revocantur omnia, -- sin ille summus appellatur Deus cujus
natura and (...) est summa Deitas, sive ab nullo altero, sive ab altero
communicata, hac ratione non minus Filius, ac Spiritus Sanctus summus est Deus,
quam Pater tametsi diverso modo Deitatem obtineant. Petav. Dogm. Theolog. de
Trin L. 3. C. 1.
Petavius expressly allows the ambiguity or equivocal meaning of the word God,
or chief and highest God in the very sense beforementioned; and I know none,
but Sabellians and Socinians, can have reason to dislike it, because off that
terrible Objection of theirs against the Trinity, that God, and Divine Being,
or Person, are convertible and equipollent, and therefore if there be three
Divine Persons and Beings, there must be three Gods, whereas in one, i. e. the
highest sense, (of (...),) the word God is only convertible with, and
equipollent to God the Father, and in the sense which is given of it by several
Mahometes Azoar 11. Alcorani, dic ille Deum unum esse, qui nec genuit, nec
generatus est. -- Deum esse ens necessario existens, cujus esse impossible est
ut sit ab alio, Avicenna. Nos voce Dei intelligere ens illud quod caeteris
omnibus existentiam dedit, ipsum suam a nullo accepit. Cler. Pneumatolog. c. 2.
, belongs only to him; and Melancthon therefore wisely and designedly changes
the definition of God for the like reason Ut autem descriptionem aliquam Dei
teneamus, conseram duas, alteram mutilam Platonis, alteram integram quae in
Ecclesia tradita est, and ex baptismi verbis dicitur. Platonica haec est, Deus
est men's aeterna, -- sic igitur haec altera descriptio, Deus est Essentia
spiritualis, intelligens, aeterna, Melancthon.
.

I hope upon the reading of this, both my offended Brethren (though I think I am
the offended Brother, I am sure I am the Iujured one, and if the Scandal be so
general according to your Letter, the Injury is the greater) will be sensible
of their great Mistake, and of their ungrounded Charge and Accusation against
me, and will recollect from whence it arose, from misunderstanding and
misapplying the word Equivocal, and will therefore think themselves bound both
in Honor and Conscience to make a proper Reparation and Satisfaction, to own
their Mistake, and beg my Pardon. I hope also your Lordship, and the rest of my
Brethren, will think this reasonable, and persuade them to it, else I must
appeal to the World, and publish this my Vindication as well as my Sermon; and
if the doing this occasion any further Quarrel and Disturbance, they who are
the true cause of it must answer for it both to God and Man, and otherwise I
shall think it a design to blow up a Contention very unseasonably at this time,
and to breed a Quarrel among our selves, and then I can guess at the Secret
which lies at the bottom, and in Ciphers it is only HC. and JB.

I used all possible Caution in my Sermon to prevent all this, and opposed no
body but the Deists and Socinians; and it is hard when we are defending the
common Cause and Faith of Christianity, against those that our Brethren and
Confederates should out of Pique and Prejudice strike in with the public
Enemy, and help to do their work for them.

I used no other Terms throughout all my Sermon in speaking of the Divine
Persons and Blessed Trinity, but those used commonly by the Church, according
to the King's Directions; and I am sure my Doctrine is entirely agreeable to
that of the Primitive Church, satisfied in it, as in Christianity; for it is
Christianity as distinct from Natural Religion, and I could dye, and suffer
Martyrdom for it: If all the Pains I have taken to understand and defend it,
meet with no other Reward here but Scandal and Calumny, Noise, Clamor and
Trouble, I doubt not but the great God, and my Blessed Savior, and their Holy
Spirit, whose Glory and Honor I have sincerely aimed at, whose Faith and
Religion I have endeavored to defend, will support me comfortably at present,
and recompense me sufficiently hereafter.

3. As to the other thing charged or hinted, about Specifical and Numerical
Essence, two of my Brethren who saw the Paper could not well remember any thing
about it, nor can I guess, and imagine; for the words were but just named, with
an -- hence the distinction of a Specifical and Numerical Essence -- I asserted
not either, nor do understand any great difference between 'em, nor think
particular Essence to be any thing (...), Basil. Epist. 369.

(...), Id. Epist. 43

(...), Damasc. l. 3. c. 6.

Essentiae in Universalibus quidem esse possunt, in solis vero individuis and
particularibus substant. Boeth. de duobus naturis and una Persona Christi.

Usiam commune aliquid esse dicunt Antiqui, Hypostasin particulare quiddam and
individuum. Petav. Dogm. Theol. de Trin. l. 4. c. 7.

Essentia quae definitur id per quod res est id quod est, est idaea abstracta
quae sola ratione distinguitur ab ente, neque enim ens est in essentia neque
Essentia in ente, tanquam subjecto neque possunt separari. Cler. Ontolog. c. 4.

Aut falsum aut saltem temerarium est quicquid affirmatur de Essentijs apud
Scholasticos, nisi de Idealibus essentijs quas tantum in animo habent, and quos
ipsi efformarunt, confunduntque cum realibus intelligatur. Cler. Log. P. 1. p.
34.

Potius Essentia in Personis tribus subsistere dicenda est quam Tres Personae
in Una Essentia. Chamier. de Trin.


distinct from particular Beings (a); but I was not then to teach my Auditors
Metaphysics, nor am now my Brethren, but I remember I expressly affirmed in my
Sermon, that there was no Multiplication of Essence in the several Divine
Persons, which I hope was very Orthodox, and so was every thing I said.

After all this long Scribble, which has tired me, and which I had not time to
shorten, and for which I beg your Lordships Patience and Pardon, I have but
one thing more to answer, Why I did not carry my Notes to my two offended
Brethren, as was desired by the Letter? To which I Reply, That I had done that
before, and read those Passages they excepted against to both of them,
according to my Promise in Chapter: And I hope your Lordship, upon second
Thoughts, will not think fit, that one of equal Character to them in other
things, and not the less I hope as the King's Chaplain, should be so
contemptibly treated, as to be Obliged to go backwards and forwards with his
Sermon, and to wait upon his Accusers at their Houses with his Notes, as often
as they shall please to call for them, only to pick out perhaps if they can,
some New Cavils against them: But in truth I could not do this, had I been
never so humble and willing, for my Notes are loose and mangled at the Press,
and from thence they and the World may I hope expect a Copy of them very
shortly.

My Lord,
I send you the same Letter in print, only a little enlarged, which I sent you
some few Months ago in Writing, being of the same Opinion with your Lordship,
that since this has made so much Talk and Noise, that something ought to be
made public concerning it; and I doubt not but this will give full
Satisfaction to all Learned and Unprejudiced persons, who have any true
Knowledge and Understanding in that Controversy, who will see by the
Authorities and Quotations I have used, not only a sufficient Defense of my
Doctrine, and a full Agreement in it of the best Divines, but such a state of
that Controversy against all the Adversaries of the Blessed Trinity as may give
an Answer to their Objections against it, and help others rightly to understand
it. I have chosen to speak out the Truth from the Mouths of others of
unquestioned Credit, rather than my own, that I might not be thought to be
singular, and because it is very difficult and dangerous sometimes, as one long
ago observed Vera de Deo, dicere admodum periculum sit. Ruffin in Symbol.
. To speak truth of such high matters, No Man does more fully believe the true
Divinity of the Son and Holy Ghost than my self, as is well known to all that
know me, and appears by several Sermons preached at W -- and other places, and
for one of them not long ago Tritheism was laid to my charge, (as that and
Polytheism was of old to all the Orthodox Believers of a Trinity So the Jews
and Gentiles, as appears by Athanasius, (...). Athanas. contra Arrian Orat. 4.
Id. contra Sabel Gregales. Vide Genebrardi Respons. ad Joseph. Albo and David
Kimchi.


(...).

Thus Lucian in his Dialogue, Philopatris: And Celsus apud Originem contra
Cells. l. 8.

So did the Sabellians, who laid the like Charge against Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, when he had condemned Sabellius, from which Charge he was acquitted
in a Synod at Rome, Anno 263.

Itaque duos and tres jam jactitant a nobis praedicari se vero Unius Dei
cultores praesumunt. Tertullian adv. Prax.


Vide Eusebius. contra Marcellum and Theolog. Eccles.

So Paulus Samosatenus, Concilla Labbe. T. 1. p. 875.
as appears by his Questions to Dionysius of Alexandria, (...), etc. --
Dionysius his Answer, (...). Ibid.
And the Synodic Epistle of the Council of Antioch to him, (...).

So Photinus, Facund. Hermianens. l. 4.
as appears by Julian 's Letter to him.

So the Arrians, as appears in many places of Athanasius and others against
them, Athanas. contra Arrian. Orat. 5.
(...).

So they and the Macedonians, Basil (...) 29. Greg. Nyssen. Epist. ad Ablab.
Greg. Naz. Orat. 23. Centur. Magdeburg. 7. ex Alcoranl Azoara 12. Cantacuzen.
Orat. 3. apud Gualter. Alcor Interpret.
as appears by St. Basil 's particular Discourse, (...), and Gregory Nyssens
Epistle ad Ablabium, (...), and Gregory Nazianzens often answering the Charge
of Tritheism, and saying, (...).

So the Mahomitans, out of whose Alcoran these words are alleged by the
Centuriat. Magdeburg. Omnes quidem dicentes Christum Jesum, Mariae Filium Deum
exisere, mendaces reperti sunt, cum Christus ipse dixerit, in Dominum Deum meum
atque vestrum credit. -- Sunt iterum increduli affirmantes Deos tres esse,
quia non est nisi Deus Unus. And Cantacuzenus in his Oration against Mahomet,
says, Nec Christum Deum adorare confessus est, ne duos Deos adorare
deprehenderetur.

The Socinians it is notorious lay this charge of Tritheism against the blessed
Trinity in all their Writings.


in a rude and insolent Preface, which reflected not only upon me and others,
but upon all the Bishops of England, and was thought by them to deserve
Censure: This was only for asserting with the Ancients and best Moderns, the
Distinct Being and (...) of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost (...). Synod Epist.
Council. Constantinop. ad Damasum. Basil Epist. ad Caesar. Origin contra Cells.
c. 8. Athanas. contra Sabell. Basil in Princip. Evan. Joan. Athanas. contra
Sabel. Gregal. Basil Epist. ad Caesariens.


(...).

(...).

(...).

(...) (Joan. 3.(...)) (...). --

(...).

(...). Id. contra Sabel and Art.


(...). Id. Epist. ad Caesar.


(...). Alexandr. Epist. ad Alexandr. Theodoret. E. H. l. 1.


How different is this from what we find afterward in the Lateran Council,
which in direct opposition to the best Antiquity, determined as we have it in
Greek, Council. Lateran. General, 4 tum Capitul. 2. Council. Labbe.
(...). When in those Ignorant and barbarous Ages the true Notion was altered
byRoman Power and Scholastic Subtlety, which was preserved but a little before
in Damascene, Scotus Erigena, and in a Synod that then decreed the Three
Persons to be Tres res distinctas. Oto Frisingen. L. 1. C. 47.

Scriptura certe nominat Patrem, Zanchius de tribus Elohim. C. 2.
Filium and Spiritum Sanctum, ut Res inter se distinctas, Individuas,
Subsistentes, Intelligentes Volentes. Ne quod triplici Nomine dicitur rem unam
esse putemus. Ibid. de Decret Alexand.

-- Hos tres esse tres res -- Personae seu res per se subsistentes. Id.

Vnaquaeque persona est aliqua res simpliciter and absoluta -- sunt tres res --
quia per hanc Numerationem solum indicatur absoluta and realis distinctio inter
illas. Suarez de Trin. L. 3. C. 6.

Nihilominus simpliciter verum censeo tres Personas esse tria Entia Realia. Ib.

The Critics, such as Valla, had no Cause to find fault with Boethius, for
applying the Notion of Person to an Intelligent Being subsisting by it self,
therefore I cannot but wonder at the Niceness of some late Men. -- Themselves
confess Boethius his Definition of a Person (Substantia Rationalis individua,
etc.) to be true enough, but they say it belongs to the Creatures, and not to
God, for it would make three Gods. -- And he plainly allows three Persons to be
three Individual Beings.Bishop Stillingsleet's Dialogue concerning Trinity and
Transubstant.

This great Man, when his Adversary had told him, that his defending the
Doctrine of the Trinity by reason, showed he was a bold Man, and would venture
further than Wiser Men; thus Answers, (And I make bold to vindicate my self
with his Words) It may be others have not the Leisure or Curiosity to examine a
Mystery believed to be so much out of the reach of our Understanding, and have
confounded themselves and others so much with School-Terms, as to leave the
matter rather more obscure than it was before, but I shall endeavor to make
things as clear as they will bear.

Advertisement.

THese Papers were Written; and Printed most part of them, before the Bishop of
Worcesters late Book.


, and that they were Proper and Real Persons, and not only Modes, Respects,
Characters, Offices, Names, etc. of one Divine Being or Person. Now a very
different and even contrary Charges comes upon me, from the same quarter, and
is raised by the same Spirit, which like the Testimony of False Witnesses
betrays and discovers its own Untruth by its own Contradictions. I protest by
all that is Sacred, I never said the Words charged upon me, and they are only a
false Inference of their own, from their mistaking and misunderstanding of my
Words, and not rightly understanding the Controversy, as I hope will fully
appear to all Learned and Impartial Readers of this Letter, and especially to
your Lordship, to whose Candor and Judgment I commit it, hoping you will pardon
some things writ in great have, and some little heat upon such a Provocation.
If my Accusers be not satisfied by it, I challenge them with all their mighty
Zeal and Knowledge both, fairly to reply to it, and to the Authorities here
produced. I am your Lordships Advertisement.

THe Errata's of the Press are too many to be particularized, especially in the
Greek, the Learned and Candid Reader will easily see and Correct them.




Most Humble and Obedient Servant, W. Pain.


Postscript.
My Lord,
SInce the Printing this Letter in Vindication of my Sermon, your Lordship and
my Brethren in a full and late Chapter, have upon a fresh Debate and further
Examination of the matter, been pleased to own your selves satisfied about it;
so that were it not as Necessary, both upon Public and Private Reasons, to
satisfy the World too, I could almost have wished this Letter had not been
printed at all, it being writ hastily in a few days, and being the first and
free running of my Thoughts, without any Labored or Artificial Composure; to
which I added very little, but only some Authorities to be my Vouchers and
Compurgators for some Words that were not understood, and therefore odd and
offensive to some, but very necessary and very usual with the best Writers
against Socinianism, when they are answering their subtilest Objections, and
like Fencers, keeping their Eye upon their Adversaries, and avoiding all their
Thrusts. However, I could now have wished that some few things, savouring a
little Resentment, which was excusable at that time I hope both to me and
others, when we did not so well understand one another, had been left out: For
I am now better satisfied, that there was nothing of that personal Prejudice
and ill Will, or unkind Design from any, upon some other accounts, which I
suspected to have been in it; but that it all arose from pure mistake, and
misunderstanding some some few Words and Expressions in my Sermon, which were
thought to have another meaning than they really had; and this may easily
happen upon a transient hearing or reading a Discourse, upon so Nice a Subject
as the Trinity, which I could not avoid on that day, and which I made as plain
and useful as I could, and only cryptically and in a few words took off one
great and obvious Difficulty and Objection, that of Three Gods, and One God,
which is always thrown in the way, and is the mighty Stumbling Block in that
Article of our Christian Faith, which others have been heaving at with a great
many Scolastick Levers, and I thought one word would remove it, and take off
all the objected Contradiction. The misunderstanding the word Equivocal, used
upon that Occasion, was the chief, if not the only reason of my Worthy Brothers
concerning himself in the matter. He who was the first Occasion of all this,
has abundantly convinced me, that it was no other misunderstanding between us,
both by his Protestations and Civil Treatment, and genteel begging my Pardon
for it; and I do now beg his, and any other of my Brethrens, for any thing
that may seem in this Letter to be any ways reflecting upon them, and
especially of Dr. S --, who has given too many Instances of his Learning to be
denied, and a greater than I expected in this matter of his Temper. I have no
need, I am sure, to do this to your Lordship, for whom I have too much Respect
and Veneration to let any thing drop from my Pen or Tongue, so unagreeable to
my Mind and Thoughts: Every one sees so much of the Gentleman as well as the
Scholar, shining through your Sacred Character, and so much Good Breeding and
Civility joined with your Paternal Wisdom and Gravity, that your Excellent
Temper will no more let you do an il-natured and unbecoming thing, than your
Admirable Pen, which has been a great while the Standard of English Eloquence,
will let you write an unfit one. Your Zeal for the Catholic Faith, and your
particular Duty made it fit and Necessary for you to take Notice of such a
Charge as was brought you against my Sermon: I must have blamed your Lordship,
and my Brethren as much as others, if you had not done it; and be so far from
taking it ill, that I must thank you for it, for the right you have herehy done
to the Faith and to me both: Like a true Friend of the King and Government, if
taken up by mistake, through the hasty Zeal of an officious Constable or
Informer, when he has shown the mistake, and cleared himself to the Magistrates
upon the strictest enquiry, he will rather commend and thank 'em for their Zeal
and Care of the Public, than be any ways angry with them for the little
trouble and inconvenience that was accidentally given to himself in serving so
good an end, which he so much likes and prefers to any thing private. I would
willingly sacrifice my own particular Credit, and all the worldly Interests I
have, to the Cause of Christianity in general, or to that Fundamental part of
it, the Doctrine of the Trinity; without which Christianity will, in my
Opinion, lose its peculiar Scheme and Constitution, and its great and august
Character; and therefore I have endeavored, the best way I can, to defend this
against its Adversaries, and to represent it to its Friends in the best light,
that of the Scriptures and Antiquity, in which it appears much clearer than in
those Scholastic Disputes and Explications which have only clouded and
obscured it, and turned plain Christianity into a Metaphysical Subtlety. But
when those who defend and maintain the Faith, are brought under a Charge of
undermining and betraying it, this is not only a particular Injury to
themselves, which it is very hard to lie under; and no Man, as one says, ought
to be patient under the Suspicion of Heresy; but it is a great injury and
disservice to the Faith it self, by supposing its pretended and avowed Friends
to be its secret Enemies; and that upon a free enquiry and examining into it,
they see reason to be so; and thereby rendering the very Doctrine suspicious and
questionable, as well as increasing the Number, and adding to the Party and
Interest of its professed Adversaries. The charging any such Suspicion of Heresy
upon me, and some others, and especially of Socinianism, will look as
ridiculous and incredible to those who know us, as Sir John Fenwick's charging
some of the known Friends and Assertors of the Government with being in the
Plot, and inclined to Jacobitism: I have given so much Evidence to the contrary
in all my Discourses and Sermons, that if any think they might have reason to
do this for a few mistaken Words and Expressions, which they do not like or
understand, others may upon the same account charge me with Popery too; though I
have writ so many Treatises against it, because I followed not exactactly their
Words and Phrases, or their Method of Writing and Thinking, in managing those
Subjects, but either granted too much to my Adversaries, or asserted something
that they think odd and suspicious, and looks to them like a Popish Principle.
As when in a Discourse on the Sacrifice of the Mass, I own the Eucharist to be
a Sacrifice in some sense, and in some sense Propitiatory too, from hence there
may be as good ground to charge Popery upon me, as any thing Heretical or
Socinian, upon the mistaken and misunderstood Words of my Sermon, when the
whole Scope, Design and Drift of it, was to the contrary.

Perverse and Angry Men, tied up to their own Models and narrow Systems, might
have made as great a Work, and stirred up as great Suspicions, Contests and
Dissentions among our selves, a few Years ago, about several Points relating to
those Popish Controversies, as about the Real Presence, Justification, Good
Works, and the like, as have been more lately, and very unhappily raised about
the Trinity, and have given as great an advantage to the common Enemy by so
doing: And no doubt the one would have took hold of it, and improved it as much
against the common Cause then, as the others have done since. But though I think
it would have been very imprudent, and very dangerous, both then and now, to
stop the Controversy, and impose silence upon this account, and let our
Adversaries write on and triumph without Answers, and so to lose the Truth for
fear of losing Peace, yet common Prudence and Christian Charity, and a hearty
concern for the common Cause, should make all Writers agree in one Case as well
as the other, notwithstanding some little difference of Thoughts and
Expressions, and not break out into a Civil War among our selves, while we are
opposing a public Enemy, when in the main we do agree in the same Doctrine,
the same Article and Confession, as it is expressed by our Church.

The Schoolmen and Divines of the Church of Rome differ very much among
themselves about these very matters. Peter Lombard and Richardus de Sancto
Victore about the Definition of a Person, and Essence generating Essence;
Durandus, Scotus, Ocham and Biel about the Divine Unity, and whether the
distinction in the Deity be real and Formal, or Modal and Virtual. The Scotists
and Thomists have their known Differences and Parties about those and other
things; Copreolus and Aureolus differ throughout; so do the Jesuits and
Dominicans, Molina with Thomas, and Cajetan, Valentia, Suarez and Vasquez, though
all Jesuits, yet dispute fiercely with one another; the two latter especially,
about the famous Question of a common Subsistence in the Trinity, whilst Arriba
is very zealous against them all, for allowing Aliquid Relativum as well as
Absolutum in the Trinity. And to name no others, Tanner, Ruiz and Arriaga
oppose one another, and those that have gone before them, in several high
Points, as do indeed all their Modern Writers, taking the part sometimes of
Scotus, and sometimes of Thomas, and sometimes differing from both, and always
from those that wrote a little before them: They dispute Problematically, and
hold different Opinions concerning these Trinitarian Points, as much as other
Theological Questions; and particularly Ruiz Disp. 22. Sect. 1.
proposes an Explication of the Trinity, different from the common Soholastic
one; making the Three Persons together God adequately, and each single Person
God inadequately: Which though he asserts not, yet by his Authorities out of the
Fathers we may see he Favors, whilst all of them still agree in the common
Faith of the Article, as it is determined and expressed in the words of their
Church. So long as they do this, none of their Infallible Popes, or wise
Bishops, have thought fit to interpose by their Authority, or to determine on
one side or other, or to impose silence upon all, notwithstanding the mighy
plenitude of their Ecclesiastical Authority, and the wretched Slavery which
has been complained of under it, even the worst of Slaveries to rational
Creatures, that of their Minds and Thoughts; Notwithstanding that, it seems,
their own Members, and their Learned Men have a free Liberty of venting their
private Thoughts and different Sentiments, even in those high matters, so long
as they consent and subscribe to the general Doctrine of their Church. Nay,
which is more strange, and more to be wondered at, they have never censured,
that I know of, those known and exceptionable Passages and bold Assertions in
Durandus, Aliaco, Erasmus, Genebrard, and others, of Three Gods in a Personal
sense, and of Cajetan, Molina, Javellus, and abundance of their celebrated
Writers, holding Three Eternals and Omnipotents, and Interpreting the
Athanasian Creed so as to make those Adjectives signify only Substantively and
Essentially. While they allow this Freedom, Liberty and Latitude to their
Friends and to one another, they give no quarter to their Adversaries out of
their Communion, but pursue them, and particularly Mr. Calvin, with the
heaviest Charges of Blasphemy and Tritheism, Nay, even of Atheism, for the
least unwary and exceptionable Expressions about the Trinity, as may be seen in
Genebrard de Trin. Fevardentius's Theomachia, Salmero's Disput. Possevin in
Atheismis, and others. The Reason is plain, they hated them upon other
Accounts, and were resolved to quarrel with them upon all Occasions they could
find: They bore an hostile Mind and inveterate Spirit, and implacable Malice
against them for other Reasons, and therefore lay at Catch, to Accuse and
Expose them, though never so falsely and unjustly, and resolved to pursue the
Charge of Heresy against them in all Points where there was the least shadow
or color, and especially in so tender a point as this of the Trinity, where
it is so easy to make it with a little Spite and Malice, and so hard to avoid
it with the utmost Caution, upon so Nice and Difficult a Subject. The Learned
Friends of the Reformation have sufficiently cleared and vindicated Mr.
Calvin's Orthodoxy in those Points, notwithstanding some few Expressions, by
which he dislikes calling the Trinity one God, etc. as not strictly Scriptural,
(in Epist. ad Polon) and it would have been looked upon as a very odious and
ill Office, to the Service of Popery and Dishonor of the Reformation, if any
Protestant had joined with his Popish Enemies and Accusers, and countenanced or
maintained the same Charge against him. If there were a true Spirit of
Christian Charity, Love and Good Will among us, our Differences and Dissentions
about the Trinity would quickly be at an end, however high they have been
carried of late by some among us. Your Lordship I know will take Care, with
your great Prudence and Temper, to preserve this among us at Westminster: And
may the God of Peace and Love inspire the Hearts of all Christians, and
especially of all Clergymen, who are of the same Faith and the same Communion,
that they may keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, and hold the
Mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience.

Some Opinions and Differences of the Schoolmen and Romish Divines, about Deus
Vnus and Trinus.
DEus genuit Deum qui non est Deus Pater, ergo non est tantum unus Deus
personaliter, quod verum est. Durandus in Sentent. Lib. 1. Did. 5. Qu. 2.

Sensit Petrus de Aliaco, in 1 Q. 3. circa finem, et Q. 5. per totum, et ut
videtur, Marsilius in 1. q. 5. art. 2. ad 5. Sc. de rigore Sermonis recte posse
dici personas esse tres Deos, et tantum vitari oportere eum modum loquendi
propter periculum ne credantur tres Divinitates, Valent. Disp. 2. Qu. 13.
Punct. 3.

Quum Deus ponitur respectu termini vel praedicati essentialis supponit pro
essentia, sed quum in respectu termini vel praedicati notionalis supponit pro
persona, et hoc intelligitur quum ponitur respectu termini precise supponentis
pro supposito vel essentia, et hoc rationabiliter tum propter identitatem
divinae naturae et suppositi, tum etiam propter Haereticos, ne si Deus precise
supponeret pro supposito, multae propofitiones essent concedendae quae per
astutiam Haereticorum simplicibus propositae, essent ijs occasio errandi and
credendi pluralitatem Deorum ac Divinarum Essentiarum. Biel Repertorium, L. 1.
Did. 4. Qu. 1.

Notandum quod cum Deus ponitur cum signo alietatis, aut importante
pluralitatem supponit essentialiter, and hoc ne si concederent quod Pater est
alius Deus a Filio, simplices putarent esse plures Deos; cavent enim Doctores
ne detur occasio errandi simplicibus quo credant esse plures, Deos
essentialiter distinctos, quo modo errent idololatrae, and ideo illae negantur
Deus genuit Deum, Pater Filius and Spiritus sanctus sunt tres Dij, quamvis
concedatur quod persona genuit aliam personam divinam. Ibid.

Catholice dici potest una essentia trium personarum et tres personae unius
essentiae, non autem unus Deus trium personarum, vel tres personae unius Dei.
Id. L. 1. Did. 34.

Haec cum Petro Aliaco non satisfacerent, ( Sc. Explicatio symboli Athanas. non
tres aeterni, etc. quam Thom. Aquin. Holcot and alij dabant) aliam
interpretationem indagare coactus est; in Symbolo, inquit, cum concedantur tres
coaeterni, miror quare ibidem negantur tres aeterni, nec video rationem
diversitatis; postea dum quaerit sitne aliquo sensu concedendum tres esse Deos,
quid his responderi velit, indicat, ait Dei nomen aliquando sumi essentialiter,
atque ita reciprocari cum essentiae divinae sen divinitatis vocabulo, eique
esse plane (...), aliquando intelligi personaliter supponereque (...) pro
divina persona et sic Deum generari a Deo, et Christum Dei esse Filium; priore
designatione non credendum esse tres Deos, ne Dei essentia multiplex
existimetur, posteriore quemmodum istae propositiones recipiuntur, non tantum
est una persona divina vel tres sunt personae divinae quarum quaelibet est
Deus, sic agnoscendas esse has non tantum est unus Deus, vel plures sunt Dei,
quod tales idem penitus valiant juxta hanc alteram significationem idque
apparere per nominis rationem atque vim. Aliaco q. 5. prim. Sentent. Genebrard
de Trin. l. 3. p. 234.

Posset etiam dici nomen Deus interdum spectare ad personam and eo sensu esse
tres Deos, -- interdum idque saepius ad essentiam referri, -- tumque Vnicus est
Deus, Id. p. 237.

Si mavis tres Deos in tres divinas personas possis dicere atque interpretari,
non vocabulum Deus aliquando sumitur hypostatice ut Deus a Deo, Id. L. 2. p.
155.

Ad eosdem pertinet, quod adjicio de tribus Dijs, hoc (...), quum Petrus
Aliacensis assentientibus Theologis putet in aliquo sensu verum, tamen apud
populum magno offendiculo dicitur, inter eruditos nihil habet offensae, quibus
cognitum est Dei vocabulum, non semper sonare divinam essentiam, sed accipi
nomen pro persona ut cum dicimus Deus gignit Deum, and Jesum esse Filium Dei,
nihil enim aliud intelligunt docti, quam esse tres personas in quarum
unamquamque competat Dei vocabulum. Neque prorsus negat Alliacensis posse dici
tres omnipotentes ac tres aeternos, and si negaret consequitur tamen ex his
quae concessit posse dici tres Deos, licet non simpliciter, quemadmodum enim
juxta Dialecticam non est absurdum dicere tres sapientes una sapien tia, tres
bonos eadem bonitate, tres omnipotentes eadem omnipotentia^, tres esse sed
eadem essentia, tres volentes eadem voluntate, it a non arbitror impium dicere
tres Deos eodem Deitate, non enim minus ad substantiam Dei pertinet Deum esse
quam sapientem esse, verum ut haec non asserit Alliacensis, ita nec ego assero
in hoc tantum adduxi ut docerem fieri posse ut quaedam sint vera juxta sensum
aliquem, quae tamen apud imperitos efferri non expediat. Erasmus in
Hyperaspist. diatribae contra Lutherum de servo arbitrio.

However exceptionable the Assertions of these Men are, yet the Church of Rome
never censured them, and the Socinians cannot take any advantage against them,
fince Socinus Tantum abest ut qui ista profitetur (sc. Christianis duos esse
Deos, hoc enim objecrat Wiekus) propter id ut Wieko placet, non Christianus sed
Ethnicus sit appellandus. Socin. Respon. ad Wiekum. C. 1.
says ( against Wiekus) that it is so far from Pagan to worship two Gods, that
it is most Christian, and Smalcius says it is Jewish to believe and worship but
one God, and Crellius Quasi aut duos Deos haberemus summos, aut Unum babere
Deum summum, alterum vero ab eo dependentem eique subordinatum sacris literis
sit adversum? Crel. de uno Deo, C. 1. S. 2. C. 18.
says it is no way contrary to Scripture to have two Gods, they who are for
worshipping Christ, must all say this, and their Heresy lies in making him a
God only by Office and not by Nature, they are therefore truly chargeable with
Polytheism as the Arriaus were of old, who worship a Creature as God, or any
being that has not the true Divine Nature and Essence, but they who hold the
same Divinity, the same one Essence to be in three Persons, and communicated
from the first to the two other, as from one (...) and Principium can never be
charged with Polytheism or Tritheism; all the Tritheists who were condemned in
late and dark times, holding three Essences and so opposing the (...), as the
Peratae in Theodoret, Philoponus in Nicephorus, and Photius: Joachim in the
Lateran Council, Roscelin in the Synod of Soissons, Abaelardus in the Synod of
Soissons, Porretanus in that of Rhemes, but of this elsewhere. I shall only
instance further in the Opinions and Differences of the Scholastic and Romish
Divines about three Eternals, Omnipotents, etc. and three Subsistencies.

Dicimus tres existentes, vel tres sapientes, aut tres aeternos and increatos
si adjective sumantur, si vero substantive sumantur dicimus unum increatum,
immensum and aeternum, ut Athanasius dicit. Cajetan Comment. in Thom. Qu. 39.
Art. 3. Athanasius substantivis usus est adjective in Symbolo. Javell. Exposit.
in Cajetan. Ibid.

Petavius explains this otherwise against these and Thomas Aquinas too, -- Quem
ad finem verba illa in Symbolo posita sunt imprimis spectare convenit, haec
igitur adversus Arrianorum Haeresin opposita videntur a conditore symboli, quae
Trinitatem cum tribus componebat personis inaequalibus et substantia diversis
quarum singulae singulis constabant ut naturis it a proprietatibus naturae.
Petav. de Trin. p. 286.

Molina had before upon the Principles of Aquinas, endeavored to reconcile the
Athanasian Creed, about one Omnipotent Eternal, with the Council of Lateran,
which declared for three Coeternals, etc. thus; Ex conclusione D. Thomae
regulaque proposita, facile erit intelligore rationem conciliandi quaedam dicta
in Symbolo Athanasij and in Concilio Lateranensi Cap. Firm. de summa Trin. and
in fide catholica, quae primo aspectu videntur contraria inter se. In
symbolo-namque Athanasij, de Patre, Filio and Spiritu sancto dicitur, non tres
aeterni in plurali, sed unus aeternus, sicut non tres increati nec tres
immensi, sed unus increatus and unus immensus and infra, non tres omnipotentes
sed unus omnipotens. Cap. vero firm. de eodem Patre, Filio and Spiritu sancto
dicitur in plurali, consubstantiales, et coequales, et co-omnipotentes, et
coeterni, imo in eodem Symbolo Athanasij, eaedem personae etiam dicuntur
coeternae, eis verbis coeternae sibi sunt et coequales; haec, ex dictis, in
hunc modum concilianda. Athanasius in locis primo loco citatis, sumpsit nomina
illa substantive, (tametsi quaedam eorum, quod non sumantur in terminatione
neutra, pre se ferant formam Adjectivorum) ideoque negavit dici pluraliter de
tribus personis. Concilium vero Lateranense, idemque Athanasius, ubi seoundo
loco citatur, sumpserunt illa alia nomina adjective eaque ratione tribuerunt
illa tribus personis in numero plurali. Molina Comment. in Thom. p. 1. q. 39.
art. 3. disp. 1.

Arriba opposes Molina, and gives another Answer to this Difficulty, Respondeo
ad difficultatem, quod concilium Lateranense dum affirmat Patrem, Filium and
Spiritum sanctum in plurali numero esse consubstantiales, coequales and
coeternos, and coomnipotentes, loquitur de ipsis secundum rationem and
habitudinem relativam, quae ratione praedictae particulae defert pluralitatem
in suppositis Existentibus a part subjecti. Arriba conciliatorium Lib. 2.
disp. 3. c. 13.

As to the Divine Subsistencies the Differences are greater, Tres sunt de hac
re Scholasticorum Opiniones, prima unum esse subsistentiam essentialem seu
absolutam, and nullas personales seu relativas, ita Durandus, Paludanus,
Capreolus, in 3. d. 1. quibus videtur favere Thomas qu. 2. de poten. a. 1. and
qu. 8. a. 3, and 7. secunda tres esse subsistentias relativas and nullam
absolutam sen essentialem ita Bonaventura and alij multi, tertia unam esse
subsistentiam absolutam and tres relativas ita Cajetanus in 1 p. q. 3. a. 3.
and in 3 p. q. 2. a. 2. Becanus de Trin. C. 3. Qu. 11.

Singularis quaedam opinio doctissimi alioqui Theologi Cajetani, qui in 1 p.
qu. 3. art. 3. and qu. 39. art. 4. existimavit praeter tres subsistentias
relativas, quibus constituuntur personae, esse etiam in Divinis quandam
subsistentiam absolutam, quae cum essentia divina constituat hunce Deum
subsistentem, pro quo supponitur ille terminus, Deus acceptus essentialiter.
Valent. disp. 2. qu. 13.

Secunda sententia referri potest asserens tres personas vere and proprie esse
unum Deum ratione untus subsistentis communiter in Deitate, ablata vero
subsistentia communi non posse tres personas dici proprie and simpliciter unum
Deum: Sumitur ex Cajetan. 3 p. q. 3. a 6. and Durand. in 3. did. 1. q. 3.
Richard art. 1. qu. 5. ratio est quia posita subsistentia communi, hoc
subsistens in Deitate est hic Deus, qui proprie dicitur Pater, Filius and
Spiritus Sanctus, ablata vero subsistentia non potest designari in concreto
unus numero Deus, qui sit tres personoe. Suarez de Trin. L. 4. C. 12.

Non potest admitti quod sit unum suppositum commune tribus personis, quia hoc
esset confundere tres personas in unam personam seu hypostasin, unde merito
reprehenditur Gajetanus, quod aliquo modo admiserit unum suppositum commune
tribus perfonis quanquam non simpliciter, sed cum addito id dixerit, scilicec
suppositum incompletum vel personam incompletam, nam ratio suppositi repugnat
cum communicabilitate divinae substantiae. Suarez disput metaphys 34. in Deo
potest esse subsistentia communicabilis. Ibid.

Possumus intelligere hunc Deum esse quid commune tribus personis non solum
ratione naturae and personalitatis confuse conceptae, sed etiam ratione
subsistentiae communis. Id. T. 1. Comment. in 3 Thom. disp. 11. but of this see
Suarez T. 1. p. 3. disp. 11. sect. 3. and Valentia against it. 1 p. disp. 123.
c. 3.

Whoever reads the Schoolmen, especially upon these Propositions, Deus creat,
Deus generat, Deus spirat, Deus est incarnatus, and Hic Deus will find them
very different and perplexed, and yet all agreeing that the word Deus must be
taken ambiguously and equivocally, and not in one adequate and univocal sense,
but sometimes as an universal and communis terminus, sometimes singularly,
sometimes essentially, and sometimes personally, sometimes abstractly and
sometimes concretely, sometimes substantively and sometimes adjectively,
sometimes indefinitely and sometimes precisely, sometimes absolutely eminently
and appropriately, and sometimes particularly and connotatively. Those who are
versed in them cannot be ignorant of this, and that these distinctions are
necessary to account for God's being one and three, Deus unus and trinus, and
to take off the Contradiction of three Gods and one God in the Doctrine of the
Trinity.

But not to swell and enlarge too much this Farrago which I have made so, not
without design, like the Philosophers Acroamata, that while it is understood by
the Wise and Learned, it may not be obnoxious to the Ignorant and Captious
Carpere and Detrahere vel imperiti possunt, doctorum autem est and qui
laborantium novere sudorem vel lassis mauum porrigere, vel errantibus iter
ostendere. Hieron. in Jon. c. 4.
, upon the best Judgment I can make with my little Parts and Reading, having
nothing but Truth and Faith before my Eyes: The Schoolmen have perplexed and
entangled themselves and this Doctrine with Endless Difficulties, and run it
into such Contradictions as themselves own would be so in any thing else Tenet
praeterquam in proposito in divinis, eo quod nusquam alibi possunt esse tres
res quarum nulla est alia quae tamen sunt una res numero, sed tantum in divinis
illa reperitur. Biel Repertor L. 1. Did. 5. Qu. 1. Impossible putant unam rem
singularim esse plures res ficut impossible est in creaturis, -- and quidem in
Creaturis non datur instantia, sed in divinis datur. Ibid.

Distinctionem virtualem in eo formalissime consistere, quod uni realiter
indivisibili a part rei and independenter a nostris conceptibus conveniant
praedicata quae alioquin videtur contradictoria, and quidem in creaturis essent
contradictoria, -- in divinis posse eandem rem produci and non produci
communicari and non communicari quod nulli Creaturae convenit, -- in divinis
capacitatem majorem in una indivisibili re ad habenda praedicata contradictoria
quam in humanis, -- quod si rationem a priori hujus distinctionis quaeramus,
non aliam possumus reddere nisi infinitam perfectionem Dei, ratione cujus in
ordine ad aliqua praedicata in se opposita habet capacitatem ea recipiendi
simul, perinde ac si esset multiplex realiter, -- fateor eam aequivalentiam
difficulter intelligi, non est tamen propterea neganda, eam enim fides, in
cujus obsequium debemus captivare intellectum, manifest ostendit. Arrlaga
Tractat. de Mysterio Trinit. Disp. 42. Sect. 1.

Eidem indivisibili rei respectu alterius etiam indivisibilis convenit realiter
distingui and realiter esse idem. Ibid.

Qui non attingunt non aliud non esse idem, and non idem non esse aliud non
possunt capere etc. Cusan. in Crib. Alcor. L. 2. C. 8.


, (as for the same thing to be one and three, the same and not the same,
produced and not produced) and have obscured it with dark and unintelligible
(not to say false) terms, which only amuse but do not satisfy, as real
Essences distinct from singular Beings, and Existence without Subsistence, and
modes of Existence, Subsistence, and the like Explications of Obscurum per
obscurius, which are not to be found in any of the Fathers, but only in latter
Schoolmen and modern Metaphysics Tunc igitur existentia naturae substantialis
erit complete terminata quando suerit affecta modo existendi per se, hic ergo
modus complet rationem subsistentiae creatae, ille ergo habet propriam rationem
personalitatis seu suppositalitatis. Suarez Disp. Metaphys. 34. -- Pestquam
essentia est in actu, solum indiget modo existendi in se and per se declaratur
ex incarnatione Christi, nihil enim aliud intelligimus deesse humanitati
Christi, ut non subsistat subsistentia propria nisi talem existendi modum quo
sit per se and non in alio, nam in ea est integra omnis essentia actualis and
creata, and consequenter est etiam substantialis existentia humanae naturae,
tamen quia illa existentia ita est affecta ut innitatur verbo, a quo
sustentatur and pendet, ideo caret illa humanitas modo existendi per se, ergo
solum ex defectu hujusmodi non est subsistens nec persona creata, ergo talis
modus est qui babet rationem personalitatis creatae.

Id quod suppositum creatum addit supra naturam, distinguitur quidem in re ab
ipsa natura, non tamen omnino realiter tanquam res a re, sed modaliter, ut
modus rei a re.

Est ergo substantia transcendenter sumpta ut distinguitur contra accidens
(quia non potest substantia ab accidente formaliter accipere suum complementum)
non tamen entitas sed modus substantialis, atque ita non direct sed reductive
ponitur in praedicamento substantiae quia est aliquid substantiale. Suarez
Metaphys. Disp. 34.


, that they have thereby given too much advantage to the Socinians, who have
been prejudiced and hardened by these Scholastic Explications against the
Doctrine it self, so that the plainest Evidence and Demonstration of it from
Scripture will not persuade them to believe, what appears so unintelligible and
unreasonable as it is represented to them. The Doctrine seems to me, and I hope
may to others, even to them at last, to be liable to no such Charge, but to be
more plain and easy to our Thoughts, (though it has many things in it very
mysterious and incomprehensible, both as to the thing and the manner of it) as
it is proposed by Revelation, and as it is explained by the best Antiquity in
this manner: An Original, Eternal Mind, with an Eternal (...), or substantial
(...) issuing from it, and an Eternal Divine Spirit proceeding from both, for
the Ancients do not call them (...), or (...), or (...), which would represent
all of them rather as original and absolute, and not relative and derived from
another, as two of them are from one (...), Principium, Fons, Origo, etc. in
which they chiefly lay the Divine Unity, but always assert a real Trinity of
(...). This is the Explication of the Ancients which they hold with this more
plain Scriptural Account of the Trinity, that needs no Explication: One God the
Father, with an only begotten Son, (and so of the same Nature with himself) and
a Divine Spirit, the Spirit of the Father and the Son (who has Personal and
Divine Attributes, and Perfections plainly attributed to him) and so each of
the two latter are God in a true and proper sense, as habentes Deitatem and
Divina Natura praediti, but not unoriginated, or God in that high sense, as the
Father who is (...), and to whom therefore the term of God and one God, is more
peculiarly attributed and even appropriate in the Judgment of the Ancients Nam
quum id sit principium caeteris quod ingenitum, Deus solus Pater est, qui extra
originem est, ex quo hic est qui genitus. Tertul. seu Novatian. de Trin. Deus
quidem ostenditur Filius cui Divinitas tradita and porrecta conspicitur, and
tamen nihilominus unus Deus Pater probatur. Ibid.

(...). Athanas. Orat. coutra Arrianos.

Deum in verbo suo omnia fecisse, dum enim Deum audio Patrem cogito. Scotus
Erigena de Divis. Naturae, L. 1. P. 61.

Habeo libenterque accipio Dei nomine Patrem, Principij Filium Dei, Spiritus
Dei Spiritum Sanstum significatos. Ibid.


and Moderns Peculiariter and (...) tribuitur Patri Dei nomen. Ravanel.
biblioth. v. Deus and Persona. Caeterum Attributionem seu Appropriationem ut
vocant nominis Deus omnes in Scriptura pie ac prudenter exercitati facile
animadvertunt. -- Appropriatio autem omnino in eo sita est, quod vox Deus quae
caeteroquin pluribus numero personis est communis, tanquam unius nempe Patris
propria sumatur. Bisterfield contra Crel. L. 1. P. 41.

Nonne in hoc regno-solus Condaeus absolute princeps dicitur, idque elogium pro
ejus nomine proprio saepissime ponitur cum alij. -- Exemplum in quo Attributum
commune uni tantum ex illis ita recte tribuitur ut dicere ci soli competere. --
Placaeus contra Crell. P. 33.


. This is the Christian and Catholic Faith, which he that believes with or
without, with right or with wrong Explications is undoubtedly Orthodox. The
Truth seems to lie so plain, that I wonder any should miss it, I have picked it
up where others have over looked it: It is generally observed to lie between
contending Parties. The Socinians, especially Crellius, insist very much upon
the Scriptural Notion of One God the Father: The Ancients also do this, as I
have shown, but not exclusively to the Divinity of Son and Holy Ghost, as the
others have done very Erroneously and Heretically. The School men mist this
plain Notion, whilst they carefully maintain the other, but run into a
Labyrinth of Subtleties and Difficulties about One's being Three, and Three
One, and weave an artificial cloudy Network of thin but dark Cobwebs, such as
Real Universals, Substantial Modes, Subsistent Relations, Unsubsistent
Existencies, Concrete Personal Properties, etc. that through it One Being may
look and appear as Three, and yet be One; and to avoid the Objection of Three
Gods, which they need not have been puzzled with, if they had hit right upon
that of One, according to Scripture and Antiquity, they make three distinct
Subsistencies, and but one distinct Subsistent, Three opposite Modes and
Relations, and but one Subject of them, Three Divine Persons, and but One
Divine Being; Three Somewhats, and but One Thing. My hearty Zeal and Concern
for the Honor of Christianity, and my deep Regret to see its Faith thus
Mangled and Perverted, and my Pity to see so many groping for the Light at
Noonday, and looking so carefully for what they have in their hands, has made
me venture to show that which I wonder I did not always see, and I hope others
may do the same.

Some Remarks of the Fathers upon Sabellianism, and the wrong and Jewish Notion
of One God which it held, and from whence it arose.
SImplices enim quique ne dixerim imprudentes, and idiotes, quae major semper
credentium pars est, quoniam and ipsa regula fidei a pluribus Deis saculi ad
Vnicum and verum Deum transfert, non intelligentes unicum quidam sed cum sua
oeconomia esse credendum, expavescunt ad oeconomiam, numerum and dispositionem
Trinitatis. Divisionem praesumunt unitatis, quando unitas ex semetipsa derivans
Trinitatem, non destruatur ab illa sed administretur. Itaque duos and tres jam
jactitant a nobis praedicari, se vero unius Dei ^ultores ^pr^^sunm^t, quasi non
and unitas irrationaliter collecta Heresin faciat? and Trinitas rationaliter
expensa veritatem constituat. Tertul. adv. Praxeam.

(...). Athanas. contra Sabellij Gregales.

(...). Ibid.

(...). Basil Epist. 64. ad Neocaesar.

(...). Ibid.

(...). Ibid.

(...). Id. contra Sabel. and Arr.

(...). Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 25.

(...). Id. Orat. 1.

(...), Cyrll Alexandrin. in Thesauro, p. 109.

It was Sabellius his plausible and twitting Question; (...)? Epiphan. Here Is.
62. Thus Noetus gloried in his being an Unitarian, (...), Id. Here Is. 57. But
the Father calls him (...) for those Reasons, which are a Demonstration against
his Opinion of One Being; (...). Epiphan. Ibid.

They brought all the places of Scripture for One God against the Real Trinity,
as others do since, and run into their Error, to avoid Tritheism. (...). Epiph.
Ibid.

From all which it is plain, and will be plainer to those who read these
Authors at large, that it is Heretical to believe One God in a Jewish and
Sabellian (I may add now in a Mohammedan and Socinian) Sense, as well as Three
Gods in a Gentile and Pagan, or Marcionite and Valentinian; and that
Christianity is between those Extremes, believing One God the Father, a Son,
who is God begotten of him, and a Holy Ghost, who is God proceeding from both.
I conclude with a Quotation which the Learned Reader will understand the full
Purport of: (...). Greg. Nyssen. adv. Gre. T. 2. p. 82.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
He Reader is desired to add these words which were omitted, p. 20. lin. ult.
No way contrary to that of the Church of England, I am as well -- Many other
Errata's having slipped correction, the Reader is desired to excuse and amend.

Three Sermons of the Author, in Octavo, finished before his Death, will be
Published in a few days.


