SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the HERB Cassiny; Imported from CAROLINA: SHOWING
Its Admirable VIRTUES in Curing the SMALL POX.

Written by a Physician in the Country to Esquire Boil at London.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1695.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the HERB Cassiny: SHOWING Its Admirable Virtues in
Curing the SMALL POX. In a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
I Am sorry to hear that the Small Pox is so rise at London, it is the less
Wonder to find you so Inquisitive after a good Specific Remedy in that
Distemper: I must tell you, I know no better Medicine in that Case than the
Famous Carolina Herb called Cassiny.

There are abundance of Persons now Dye of the Small Pox in our Town and
Country, but I attribute it very much to ill Management of Nurses and Ignorant
People, who give many hot Medicines, under the pretense of driving out, as
Sack, and Saffron, and Mithridate, and Venice Treacle; by this means they fire
the Blood into a Feavor, and that kills them. I only give a few Drops of the
Tincture of this temperate Herb in Water Gruel, or in Panado, or Posset Drink,
and do nothing else all the while, but leave it to Nature, and I find better
Success.

I have had many in one Family down at one time of this loathsome Distemper,
and all recovered with this Method; but if any desire to dye with more pompous
Prescriptions, much good may it do them.

The Medicines made of this Herb do not in the least heat the Blood, but rather
moderate and gently allay the violent Fermentation of it, if it be too high,
and yet safely help the Expulsive Faculty if it be too weak. This Specific
keeps them out of the Head and Throat, and secures the Lungs, by helping
Expectoration.

I have often observed, that the slower they are in coming forth, the more
dangerous; and if the Salivation or Spitting cease before the eleventh Day,
especially in a Flux Pox, there is then much more reason to fear the Patients
being poisoned by the return of the purulent Matter inwards: And yet in this
extreme hazard the Tincture of this Herb in Small Beer, and some times in Tare
Broth, has saved the Lives of many.

I being once sent for to a Boarding-School, where several young Gentlewomen,
who highly valued their Beauty, were surprised with the Small Pox, I only gave
them the Drops drawn out of this Herb in all their liquid Aliment, as
Water Gruel, and Posset Drink, and Small Beer, and caused them to keep their
Faces covered with their Masks all the time, and they recovered, and preserved
their Complections.

I remember that an Eminent Physician of London told me an extraordinary Case
of a Court Lady of great Beauty, a Patient of his, who was much afflicted at
the Death of many who dyed of the Small Pox, and he was resolved to try a
contrary Method to what had been taken with those, he kept her moderately warm
covered with Scarlet Blankets, omitted Bleeding, and caused her to take no more
Nourishment than would keep her from starving; her Drink was Posset Drink, with
Figgs in it; her Food only Bread and Water boiled together, with seven Drops of
this Specific which came out of Carlina; he caused a live Sheep to be kept in
the Chamber all the time of her Illness, to draw away the malignity; the Sheep
dyed, but the Lady recovered, although it was a very unkindly sort, which much
threatened her Life; the Dr. told me he durst never give her any Opiate
Medicine, lest it should stop her Spitting, which is the most proper way of
Evacuation in all sorts of Poxes, both great and small.

The Virtues of this excellent Plant are at large mentioned in an Account of
Carolina, and also in the History of the West Indies, a Latin Book written by
John Delait of Antwerp, many Years since, who tells us that it is an Admirable
Dioretick, it also greatly corroborates Nature, and helps her to cast off
whatever is offensive to the Animal and Vital Spirits, and also it promotes
genuine easy Sweats, and mild friendly transpirations, preserving the Mind
serene, and the Body active and lively a long while after, without any other
Nourishment, and none but Persons of great Quality are permitted to use this
Noble Beverage, which they drink as we do Tea and Coffee.

Purchase in his Pilgrimage tells us, that at Florida, now called Carolina, they
live to a very great Age, and speaks of one of their Kings who was three
Hundred years old; and whenever the Inhabitants of that Country meet with
Mournful Accidents, or Subjects of Lamentation, they drink Cassiny to cheer
their Hearts.

A famous Sea-Chyrurgeon who came from those Parts, had most of his Ships
Passengers taken sick of the Small Pox, and recovered them with Medicines made
with this Herb.

I have so great an Opinion of this Plant, that if I had an Only Child who had
the Small Pox, I would give him the Tincture of it in all his Drink, and depend
upon it under God, as much as I would upon the Peruvian Bark in a Quartan Ague.

FINIS.

