THE MYSTERY OF THE Christian Faith AND OF THE Blessed TRINITY VINDICATED AND
THE Divinity of Christ PROVED.

In Three SERMONS.

Preached at Westminster-Abbey upon Trinity-Sunday, June the 7th, and September
21. 1696.

By the Late Reverend WILLIAM PAIN, D. D.

In the Press before his Death, and by himself ordered to be Published.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Cumberland at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1697.

MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715.

GEORGIUS D.G. MAG. ^^^^ET ^^^ REX ^D.

portrait of George I

J. Pine sculp
University of Cambridge bookplate

THE MYSTERY OF THE Christian Faith AND OF THE Blessed TRINITY VINDICATED.
SERMON I.
1 TIMOTHY iii. 9. Holding the Mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience.
THIS Advice which is here given to Deacons, does almost equally concern all
Christians; for though here are some Duties peculiar to the Ministers of
Religion, relating to their Office, yet the common Duties of Christianity are
bound upon Them and the People with equal ties and obligations. So that every
Christian is under the same engagements to be a Good Man, to live as Virtuously
and Religiously, and to perform all the Duties of our common Christian
Religion, as either a Presbyter or a Deacon, both which, some think, are meant
here; Faith and a Good Conscience are to be kept or held by All, and he is not
a Christian who lets go, or makes Shipwreck of either.

The Christian Faith though it be a Mystery, yet is not as the Heathen
Mysteries, to be a Secret kept up and concealed from the Vulgar, and known only
to the Priests, to the Mystae and Adepti, by a sort of Disciplina Arcani, but
is by the Gospel Revelation discovered and communicated to All: All Catechumens
are to be Taught and Instructed in it, All who are Baptized are to profess it,
and all the Fideles are to understand and to keep it, as the Faith once
delivered to them by Christ and his Apostles, and by the Church and Holy
Scriptures. The believing Christ to be the Messiah, and Sent of God, is not the
only Fundamental Article of Christianity as some would have it, for if it were,
all the Heretics in the Apostolic and after Ages had come up to it, against
whom notwithstanding St. John in his Epistles, and other Canonic Writers speak
so much as well as St. Clement, Polycarp, Ignatius and the earliest Writers who
renounced both the Faith and the Communion of those Heretics, notwithstanding,
they owned Christ to be the Messiah; so that this was not a sufficient Faith
for a Christian, as such.

But it may be asked, Are ordinary Christians then to believe the Mysterious,
and Abstruse Doctrines of Christianity? Such as the Trinity, the Divinity and
Incarnation of Christ, and the like, which are so difficult, and unintelligible
that the most Learned cannot understand them or agree about them; are these to
be accounted Fundamental and Essential Articles of Faith necessary to be
believed by the meanest and most ordinary Capacities, which are so puzzling and
so intricate to the highest?

I Answer, Whatever is Essential and Fundamental to Christianity, and as such
is plainly Revealed by God, upon which the Peculiar Faith, Hope and Worship of
it is built, however incomprehensible and Mysterious it is, which shall be
considered immediately, is to be believed by every Christian; as, that God sent
his only Son into the World, and that we are Redeemed by him, and that we are
to place our Hopes, Trust and Confidence in him for Salvation, and that we are
to Worship him, and Pray to him, and to Honor him, even as we Honor the
Father. This which is the Peculiar Scheme and Character of Christianity, and
necessarily supposes Christ's Divinity, and that he is not a Creature; and also
the Divinity of the Holy Ghost the Comforter and the Sanctifier, and so
consequently a Divine Trinity, this is as necessary to be believed by every one
as Christianity, for it is the very make and peculiar economy of Christianity,
as it is distinct from Natural Religion. This Faith with a Good Life, or a Life
answerable to the Rules and Precepts of the Gospel is necessary to make and
constitute a good Christian. To ask whether a good Life will not save a Man
without this Faith, is to be answered with the same question, or one much like
it, Whether such a good Life will save a Man without believing Christianity.
They are both necessary to a Christian, who is thus to hold the Mystery of the
Faith in a pure Conscience.

I shall from the words Consider these two General Things.

I. Why the Christian Faith is called a Mystery? II. How we are to hold it in a
pure Conscience?


I. Why the Christian Faith is called a Mystery? Which it is upon Three
Accounts.

1. As it was not knowable by Natural Reason without an Express and Immediate
Divine Revelation. 2. As it was very obscurely and imperfectly Revealed before
the Gospel, and the coming of Christ. 3. As it is Incomprehensible to our
Reason and what we cannot fully conceive and Apprehend even after it is clearly
Revealed.
1. As it is not knowable by Natural Reason without an Express and Immediate
Divine Revelation. For thus that God should have a Son, an Eternal, only
begotten Son, of the same Nature and Likeness with himself, and that he should
send this his Son into the World to become a Man, to take on him our Nature,
and be made Flesh, that so he might dye for us, and be a Sacrifice for our
Sins, and Save and Redeem Mankind according to this Mysterious Method, Economy
and Dispensation of the Gospel, this is what Reason could never have found out,
nor any thing but the Infinite Wisdom, and no less Infinite Goodness of God
have contrived.

That there is a God, an Invisible Maker of the World, a First Cause of All
Things, this Reason and the Light o^ Nature teaches us, and the invisible
things of him from the Creation are plainly seen by the things he has made,
even his Eternal Power and Godhead. His Power and Wisdom and Goodness are
sufficiently manifest to our Thoughts and Reason by the admirable Structure and
the commodious and beautiful and orderly contrivance of the World and all the
things that are in it, and we can know most of his Attributes and Essential
Perfections from Reason and the plain deductions and consequences of it, but
that this Infinite and Almighty and All-sufficient God, who had all possible
perfections in himself, and all Perfections sufficient to his own Happiness and
Self-enjoyment, and to the Needs and Necessities of his Creatures, and to all
the Purposes of Creation and Providence, that he should beget a Son, another
Divine Person and Being like himself, and communicate the same Divine Nature
and Godhead to him that belonged to himself, this which the Scripture
Revelation acquaints us with, is so far from being known by Reason, that That
staggers at it, and asks two bold questions about it, How this can be? And to
what purpose it is? And Mahomet in his Alcoran Azoara 12. cap. Helmon. in
Alcoran. Nec Christum Deum adorare confessus est (sc. Mahomet.) ne forte duos
Deos adorare deprehenderetur. Cantacuzen. in Mahomet. Orat. 3.
offers several reasons against it, among which this is one, That God and his
Son would make two Gods, and that they must worship only one God.

These Reasons, I think may be fairly answered, but Reason it self could nor
have known or collected this either from the Divine fecundity, or from any
Natural Perfection or Property of God knowable by the Light of Nature, it is
only Revelation acquaints us with it, and lets us at the same time see the
admirable ends and uses and purposes of this, if not for the designs of
Creation and Providence, yet for the Redemption of the World by this Son of
God, which is a work as great and as Divine if not more so than the other two.

It Is the peculiar Character, Frame and Scheme of Christianity to reveal this
Mystery fully to us, this adorable Mystery of Divine Love and Wisdom, God's
Saving Lost and undone Mankind by his Son Jesus Christ; Reason could not have
discovered this, nor can it now penetrate into all the deep Counsels of the
Divine Govenment, and hidden Reasons of the Divine Wisdom which made this
either absolutely necessary, or to be sure the most fit and convenient Method
to Save and Redeem Mankind.

This is such a Mystery of State, such a Secret of the Heavenly and Divine
Policy and Management, that whether God could have Effected and Accomplished
this any other way is unknown to us, and our Reason must cry out upon the
Thoughts of it, O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
God, Romans 11.33.
how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out.

Further, The Christian Revelation discovers to us another Divine Person
besides the Son, to wit, the Holy Ghost, who proceeds from the Father and the
Son, and who was sent by them in a Visible and extraordinary manner, and was to
be the Comforter and Paraclete, as Christ the Redeemer and Savior; and was to
Sanctify, and Fit, and Qualify all Christians for that Salvation which Christ
had Purchased and Obtained for them, without whom Christianity could not have
been spread and established in the World, nor in the Hearts of Men, and who was
therefore to bear a Peculiar and Distinct part and Office in the Accomplishing
the great work of our Redemption, which was to be Performed by the Fathers
sending his Son, and both sending the Holy Ghost, to Perfect and Effect this
Great Thing; and This is the Constitution, the Frame, the Faith of
Christianity, as a Religion distinct from Natural, and which is such a Mystery
as could not have been found out by Natural Light and Reason without an
immediate Divine Revelation, for it was not any Natural Property of the Divine
Nature, so far as we know, to have a Son and a Holy Spirit, nor did the
Purposes of Creation and Providence require this, and therefore the Deists and
others think more than one Divine Person, and one Infinite Being Unnecessary;
and as far as Reason alone goes, neither the Truth nor the Necessity of more
would appear, but Revelation, and especially the Christian acquaints us with
God's having a Son, and a Holy Spirit, distinct Persons from himself; the one
Begotten of him and so his only Son, the other proceeding from him and the Son
both, and these two still in the Father, naturally and inseparably united to
him as to the Fountain of their Being. One with him in the same Divine Nature
and Essence, and All Three together Accomplishing, Effecting and Perfecting the
Redemption of Mankind and bearing distinct parts in that Great and Blessed Work.

2. As Reason could not have known or found out any thing of this, so the
Revelation of it was at first very Obscure and Imperfect; there being only some
smaller Glimpses, and lesser manifestations of it, and those covered with Types
and shadows, and Prophetic Symbols, through which the Fathers saw as through a
Glass darkly, and beheld the Promises of the Messiah yet afar off, so that the
Jewish Law and Dispensation, though it wholly pointed at this thing, and Christ
was the end of it, yet was but a Shadow of these good things to come, and Moses
had a vail over his face, by which the Children of Israel could not see to the
end of their own Typical Institution, till the vail was taken away in Christ.
And the Mystery which was kept secret since the World began 2 Cor. 3.14.
, which had been hid from Ages and Generations Romans 16.25.
, and which in other Ages was not made known unto the Sins of Men Col. 1.26.
, was by the Gospel revealed and manifest and made known to all men, to the
Gentiles as well as to the Jews Ephesians. 3.5.
.

Adam immediately after his Fall had this Mystery of Gods sending the Messiah
into the World for the Salvation of Mankind promised and revealed to him in
those words, The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15.
And no doubt he transmitted this great and comfortable Tradition to all his
Posterity, and there seem to be the broken remains and Characters of it in some
parts of the Religion of all Mankind, especially in the general if not
Universal Custom of Sacrifices, and the secret Cabala and mysterious design
seems to run through the Gentile Theology, which was a corruption of the
Patriarchal Religion, from whence some Marks and Footsteps of this Original
Mysterious Tradition were preserved and continued among the Gentiles, as
appears in the Prophesies of Balaam of Old, and the Sybils afterward, and in
the Notion of a Trinity among the Platonists and others, which outdoes any
thing to be found about that matter in any Jewish Writer, and must come from
some Ancient Cabala, and Traditionary Account of it.

How far the Jews had a knowledge and belief of it, we want their Writings to
acquaint us, though in some of those we have, there are remarkable intimations
of it, as in the Caldee Paraphrase the Messiah is often called the Mamra
Jehovae, the Word of God, the (...), as St. John calls him, and there, and in
the Jerusalem Targum, he is represented as a substantial Word, and as a Divine
Person; and several of their Rabbis interpret that of 110 Psalm, The Lord said
unto my Lord, of the Messiah; and so that of Jeremy 23. where he is called the
Lord, or Jehovah our Righteousness; and they often speak of their Emanations
from the Kedem, or Essence of the Ancient of days; and in their Prayers and
Liturgies, particularly in a Collect used at the Feast of Tabernacles, God is
invoked as Sanctified with three Sanctifications; and in a Famous Book among
them, called The Gate of Righteousness, this Sanctification is called a
Mystery, whereby, they say, is meant the Procession of the Emanations from the
Corona, which is the Mystery in Isa. 6.3. Holy, Holy, Holy. Galatinus, and
Voisin, and other Rabbinical Writers, produce many such Instances out of the
Jewish Writers to this purpose, notwithstanding which I doubt the Notion of the
Messiah as a Divine Person, and as the Son of God in our Sense, was lost among
all the latter Jews, who looked upon him only as a Temporal Prince, and an
Earthly Monarch; and though in many places of the Old Testament, and especially
in the Book of Psalms, there are several Proofs and Authorities for the belief
of a Trinity, and the Messiah's being a Divine Person, yet there is nothing in
their Revelation that has any Evidence of it equal to that of the Gospel, and
therefore notwithstanding all imperfect and obscure Revelations of it before,
it is called there a Mystery, which has been hid from Ages and Generatiins,
but is now made manifest, Colos. 1.26. Which was kept secret since the World
began, but now is made manifest, Romans 16.26. Which in other Ages was not made
known unto the Sons of men, as it is now revealed unto us, Ephesians. 3.6. Our
Socinian Adversaries will allow the Christian Faith to be a Mystery upon these
two Accounts I have mentioned. And I must confess the word Mystery is generally
used in Scripture in these Senses; but it is not so much the Word as the Thing
we are to Consider, namely, whether there be any Truths in Religion
Incomprehensible to our Reason? And this is the Third Reason why I would have
the Christian Faith called a Mystery which they so much Expose and Ridicule,
and which I shall endeavor to Defend as it contains,

3. Something Incomprehensible and Inconceivable, and Unaccountable to our
Reason and Understanding, even after it is the most fully and clearly revealed
by the Gospel. By which I do not mean that we have no Idaea, Conception or
Knowledge at all of what we do believe concerning it, for then it would be just
such a Mystery as it is to those who know nothing at all of it, a Thing
perfectly unknown, a Nullity, a Nonentity, which is no manner of Object of our
Faith, and concerning which we can neither affirm or deny any things not have
any Persuasion or Disswasion about it. The Trinity would then be only an empty
word, or sound without any meaning, or signification, like the word (...) among
the unlearned Greek Scribes, mentioned by St. Hierome, Epist. 136.
put for the Hebrew (...), but we know very well what is meant by those words
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, or Spirit, though to connect, and unite those
Idea's, and to make such Propositions out of those Terms as are agreeable to
Faith may be a difficulty.

2. Yet neither are we so to join, and unite those Idea's nor to make any such
Propositions out of those Terms, as shall be inconsistent with themselves, and
destroy, and contradict one another, as to say that they are One, and that they
are Three in the same respect, the same sense, and consideration. The doing
this, or endeavoring to do it, has wretchedly perplexed our Christian Faith,
and made it be called by its Enemies, a Mystery of Nonsense, Absurdity and
Contradiction, and exposed it as such to our Heretical Adversaries; whereas had
we gone no farther then Scripture, the only Rule of our Faith in this matter,
and held with that, that to us there is One God the Father, One God, 1 Cor.
8.6. Ephesians. 4.6. John 17.3.
and Father of all, who is above all, and had we known him the only true God;
as Christ calls him, not exclusively, but eminently, and by way of Excellency,
and Prerogative, by which the Name and Title of God is peculiarly praedicated
of God the Father in Scripture, Calvin in Protheses Valent. Gent.
as Calvin ingenuously delivers it, to use his own words, Ingenue tradimus
(...) Dei nomen Patri proprie ascribi: And another Protestant Divine his
Follower, Zanchius de tribus Elohim, L. 5. C. 5.
Patrem sic vocari (Vnum and solum Deum) (...) quia totius est Deitatis fons,
which is the great Reason given by the Fathers of the Divine Unity, and in this
the Peculiariter and (...) tribuitur Patri nomen Dei. Ravanell. Bibl. v. Deus
and Persona.
Papists agree with them. Had we considered this plain Scriptural account, and
observation that one God is spoken, and praedicated of the Father, and meant of
him, when it is said both in the Old Testament, and the New. The Lord thy God
is One God, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Mark 12.32.
and there is none other but he, or besides him; we had not given occasion for
that objection of our Adversaries, against our Faith, of its implying a
Contradiction, or of its setting up more Gods than one. The One God whom we
Pray to in the Lord's Prayer, and in other Christian Offices, and Addresses,
whom we profess to believe in, in our Creed, and whom the Scripture calls so,
is God the Father Almighty; and he has an only begotten Son, of the same
Nature and Essence with himself, who is the brightness of his Glory, and the
express Image of his Person; and there is also an Holy Spirit proceeding from
both, and sent by both, who has the Characters, and Attributes of Divinity
plainly ascribed to him, and who is joined with the Father, and the Son in the
Office of Christian Baptism, and in the Form of Christian Blessing, and against
whom the most high, and unpardonable Sin may be committed. This is our
Christian Faith which as it lies in the Scripture has no contradiction in it,
that I know of, nor do the several terms whereof it consists destroy, or oppose
one another.

These three are one, is the only thing in Scripture, or in our Faith that
sounds as a Contradiction, and in one, and the same sense it must be owned such
a downright contradiction, that it cannot be true, some would therefore
suspect, and throw out that passage, and are very willing to find some Copies
of the Bible without it, it being the only place of Scripture that says this,
but our Savior says, He, and his Father are one, John 10.30. and three may be
one as well as two. We must therefore consider the true sense, and meaning of
the words, which was not to teach us a new way of numbering, or to destroy the
nature of numbers, no more then when it is said Man, and Wife are One, Christ,
and Believers are One, and the many hundred Converts to Christianity were of
one Heart, and of one Soul; there are several sorts of Unity, there is an Unity
of Consent, and agreement which may be amongst a great many, of Power, and
Authority which may be possessed and executed by several Persons, who may be
all one General, Admiral, Chancellor, and even one Sovereign, and Royal
Monarch. A great many Individuals may be one in Nature, and Essence as all
Mankind are, hence the Distinction of a Specifical and Numerical Unity, and of
a Specifical and Numerical Essence, though I take Essence to be a common
Nature, or General Idea, taking in several things at one view, and that there
is no such thing as particular Essence, distinct from particular Beings; so
that there is no multiplication of Essence in several Divine Persons, or
Beings. Now as to those three being One, it may be meant in any way whatever,
so far as those words alone import; but there are other places of Scripture,
and there is a connection, and analogy of our Faith from all places compared
together, which oblige us to believe that the Son, and Holy Ghost have the same
Divine Nature and Essence with the Father, derived, and communicated to them,
Eternally, Permanently, and Perpetually, and that they are in the Father, as in
the Fountain of their Being; and are naturally, and inseparably united to him,
and that he is the self-existent, Unoriginated Principle, the Root and Fountain
of the other two, and therefore they are One with him, because though having
real Beings, and subsistences of their own, yet they are from him, and in him.

But still it will be objected, that each of them is God; the Father is God,
the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and then there must be Three Gods,
and yet but One God; which brings the contradiction still upon us. I Answer;
The One God is spoken of God the Father in Scripture as I have shown you; and
as a great many Ignat. Irenae. Athanas. Greg. Naz. Eusebius. Novat. Hilar.
Ambrose, Austin, Calv. Zanchy, Comen. Petav. Bull. etc.
, and particularly Bishop Art. 1.
Pearson upon the Creed, observes, That the Name of God taken absolutely is
often in Scripture spoken of the Father, and is (in many places) to be taken
particularly of the Father, and from hence, says he, he is styled One God, the
True God, the Only True God; and this he says further, is a most necessary
Truth to be acknowledged for the avoiding multiplication, and Plurality of
Gods. He laying the Unity mainly here as I have done; so that though the Son is
God, and the Holy Ghost is God; which they are not often called in Scripture,
which rather reserves, and gives the name of God absolutely and peculiarly to
the Father Observandum est quod plerumque Paulus suis Epistolis no nen Dei
Patri tribuit in Novo Testamento plerumque tantum prima persma vocatur Deus.
Flac. Illyric. Clavis Scripturae in verbo Deus.
; as, God loved the World, God sent his Son, and the like; yet neither of them
are meant by that one God which the Scripture speaks of, when it speaks
peculiarly of the Father. They indeed having the Divine Nature, and the Divine
Attributes and Perfections belonging to them, may each of them be properly
called God, and the Divinity does certainly and truly belong to each of them,
but then the Word God is not taken always in one, and the same Sense, but it
is sometimes meant of one Person, and sometimes of another, or of all, being
taken either Essentially or Personally, as all Divines own; and generally if
not always in Scripture taken absolutely, and spoken so of one God, it is
meant of God the Father, which may give us such an account of the Trinity, and
of the Unity, Vbi enim est diversa significatio non estcontradictio Affirmantis
and negantis, Aequivocatio enim impedit contradictionem. Aquin. Sum. P. 1. Qu.
13.
as may take off all the charge of a contradiction since they are not one, and
three, nor is each of them God, and all of them God, or one God in the same
respect, sense, and meaning of the words, but in different. Those Terms being
not always taken in the same adaequate Univocal Sense, but are used often
Equivocally. The Father is the only self-existent, unoriginated Being, the
Cause, and Root, (...) of the other two as the Ancients often call him, and so
is the most absolutely Perfect Being, and God in the highest Sense, and the
Scriptures, Creeds, and Christian Offices call him so absolutely and by way of
Eminence, and Prerogative. The Son is produced of the Father and so is not
(...), or God, in that Sense as the Father who is from none, but is God of God,
and is very God, as having the Divine Nature, and Perfections belonging to him
but Communicated and derived from the Father, as the Holy Ghost from both.

3. As by our Faiths being Mysterious, and Incomprehensible, and Unaccountable
to our Reason, I do not mean that 'its Idea's, or Terms destroy one another, or
imply a contradiction which is to make it contrary to it self, so neither is it
contrary to any certain Principle of Reason, nor to any Natural Truth
whatsoever known to us, If it were it could not be true, for one Truth cannot
be contrary to another, and what is true by Nature, cannot be false by
Revelation, for then God the Author of both and the God of Truth would lie and
contradict himself. There are common notions, Principles of Reason, and some
Natural Truths known by Sense, and Experience which we are as certain of as of
our Beings, and which are the Foundations of all Knowledge, and which we have
such evidence of, that to give them up would be to run into boundless
Scepticisme, and own nothing to be True, or False, but that God has made us of
such faculties, that we might be deceived in every thing, now Revelation can by
no means destroy these, as that the whole is greater then a part, that one is
not three, nor three one in the same respect, and meaning, that a Body cannot
be in two places at once, that our Senses are true, and the like, and therefore
Transubstantiation cannot be true, nor can that be the Sense of those words,
this is my Body, but now in the Trinity there is nothing contrary to any
Natural Truth or to any Principle of Reason, for that God should have a Son of
the same Nature, and Divinity with himself, and that an Eternal Spirit should
proceed from both, though it be a Truth by it self, and of pure, and immediate
Revelation which our Reason could not have found out from any known Property of
the Divine Nature, nor from any Reason, and Necessity in the thing it self, yet
there is nothing in it contrary to the Natural Notion of a God, or to any other
certain Principle of Truth, or Reason: The only thing that can be pretended is
that of the Divine Unity, which is thought to be such a Natural Notion as to be
inconsistent with any more Divine Persons then one, and therefore has been
objected against the Trinity by all the Adversaries of this Doctrine, by the
Jews, and Mahometans, by the Samosatenians, the Photinians, the Arrians, the
Macedonians, and the Socinians who have all charged it with Tritheism, and
Polytheism, contrary to the Divine Unity, but this has been from not
understanding, what the Divine Unity was and wherein it truly consisted
according to the Scriptural account I have given of it, which wholly takes off
this Objection;

There are several things I own in the Blessed Trinity Incomprehensible to our
Reason, and Unconceivable, and Unaccountable to our Finite Understandings, when
they are employed about so great, and Infinite an Object, which is too big for
them, and so much above them, As why, and how an Infinite, All-sufficient God
should produce an Eternal Son, and Communicate the same Nature to him with
himself, whether this were by a voluntary, or a necessary Production, and
Emanation, and how the Procession of the Holy Ghost differs from the Generation
of the Son any otherwise, than as that was an Emanation from both, and not from
the Father alone, and how three such Infinite Persons are so distinct from one
another, as not to be confounded, or be the same, though Omnipresent, and in the
same Infinite Vbi; and though so Inseparably united, yet the one to take flesh,
and be Incarnate, and not the other; These, and other things relating to this
Mystery of our Christian Faith, are I say Incomprehensible, Unconceiveable, and
Unaccountable to our Reason, by which I mean only that we can compare 'em to
nothing else that we certainly know, that we have no perfect, or absolute
likeness of them in any thing else, that we have no adequate Idea simple, or
complex, no similitude, or Representation of any such thing in our minds from
any thing else in Nature, but that it is a Truth purely known, and manifested by
Revelation, joining together, and connecting such Idea's concerning God, and so
presenting them to the mind as united together under one view, and so
compounded, and complicated with one another that though they do not disagree,
nor are contrary to one another yet we see not perfectly their agreement, or
connection, but have only an obscure, and general, and confused view, and
conception of them, as we have a sight of such Objects, which are too high, or
too remote for our eye thoroughly to ken, and yet we see them though not by the
naked Eye, yet by the help of a glass, or Telescope so as to be satisfied of
the Truth of them.

Revelation is as a Telescope, and our Reason, and Understanding is as the Eye,
which could not by its naked Power discern, or find out those high Objects, and
supernatual Truths of our Christian Faith, but now by Revelation they are
discovered to us, and our Reason, and Understanding as the Organ without which
we cannot see, or believe any thing, does plainly see, and discern them, but it
is as through a glass darkly, as having something of Cloud, and darkness about
them, or as we see the Sun which is an object too dazzling, and illustrious to
look fully upon with our weak Eyes:

The Sun with 'its coeval light, and heat, is an usual resemblance of the
sacred Trinity, and is the best material one that is in Nature, but light, and
heat are but qualities, and motions, not substantial Things, and are though not
divided from the Sun, yet without it, and not in it; so the fountain, River,
and streams are but imperfect, partial Resemblances, as having the same water
in all, and not being cut off, or separated from the Fountain; but all material
likenesses must fail when applied to Spiritual things; Our own Soul is the best
Image of God, and without it we should not know what God, or Wisdom, or any of
his Perfections were, the two faculties of Understanding, and Will are the most
like to the Divine (...) and Wisdom, and to the Divine Spirit, power, and
Energy, and in allusion to these the Schoolmen would have the Son to be
begotten per Intellectum, by a direct act of the Divine Mind conceiving an Idea
of 'its Self, and the Holy Ghost to proceed by a reflection per amorem, by an
active Love of it self upon such a Conception: But these men have been the most
rash, and bold explainers of the Trinity, which is a Truth, and an Object by it
Self, to which nothing else is perfectly like, and of which we can have no
Comparative knowledge, nor no complete, and adequate Idea, or Comprehension;
for the two sacred Originated Persons are not two faculties, but two
substantial Persons, and Real Beings, the Scripture ascribing as distinct
Properties, Relations, Attributes, Characters, Acts, and Operations to each of
them as to any other distinct Persons and Beings whatsoever, as the Son to be
begotten of the Father, to be sent into the World by the Father, to pray to the
Father, and mediate with the Father. Now the same Being and Person cannot be
Father, and Son to it Self, beget, and be begotten of it Self, send, and be
sent by it Self, pray to, and mediate with it Self, and the like may be said as
to the Spirit; These are not therefore like one, and the same mind, with two
faculties, or two acts, or operations, or only as variously considered two
ways, nor are they one thing, or one Being diversified only with three Names,
Titles, Offices, Characters, Capacities, Respects, or any three differences
whatever belonging to one Person, or Being, but three true, proper, real,
Divine Persons, The One the Father, the other the Son, the third the Spirit of
both.

Now nothing in our own minds, or in visible Nature is perfectly like these, or
to which we can compare them, or from whence we can draw a Similitude,
Representation, or Idea of them, and therefore they are Incomprehensible, and
Unconceivable by us, for it is by Comparison, and likeness we chiefly know, and
conceive things, and it is hard to distinguish between Knowledge, Conception,
and Imagination; so that what some persons cannot imagine, or cannot have a
picture or likeness of in their Fancy, and Imagination, they say they cannot
conceive, and therefore some pretend they can have no Conceptions of a
Spiritual Substance, and others no Idaea of the Trinity, nor even of God, by
which they mean they cannot have a Picture or Idea, or likeness of these things
in their Imagination; but we know, and believe, and are well assured of a great
many things without that; as of all Mathematical and Metaphysical Verities
about abstracted things; of all Axioms, and Common Notions; of all
Demonstrations about Lines and Numbers; of all things not Corporeal, as Time,
Motion; the Acts and Operations of our own Minds, such as Understanding,
Choosing, Suspending, Doubting, and the like; all which we know by Reason, and
can reason about, though we can have no Pictures, or imaginary Idaea's of them,
or any other likenesses of them. I shall show for the Defense of Mysteries, and
of the Mystery of the Trinity, and the Christian Faith, that there are a great
many other things which are Incomprehensible, and unconceivable to us,
concerning which we are well assured, and have no doubt of them, and this in
several Particulars.

1. In visible Nature, and in the Material World that lies before us. 2. In our
own Minds, and in Spiritual Beings. 3. In Arts, and Sciences. 4. In Natural
Religion. 5. In Revelation, or the other parts of it besides the Mystery of the
Trinity, and the Christian Faith. 6. I shall add that the Socinians, and other
Adversaries to Mysteries, run into greater Difficulties, and Incomprehensible
things in their Schemes, than those they oppose.
But these, and what remains upon the second General Head of Discourse, to wit,
how we are to hold the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience, I shall leave to
the Afternoon.

THE MYSTERY OF THE Christian Faith AND OF THE Blessed TRINITY VINDICATED.
SERMON II.
1 TIMOTHY iii. 9. Holding the Mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience.
I Proposed to Discourse from these words on these two things.

I. Why the Christian Faith is called a Mystery? II. How we are to hold it in a
pure Conscience.


The Christian Faith was a Mystery, I have shown upon three Accounts.

1. As it was not knowable by Natural Reason without an Express and immediate
Divine Revelation. 2. As it was very Imperfectly and Obscurely revealed before
the Gospel, and the Coming of Christ. 3. As it is Incomprehensible to our
Reason, and what we cannot fully Conceive and Apprehend even after it is
clearly Revealed.


The Socinians, and other Adversaries to Mysteries, and to the Doctrine of the
Blessed Trinity, are for Believing nothing which they cannot Comprehend and
Understand, and will admit nothing Mysterious in Christianity; and therefore
are for rejecting such Doctrines, those especially of the Trinity, as are so,
and will allow the Christian Faith to be a Mystery only in the two former
Senses but not in the latter; and they expose and ridicule all Mysteries, and
the believing things they do not understand as the most absurd and unreasonable
Opinions, as the believing only so many words without any sense or meaning, as
destroying the certain principles of Truth and Reason, and unmanning our selves
to become Christians, and swallowing down the most monstrous Absurdities and
Contradictions, and calling them by the name of Faith and Mysteries. I have
shown that our Christian Faith, even that of the Trinity is not liable to those
Objections; that by its being Incomprehensible we do not mean that we have no
Knowledge or Conception at all of it, or that it is only so many words without
any sense or meaning understood by us, or that it is contrary to any natural
Truth, or to any Principles of Reason known to us, or that it implies a
Contradiction, or has any Inconsistencies in it; but only that we cannot
understand it fully, and every thing that belongs to it; that there is nothing
else we know to which we can compare it, nor have any perfect likeness or
resemblance of it by any thing in visible Nature or in our own Minds; that it
is a Truth and an Object by it self, made known to us purely by Revelation, and
such a Complex Idaea or Connection of Idaeas that we have no other Idaea,
Similitude or Representation that exactly answers or comes perfectly up to, and
therefore it is Incomprehensible and Unconceivable by us, and an Object too
great and too big for our weak Reason and Imperfect Faculties fully to
understand. That there is something in it beyond all our Knowledge and all our
Conceptions, and yet that it is not upon that account to be rejected and
disbelieved by us; but since the Truth and Reality of it is made known and
discovered to us by Revelation, the Difficulty and Incomprehensibleness and
Mysteriousness of the thing is not a sufficient Argument or Reason for our not
believing it. To Prove and Maintain this, and to Defend the Mystery of our
Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of Mysteries in General, I proposed to show
and make out that there are a great many other things which are Mysterious and
Incomprehensible to us, and which we cannot fully Conceive or Understand, and
yet do no way doubt the Truth of them, but Mankind are very well satisfied and
assured about them. As, 1. In Visible Nature, and in the Material World that
lies before us. 2. In our own Minds, and in Spiritual Beings. 3. In Arts and
Sciences. 4. In Natural Religion. 5. In Revelation, I mean the other parts of
it besides the Mystery of the Trinity, and the Christian Faith. 6. Lastly, To
these I shall add, That the Socinians, and other Adversaries to Mysteries, have
as many Difficulties and Incomprehensible Things in their Schemes as those they
oppose.


1. There are many things in Visible Nature, and in the Material World, which
are Mysterious and Incomprehensible to us. Indeed all Nature is full of
Mystery, and shows the admirable and incomprehensible Wisdom of its great
Author and Contriver; the Heavens above, where are so many glorious Luminaries,
so many shining Worlds and new Earths so much bigger than ours, so many Globes
of Fire that are maintained we know not how, that keep such exact Order and
Distance to us and to one another, and move in their Liquid Ether in such
exact Lines by Causes unknown to us, as if so many Intelligencies guided them
rather than the whirling Streams of their own fluid Vortices: The Earth also
beneath, where are so many Animals of such curious Make and Structure, that the
formation of them, their Life, Motion, the Composition and Uses of all their
Parts are things to be admired, not comprehended by us; where every Fly, and
Mite, and Insect, and every Spire of Grass we tread on, is beyond all our
Knowledge and Philosophy to give a full account of; and the greatest Theorist
can no more understand all that belongs to 'em than he can make 'em. These are
sufficient Instances of the Imperfection of our Knowledge, and of the Greatness
of Gods; we that know so little of them and of our selves, how we live or how
we move so much as a Finger; how our Bodies were wonderfully formed, and
curiously wrought in the Womb; and how Blood and Spirits make their brisk
Sallies through every part, and by such various Fermentations keep up Life and
Heat in us, and how the solid parts are nourished and increased by them, and
how every new Fiber and Muscle is woven and knit about them; what an admirable
Network, and unaccountable Mechanism is in the Eye, Brain, Heart; in every
part, and in the whole of us. We that comprehend and understand so little of
this, and of our own bodily Nature, how can we be supposed to understand and
comprehend every thing that belongs to the Divine Nature, and not be as much
puzzled and confounded about the knowledge of that, as we are about our own.

If we knew any thing perfectly, it should be matter surely, and what lies just
before us; and yet we know nothing of that but its outward accidents and a few
of its qualities, its color and figure, and hardness or softness, or the like,
but its inward substance, and what is the subject and Substratum of these
accidents and qualities we know nothing of. How the parts of Matter are united,
what makes them so close and inseparable in a solid Stone or Diamond more than
in a heap of Sand, whither rest and juxta position, or what hooks and fastnings
ties them together is unknown to us; whether the parts of matter are divisible
or indivisible, is such a puzzling Problem, that both sides have a
Demonstration though it be for a plain Contradiction. Light is the clearest
object of our Senses, and yet our Knowledge of that is very dark and obscure;
we know not how it darts it self in a moment from Heaven to Earth, and how it
causes Vision in the Eye, and how so vast a number of Objects are received into
that small Room at once, and make their several motions, and draw all their
Pictures there; indeed how any of our Senses perceive these Objects, and how we
have such Conceptions and Phantasms raised in us by them, which are not in the
Objects themselves, (for Bitter and Sweet, Pain and Pleasure, Heat and Cold is
not in any of them, nor any thing like them, but only in our selves) and by
what secret Powers they excite those Sentiments is as unaccountable as it is
obvious. We must resolve all these things, and all the Phoenomina of Nature
into the will and appointment of the first cause, thither we must bring and
there we must leave all the Laws of Matter and Motion: We can trace them all
thither, and we can go no farther, but must stop at these incomprehensible
bounds and limits of all our Natural Knowledge.

2. If we rise higher and look beyond Matter, and consider what we know of
Spiritual Beings, and of the Intellectual World, we shall find that to be a
dark Hades, and as unintelligible to us. We know indeed that there must be
something above Matter; and that Wisdom, and Thoughts, and Contrivance, which
every where appear in the Fabric of the World, and in the Structure of our own
and every Animals Body, must proceed not from rambling Atoms, and from
senseless and heedless matter but from a Wise Mind and an Understanding Being;
and we feel and perceive in our selves something that is above body, that
thinks and reflects and considers, that reasons and discourses and deduces one
thing from another, and determines it self, and acts freely, and moves our
Bodies as it pleases and stops their motion, and has an (...) and (...), and is
sensible of Pain or Pleasure from things past or future which Body and Matter
cannot be, and this is what we call our Soul; and we know it by these
Properties, and have as much an Idaea of it as of Body, Thinking being as
certain and well known to us as Extension, but what is the Essence or Substance
or inward Constitution of what thinks or is extended, this we are equally
ignorant of; and how this Spiritual Substance came into the Body, whether it
was infused by God upon an immediate Creation, or Emaned and propagated from
the Parents Soul, which was an old Opinion of the Easterns, the Syrians, and
Arabians, and of many others, and does no way infer its Corporeity, by what
Vital Charm or Congruity it is united to it, by what nexus it is so joined and
fastened to Matter, as not to be released from it when it pleases; this is
unconceivable and unintelligible to us. Why are we therefore so afraid and
unwilling to believe the Mysteries of the Divine, the highest Spiritual Nature,
when we have so many in our own which is the lowest? Why is the Divine
Generation of the Son so incredible, when so many Wife and Learned Persons As
St. Hierome tells us Tom. 2. Ep. 82.
have been of Opinion that even Humane Souls are generated, and this without
any discerption or division of parts which belongs not to Spiritual Beings? Why
is the Incarnation of Christ, or the Divine Natures being united to the Humane
thought more unintelligible than the Soul being United to the Body without any
commensuration of parts or equal Extension? And why is the Sacred Trinity
Condemned as so absurd a Mystery, or three Divine Persons so inseparably united
together, when so many Philosophers of old have thought that every Man had
three Immaterial Principles or Souls in him; the Rational, the Sensitive, and
the Vegetative; though of late we have held that these Three are One. Is not
the Mind one pure Act or Energy? and yet it has three Faculties in it of
Understanding, Will and Memory, which are not the same, and yet belong to one
Soul.

3. There are a great many things in Arts and Sciences which are Unconceivable
and Unintelligible to those who are the best skilled in them, and especially to
others who are not. Thus in Physics, in Mathematics, in Chemistry, in
Astronomy, in Navigation, and other Sciences, how many strange and
extraordinary and wonderful things are there which those who are ignorant would
hardly believe, and to those who know them they are Incomprehensible. I might
produce a great many Instances from all of them, but shall only touch upon a
few. Who would not have thought the Loadstone a very Mysterious thing, and the
Pixis Nautica when first found out, and who does not think them so still, and
who can give a full account of them by striate Particles and the Magnetism of
the Earth, which is going very little further then to an occult quality. And a
great many such occult qualities and unaccountable Appearances there are in
Nature, and Philosophy, which are much like Mysteries in Religion and in
Revelation, which when our knowledge is improved we shall know better. The Flux
and Reflux of the Sea continues to be so still for any Hypothesis that can
perfectly solve it. The Circulation of the Blood through the whole Body was not
long ago thought to be so, and the Periods of Agues and Fevers is still
acknowledged to be one. The believing there were Antipodes was not many Ages
ago thought to be Heresy, Aventin. Annal. Anno 745.
and Virgilius a Bishop in Germany was condemned for it by Pope Zachary in the
8th. Century. The Philosophers Stone has been greatly talked of, and will be
acknowledged a Mystery though so many have pretended to it, and even though it
were found out. And to one who has lived always in the Hot Countries, and under
the Torrid Zone. the having Water turned into Ice, and a River congealed into a
Solid Rock, will be as Incredible a Mystery; so likewise to have a Transparent
Glass made out of Sand and an opac Body, and a Plant, as they say, raised out
of its Ashes by the Power of Chemistry. The Power of Numbers, and the
performances of Algebra, and many Problems in Mathematics may pass for Magical
to a great many, as they have done always to the ignorant; and some of them are
unaccountable and Incomprehensible to those who know and can demonstrate them;
as the Infinite Division of Numbers in Decimal Fractions; the Case of
asymptotes. How two Lines may be so drawn, as always to approach and come
nearer one another, and yet never touch one another, though drawn in infinitum.
The like Instances might be given of other Mysteries in Arts and Sciences,
which are as Incredible and Unreasonable to those who do not know them, as any
Mysteries in Religion, and yet are certainly true, and unquestionably believed
by those who do, and yet to them a great many of them may be Incomprehensible.
It Is only Ignorance and want of Knowledge makes them seem unreasonable and
incredible; the more we improve in those Arts, the more we shall see the Truth
of them, and have no doubt about them. And so it is in the Mysteries of
Religion; it is the shallowness and weakness of our Faculties makes them
difficult and incomprehensible to us: When we come to know God better,
especially in another World, these revealed Truths concerning his Nature will
be better understood and comprehended by us, though now to deny and disbelieve
them after they so are fully revealed because they are Incomprehensible, is as
if an Ignorant Person should call in question all Truths of those Arts and
Sciences which he does not understand, and which are Incomprehensible to him.

4. There are Incomprehensible Truths in Natural Religion as well as in
Revelation, and in the Mystery of the Christian Faith. God who is known by
Nature, and whose Being and Perfections are the great objects of natural
Religion, is as Incomprehensible and as much too big for our finite Reason and
Faculties fully to Comprehend as any of the Articles of Revealed Religion or
Christian Faith. His (...) or Self-Existence is such a thing as our Thoughts
are wholly lost about when we consider of it, and yet something must be
self-existent even by the Atheistic hypothesis. So something must be Eternal,
and yet let any man try his thoughts about Eternity, Infinite Duration, or
Infinite Succession, and see how they are swallowed up in those deeps of
Speculation? Let him conceive if he can Eternity without Succession, and
Immensity without Extension, and clear himself from that Contradiction, if
applied to any thing but God, that what is past or future is yet present, that
he now exists, to morrow, and that a thousand years ago his Duration was the
same as now, and nothing is added to it, he may improve these into as puzling
and incomprehensible difficulties if he pleases, as any thing about the
Trinity. What shall we think of that inextricable Difficulty of Gods prescience
of all Humane Actions by which they are certain, and yet of our Liberty by
which they are contingent, when it is as hard to make those two Consistent as
to make Father and Son to be one, and yet we must do so, or else rob God of one
of his greatest Perfections, or else rob Man of his Will and Freedom, and so
destroy all Moral Good and Evil. Since there are then so many Mysteries and
Incomprehensible Truths even in Natural Religion, which our Deists I hope do
sincerely believe, and which is owned to be the foundation of all other, why
should we wonder at those which are not much greater in Revelation, and in the
Mystery of Christian Faith. The Creation of the World out of nothing is as
Inconceivable and as Mysterious as the Generation of the Son from the Father,
and one Infinite Being is as much too big for our Finite Understandings to
Comprehend as Three, and his Attributes and Perfections are as hard to be
distinguished, and as irreconcilable with the simplicity of the Divine Nature
as multiplicity of Persons. His Justice and his Mercy, his Power, Wisdom and
Goodness are no more the same as conceived by us; but excite as truly different
Ideas in us as his being a Father, and begetting a Son, and having a holy Ghost
proceeding from him; but yet the three Persons are more than three Attributes,
and the same person cannot be Father and Son to himself as he is Just and
Merciful to us; nor is it only three Considerations, Capacities, or Titles of
one Being, but three proper and distinct Persons that constitute the Sacred
Trinity. But we may as well conceive a monad emaning or producing two from it
self, as Creating all things out of nothing, and being as Infinite as himself
and the World both, and as having three several Attributes distinct in
themselves, and not Confounded or Identified with one another.

5. There are other Truths in Revelation as Incomprehensible and Unconceivable
as this of the Trinity, or the Mystery of Christian Faith. To mention nothing
else, those many Miracles which are the proof and demonstration of the Divine
Revelation, and which must be acknowledged by all those who admit it, and are
not at all questioned by our Socinian Adversaries, these are as
Incomprehensible and Unintelligible to us as any Articles of our Faith; they
are matters as much above our Reason and do as much exceed all other things we
know, and all the likenesses and compositions of any thing we are acquainted
with in Nature, as the Trinity or any thing else in Revelation. The Divine
Power is no more limited to do those things only which we can conceive, than
the Divine Veracity to Reveal those things only which we can Comprehend, and
yet we are to believe both. If we could conceive fully how the one was done, we
might do it our selves; and if we could comprehend perfectly how the others are
true, and how those several Ideas are connected and agree together, we might
compound them our selves; and so God would not be more Powerful or more Wise
than Man is. Our Finite Understanding is no more able to comprehend all that
God does, than our Finite Power to effect every thing that he can. Miracles are
as much above us as to Facts, and as much Mysteries as to the Laws of Matter
and Motion and the known properties of Bodies, as Revealed Articles are above
us as to Truths and known principles of Reason, and as to any other comparative
Ideas and representations of things which are Familiar to us, and which we are
well acquainted with. Our Adversaries may therefore as well deny all Miracles,
as being Unconceivable and Incomprehensible to their Reason, and as Mysterious
Facts which are very much above Nature, and above all our Conceptions, as the
Mysteries of Faith, and the Principles of Revealed Religion such as the Blessed
Trinity, upon this very score and account; and may for the same Reason discard
all revelation and all natural Religion, which I fear is the design of some of
them, but I hope not of the greatest part.

Lastly, I proposed to show that there are as many Difficulties and more
Mysteries in their sense; that is Inconsistencies and Absurdities in the
Socinian Scheme and System of Opinions than in the Orthodox Faith they oppose.
Thus to make a mere Man a God, to exalt a Creature to such a Degree as to be
capable of Divine Worship, to pray to him and trust in him as a God, and hope
for Salvation from him, and yet to believe him to be only a Man is an Absurdity
so gross, so contrary to all Notions of God and a Creature, and confounding all
this Infinite distance and difference between them, and so destroying all the
Reasons and arguments of giving Divine Worship to God only, and such a
Principle of Paganism and Idolatry so directly contrary to Christianity that
nothing is comparable to it, were it never so true, but which with the greatest
falseness they object to the contrary side. It does highly aggravate and
increase this difficulty and absurdity, and no way lessen and abate it, to
ascribe as they do all the Divine Perfections of Almighty Power and Infinite
Goodness and Vertual Omnipresence to this mere Man and born Creature, which is
not only robbing God of his Incommunicable Attributes, and giving his Glory to
Another, but taking away all the strongest Arguments for proving God to be
Almighty and All-perfect by making a man to be so, and therefore capable to
make and Create the World as well as God himself; for if he is capable of such
Perfections as belong to God, he is capable of doing the same things, and so of
taking his Work out of his hands, and then we cannot prove a God from the
Creation, since a man a Creature, if as powerful and as perfect as God, which
they make Christ to be under this consideration, may be able also to effect;
and Redemption is a Greater and a more Glorious work then Creation, and if that
may be accomplished by a mere man, and we can owe our Salvation to him as such,
then we owe more thanks and greater praises and acknowledgments, and more
gratitude to him, to the Lord that bought us than we do even to the Lord that
made us. I might Instance in a great many other Particulars, but I must proceed
to

The Second General Head of Discourse, How we are to Hold the Mystery of the
Faith in a pure Conscience: By which these several Things may be employed, 1.
That out of Regard to the Revelation, and out of Conscience of believing
whatever God reveals to us, we firmly assent to it, and bring our
Understandings to comply with it, notwithstanding the Difficulty and
Mysteriousness of the Thing. 2. That we do not out of Vanity or Singularity, or
from any faults of the Will or Sinister Ends and Designs pervert or corrupt or
deny this Mystery of Faith. 3. That we hold and maintain it with Christian and
Good Tempers. 4. With a Good Life in General, and with a Conscience so pure as
to be void of all sin and wilful wickedness.


1. That out of regard to, etc. Otherwise we take away both the Truth and the
Authority of Divine Revelation, Christianity not Mysterious. page 38.
and make it with a late Author, Not a motive of Assent but only a means of
Information. Or as he further words it, Not a Ground of our Persuasion, or a
Reason we have to believe a Thing, as if we were to receive it only because
revealed; which he will not allow, but only from the evidence in the thing it
self, and the clear Conception we form of it. If so, then Revelation is only to
lay such things before us, and we are to judge of the Truth of them our selves;
and the truth of things depends not upon the Revelation, nor is our belief of
them to be resolved into that, but into our own Conceptions, so that we are not
to believe them because the God of Truth reveals them, but because we have
other reasons to know they are true. This is setting aside the Infallibility
and Authority of Divine Revelation, and Judging the matter over again by our
own Reason, and making that Superior to it: So that if what God reveals be
never so clear and plain, and the sense and meaning of the Words be never so
evident, yet if there be not an Evidence in the thing, and it do not carry its
own Conviction in it, and we have not a perspicuous and distinct Conception of
it, then we have not Reason to believe it as true. At this rate Revelation must
never go beyond our Natural Knowledge, and let God say or reveal what he
pleases to us, yet we are not bound to believe it barely upon his Word, without
some further reason or some other ground of persuasion from the thing it self.
This is a most Arrogant and Impudent treating of God and the Holy Scriptures,
and barring them from revealing any thing, and excusing us from believing it,
if we have not some further ground and reason for it. But surely God is true,
and his Word to be Credited for it self alone without any further Security or
Evidence of the thing it self; and if we are once satisfied about the
Revelation, and do own that to be true, we are not to demurre to the plain
sense and meaning of it, though there be no other Evidence in the thing, nor
any other ground of persuasion for the Truth of it but only that; and sure we
are as much bound to bring our Reason and Understandings to submit to the Truth
of what God says, as our Wills to the Obedience of what he Commands; though we
have no other reason for the Truth of the one or the goodness of the other, and
though both may seem very difficult to us: Else we make our selves, and not
God, Judges of what is true and false, and either prejudge a thing not to be
true, whatever he says of it, and so prevent any Revelation about it, or else
Judge it over again by other Measures, and condemn and reject it if it comport
not with those, and be not conformable and agreeable to our Reason and
Conceptions of things, though we know nothing of it but by Revelation, and that
both clear, and evident, and undoubted.

2. Our holding the Mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience, implies That we
do not Pervert, Corrupt, or Deny it out of any Vanity and Vainglory,
Singularity, or Affectation of Novelty, or out of any corrupt Inclination and
fault of the Will, or any Sinister and by-end whatsoever. Most Heresies have
proceeded from some such Causes as these, and therefore are by the Apostle
called the works of the Flesh, Gal. 5.20. The Error having had its first Rise
and Original, not so much from the Weakness and Infirmity of the Understanding,
as from the strength and Obstinacy, the Corruption and Depravity of the Will,
and it has had its chief tincture of Malignity and poison from this root of
Bitterness and from this corrupt fountain from whence it sprung and arose. A
proud and conceited opinion of Men's being Wiser not only than their Teachers,
but than the whole Christian Church; and a natural itch after Novelty and
Curiosity, and the pleasing vanity of being Singular and Remarkable, or of
being the Heads of a Party, and giving the Name and Denomination to a New Sect
of Followers, this has made a great many in former and latter Ages set up for
new Opinions in opposition to the Ancient Faith, and endeavor to pull that
down that they might erect Trophies of vainglory to themselves upon the ruins
of it. It is not so easy always, nor so well indeed, for others to judge this
of them; but if they would judge themselves, and search impartially into their
own Hearts, they would find the Truth and meaning of what the Apostle says,
Tit. 3.11. That such an Heretic is (...) condemned of himself, and best knows
and is Conscious to himself of the undue and faulty Reasons, and the sinister
and by-ends and designs which were the secret Springs and corrupt Causes of his
Heresy, of his Espousing such a singular and Novel Opinion out of a spirit of
Contradiction, or a proud Conceitedness of his own Parts, Wisdom or Learning
above others, or perhaps for some more Worldly and Carnal Reasons to serve a
Party or carry on an Interest, according to the Character the Apostle gives of
such an Heretic of old, 1 Timothy 6.4, 5. He is proud, knowing nothing, but
doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings, perverse Disputing of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is Godliness: And who for filthy
Lucres sake taught things which they ought not; as he charges them in another
place, Tit. 1.11. And in our days I doubt some men's opposing the Faith, and
others contending about it, is more contending for this World and some
Interests in it, then for any thing else; Envy and Emulation and a Competition
about those being more at the bottom of some Disputes among us, than a Zeal for
the Faith, falsely so called, and only hypocritically pretended: But this if it
prove not a Corrupting the Faith, is to be sure not Holding it in a pure
Conscience. For,

3. We must hold this Mystery of Faith with a Christian good Temper, and not
lose that whilst we are contending for the other, nor let our Contentions grow
so warm and intemperate, so fierce and cruel as to forget and violate the plain
Morals of Christianity, whilst we are over-earnestly disputing for the Faith of
it, or perhaps only for some false and mistaken, or at best some useless
Opinions, and overnice and subtle Controversies about it. This has been the
fault of those who have contended more for Victory than Truth, and more for
their own Credit and Vainglory than the Christian Faith; who though they may
be in the right, as it is ten to one that they are not, for Truth seldom dwells
with such a Spirit of Rage, and Pride, and Passion, but rather with a quite
other Temper, yet they greatly deserve the Cause they so unduly manage: And as
they never are like to convince their Adversaries, so they give others just
ground to suspect that they apply want of better Reason and stronger Arguments
with weak and impotent Calumny, and with undecent and unbecoming Reflections.
This is as Criminal and as Unchristian as the Error or the Heresy they are so
zealous against; and it is to be doubted it is rather a false Fire and an
Hypocritical Zeal, not for the Cause of God so much as their own; and that this
is kindled not from the Altar but some other place, and blown up by some
private pique and sinister designs, that thus blazes out to such an outrageous
degree as to consume and destroy not only its Adversaries, if it were in its
power, but even the most vital and substantial parts of Christianity, Peace,
Love and Charity, and contends for the Christian Faith with such a most
Diabolical and Unchristian Temper. This is very far from the Spirit of Christ
and Christianity; and however precious the Faith be, yet the Apostle tells us,
1 Cor. 13.2. if we had all Faith, and understood all Mysteries and all
Knowledge, yet without Charity we are nothing, however great we may be in our
own Thoughts; and such a zeal of sowreness and bitterness, as it is generally
without Knowledge, so it is always without Religion; and though it hold the
Mystery of the Faith, and do not rather pervert and corrupt it, yet to be sure
this also is not, according to the Apostles advice, in a pure Conscience.

Lastly, This implies holding it with a good Life in general, and with a
Conscience so pure as to be free from all Sin, and all wilful Wickedness: For
what does the most Pure and Orthodox Faith signify, if our Lives are Heretical
and Unchristian? For there is no Heresy so damnable and destructive, and so
contrary to Christianity, as a bad Life, and living by Principles of
Immorality, and no Orthodoxy is comparable to a good Life and a Christian
Conversation. God will sooner forgive a great many Errors which may proceed
from weakness of Judgment and want of Information, and be joined with probity
and sincerity of Mind, rather than one Act of wilful Wickedness and Immorality,
which is committed always against the Light of a Man's own Conscience as well as
against the Light of the Gospel, and where there can be no pretense or plea of
Ignorance to excuse it.

Christian Faith, in the whole compass of it, is designed to be a powerful and
operative Principle upon our Hearts and Lives, to be a Seed that is not to be
sowed in barren ground, but to grow up in all the privileges of Holiness and
Righteousness, and to produce not only the Leaves of a formal Profession, and
the Blossoms of Christian Faith, but the sound and substantial Fruit of all
Christian and Divine Virtues. This Faith is not only to float in our Heads, and
overflow our Tongues, but to sink down into our Hearts, and become the Vital
Principle of a truly Pious, and Holy, and Virtuous Life. Christianity is not
only to teach us a new scheme and set of Opinions, and to make new Articles of
Faith for us, but to make us walk in newness and holiness of Life, to set the
best Precepts of Morality, and lay the best Models of Virtue before us, and
engage us to follow them by the greatest Arguments and the strongest
Obligations; and if our Faith do not engage and prevail upon us to do this, it
will be so far from saving us that it will only more highly condemn us, and
increase and double our Eternal Damnation. Which God of his Infinite Mercy
prevent, through Jesus Christ our Merciful Redeemer.

THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST PROVED.
SERMON III.
JOHN x. 36. Say ye of him, whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the
world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?
THIS is the Defense of our Blessed Savior against the Charge of the Jews, who
were enraged at his saying, that he was the Son of God; for that it seems he
had said of himself by the words of my Text; and that he and his Father were
one, v. 30. So that they took up stones to stone him as guilty of Blasphemy,
because being a Man, he made himself God, v. 33.

There were some Heretics of old, and are so now in our days, who call
themselves Christians, but are much of the Jews Opinion, and think Christ is
but a mere Man, or a Creature, and that he is not the Son of God in a true and
proper sense, nor One with the Father as to the Divine Nature; though they do
not like the Jews, take up stones to throw at Christ, as challenging this to
himself, yet they are if not so angry yet more disingenuous than they upon one
account, that they deny the true sense and meaning of Christ's words, as he
spoke and understood them, which the Jews fairly acknowledged, and accused him
upon it. The Jews owned the words of Christ in his, and in a right sense, but
denied the truth of the thing; the Arrians and Socinians deny both the truth of
the thing, and the true meaning of the words. Now it is a matter of very great
importance to be satisfied in both, to know and believe that that great Person,
whom we call our Savior, in whom we put our trust, and confidence, and hopes
of Salvation, whom we worship and pray to, to whom we devote our selves in our
Baptism, and at other times, that he is not a mere Man or Creature, but as he
said of himself, the Son of God in a proper sense, and one with the Father, as
having the same Divine Nature and Essence and Perfection with him that begot
him, and so a proper object both of our Faith, Hope and Worship, which he could
not be without both Internal and External Idolatry if he were not thus God, and
the Son of God, and One with the Father in respect of the same Divine Nature
with his Father.

It shall be my business at present to Prove this, after I have made a few
General Remarks upon this passage, and these words of our Savior.

The First of which shall be this, That the Jews understood our Savior in this
sense; they supposed and concluded that he made himself God, by saying, That he
was One with the Father and the Son of God; for this was all we know he said:
He did not say directly and expressly that he was God, so far as appears by the
account given by the Evangelist. And a great Man observes, Cardinal. Cusa in
Cribrat. Alcoran. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Cardinal Cusa, Christus Filium Dei se nominavit (and Deum Patrem) and non
Deum, cum nominatio Dei sit nominatio Patris Christi. And an Eminent
Protestant, Flaccius Illyricus, agrees with him, Flac. Illyric. Clavis
Scriptur. in verbo Deus.
In Novo Testamento plerumque prima Persona vocatur Deus, and plerumque Paulus
in suis Epistolis nomen Dei Patri tribuit. But to be one with God, was to be
understood to have one Nature with him; and to be the Son of God was to have
this Divine Nature communicated to him from God the Father, and so to be God,
or to make himself God, or assert and declare himself to be so in that sense.
Thus the Jews took our Saviors words, and thus understood him; and they
probably had very great and particular Reason so to do from the Phrases and
Expressions then in use, and from some Learned Writings or Authors of Credit
among them at that time, it is certain they immediately put this sense upon
them: And this was the Ground and Reason of their charge of Blasphemy against
Christ, that he made himself God by making himself one with the Father and the
Son of God; and no doubt this was the true sense and meaning and import of our
Saviors words, according as they understood them, especially.

2. Because our Savior did not deny this, nor any way disown this sense of
them, nor say any thing to show they were mistaken in the sense of his words,
or to correct and undeceive them. Now he would certainly have done this both to
have corrected their Error, and to have defended himself against their Charge,
had it not been true, that he made himself God by those words of his, as they
understood them. Had his words been to be taken in the sense which our Socinian
Adversaries would now put upon them, That he was One with the Father only by
Consent and Agreement and not by Nature, and the Son of God only by Adoption
and Favor, or upon the account of his extraordinary Human Birth, his
Resurrection from the Dead, his Mediatorial Office, and great Authority to
which he was advanced after his Ascension, though it had been a strange
Prolepsis to have called himself so then upon the three last accounts, and not
as the True, Proper and Natural Son of God, our Saviors words had then given
no ground or occasion for such a Charge as they laid against him, and he might
easily have took it off, and vindicated himself by telling them, that they
mistook his words, and that he did not mean them in the sense in which they
falsely understood them; and this no doubt he would have done, had it been truly
so, and had not their sense of them been true and allowed by our Savior. It
would have been hardly consistent with his Sincerity and Probity, his Integrity
and Honesty as a Man, if he had not been God too as he was the Son of God and
One with the Father, to let the Jews understand his words in such a wrong
sense, and lay such a high Charge of Blasphemy against him upon it, and not to
say any thing to show they were mistaken, and to correct their Error, and to
prevent their Sin, and to vindicate and defend himself; for otherwise it will
look as if he had been willing to let their Mistake pass, though he knew it to
be so, and to assume to himself the Vanity of being thought to be God, and by
his words to make himself such, though he had never said it or thought it, but
knew the contrary; which is an intolerable Reflection upon the meek and humble
Jesus; and not only upon the Truth of his Divinity, but even his Honesty as a
Man.

3. The Argument which our Savior used to defend himself against their Charge.
This does not invalidate (as our Adversaries imagine) the truth of his being
One with the Father by Nature, and the proper Eternal Son of God: It Is this at
the 34, 35, 36. Ver. Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I have
said, ye are gods? If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and
the scripture cannot be broken: Say ye of him, whom the Father has sanctified,
and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?
These were called Gods in the style of the Jewish Scriptures, and particularly
Psalm. 82.2. who were called by God to be his immediate Ministers and Officers,
as Moses and other Magistrates; therefore whoever used that Name was not,
according to them, to be charged presently with Blasphemy, much less he whom
the Father has sanctified, chosen and appointed to the great Office of
Messiah, and then sent him into the World to execute it. Whether there be any
force in what some observe Quod alii ad humanium tantum Naturam restringunt ego
extendo ad totam Christi Personam, nam ex tribus Persnis in Coelo hic unus fuit
selectus ad hoc Officium Mediatoris. Zanch. de trib. Eloh. p. 124.
that the Father chose him the Second Person of the Trinity rather than the
Third; and that there is also an Emphasis in the words, And sent him into the
world, after he was first sanctified and appointed by God the Father in Heaven,
where he was before his Natural Begotten Son Maldonat. in loc.
, and afterward sent into the World. This I shall not insist on, but only
allow that this was Argumentum ad homines, as we say, such as Christ thought
the fittest and properest to offer at that time to those gross, and stupid, and
ignorant Jewish Accusers, and that was indeed only a minori ad majus, whereby
he designed only to wipe off the blackest and foulest parts of this Charge, but
not to inform and instruct them so fully and perfectly in a Truth they could
not bear, and were not prepared then to receive; however he would not deny, but
did own and acknowledge their Charge of his making himself God, in their sense:
And if this be not proved from these words of his here, yet it is no way
disproved, any more than when he was asked, whither he were the Christ or
Messiah, his not answering directly proves that he was not; or his not
instructing his Disciples so fully about his Crucifixion or Resurrection,
proved he was not to Dye or to Rise again. Neither the Jews nor the Disciples
themselves could bear some Truths at first, nor the full opening the Mystery of
the Gospel all at once; nor had Christ dispatched all the work of his Life, nor
was then willing to dye, or be stoned by them for a direct Charge of Blasphemy.
And therefore though he did not deny the Charge, which he would have done had
it been false, yet he avoided it and defended himself against it, as far as his
Infinite Wisdom thought then prudent and convenient. But there are other places
and other Arguments to prove Christ's Divinity to us, his being one with the
Father in Nature, and the Natural and Eternal Son of God; which I shall now
produce, and then show the usefulness and necessity of this Doctrine.

I shall not produce all, but only select some that are the most plain and
considerable.

The First shall be his Title and Character here given by himself; The Son of
God, and his making God his Father, which is to be meant in a proper and most
excellent and natural sense, upon the account of his Divine and not his Humane
Nature, or any thing belonging to that, as he was the Son of God antecedently
to his being born of the Virgin, being begotten of the Father from all
Eternity, and having his Divine Being from the Father, of the same Nature with
himself. For though the Title of the Son of God is given to others in Scripture,
and to Christ himself upon other accounts; as God calls the Children of Israel
his Son, and his Firstborn, Exodus 4.22. as being in a state of Favor and
Covenant with him. And Christians are thus more especially the Adopted Sons,
and the Children of God, in the Scripture style. And Christ himself is called
the Son of God upon several other accounts; as upon his Extraordinary Humane
Birth and Conception by the Holy Ghost, Luke 1.35. upon account of his
Resurrection, his being the Firstborn or First-begotten from the Dead; St.
Paul applying to him the words of David in the second Psalm, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee; upon this very account, Acts 13.33. and as
afterward upon his Ascension, he was made Heir of all things, (...), Col.
1.15. The firstborn and heir of the whole Creation. But there is a higher
Ground and Reason than all these of this great Character given to Christ in
Scripture, the Son of God, namely, his Eternal Divine Generation, his being
begotten of the Father in his own Likeness and Image, and having his Divine
Nature communicated to him; for this is the first and most proper Notion of a
Son, Another Person or Being, for nulla res generat seipsam, as St. Austin
says, de Trin. l. 1. c. 1. produced or begotten in the same Nature and
Likeness with its Father or Producent. That Christ was thus generated of the
Father, and of the Substance of the Father, and not Created or Made, (...), as
the Arrians held, and that he was the Son of God, and God his Father, in this
proper and excellent sense, as the Christian Church has always declared and
believed, so the Scripture bears witness to it in all those places where it
calls Christ God, and ascribes the Divine Nature and Divine Perfections to him,
as I shall show it does, and says he was in the beginning before the World, or
from all Eternity with God; and that he was in the Form of God, and thought it
not robbery to be equal with God; i. e. as having the same Nature with him,
which must be by that Communication of it which we call Generation; for he had
not this from himself, or from none, but from another, who is therefore called
his Father: But on this Head I insist, only upon the propriety of those
phrases, his being the Son of God, and God being his Father; which are to be
understood in the proper, literal and natural meaning, as all persons would
understand them when spoken of a Humane Father and Son, and so they are to be
taken when there is not a Connotation or a particular Reason expressed to
denote an improper and Metaphorical use of them: And there is one word
frequently used in Scripture, which I think is a sufficient proof of this, and
that is when Christ is called not only the Son, but the only Son, and the only
begotten Son of God, as John 1.14. John 3.16. 1 John 4.9. (...), is a verbal
signifying as much as (...), and (...), or uni-genitus, is one who has no
partner or sharer in that Sonship which is ascribed to him; but Christ, as an
adopted Son, has many Brethren, and therefore it must be meant of that Divine
Generation and Sonship which belongs to him alone; and God by sending his only
begotten Son intended to express his utmost Love to Mankind, and to that
purpose St. John uses the phrase, God so loved the world, that he sent his only
begotten Son: But nothing raises this Love so high as his sending his own
Natural Son, a Person of the highest Dignity next to himself, and one of the
same Divine Nature with himself, whereas if he were only an Adopted Son, or a
Son upon the other accounts only, neither the Love of the Father, nor the
Condescension of the Son would appear in such Great Characters as the Scripture
designedly sets them out by.

I have insisted longer on this Title of Son, and only begotten Son, because
they are the only words in the Apostolic, and the oldest Creeds, to express
the belief of Christ's Divinity, thereby designing to answer a great Objection
of our Adversaries. I shall be more brief on the rest.

2. As Christ is called the Son of God, so he is called God also in Scripture
in several places, John 1.1. The Word was with God, and the Word was God. My
Lord and my God, John 20.28. God blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. And in others,
especially those taken from the Old Testament, and applied to Christ in the
New. Now what can our Adversaries say to this? Sometimes they say, The Word is
not meant of Christ: But that is so undeniable in some places that they cannot
but own it: And therefore they say, Christ, though having only the Humane and
not the Divine Nature is called God in a certain sense, viz. by Office as Moses
and other Magistrates, who were the Ministers, and Deputies, and Ambassadors of
God, and upon that account have that Name sometimes attributed to them; and
Christ by having that extraordinary Office of Messiah, and that extraordinary
Power over all things committed to him as Mediator, after his Ascension, is
upon this account they say, God, and may be called God, and the True God, and
the most High God, as Socinus, Stichlingius, Smalcius, Ruarus, and others of
them speak, but still they deny that Christ is God by Nature, or that he has
the True Divine Nature, the same with the Father, belonging to him, but only as
a Man he is made and exalted to be a God by being advanced to an extraordinary
Power and Authority over all other Creatures, but this leaves him still in the
rank and order of Creatures; nay, makes him a God of a mere Man, a Late not an
Eternal God, One who had no Being before he was Born of the Virgin, and no
Divinity till after his Resurrection and his Ascension into Heaven; so that
they may date his (...), and know exactly how many Years and Days he has been
God in their Ridiculous, Blasphemous and Heathenish Sense of the word God: But
God is an Eternal, Infinite, All-perfect Being, who was, and is, and is to
come, whose Existence is Necessary and not Contingent, Eternal and not of
Yesterday, who has the True Divine Essence and Nature, and the Incommunicable
Excellencies and Perfections belonging to it. And in this sense Christ is God
and True God, and God by Nature, as I shall prove evidently from Scripture. He
is not indeed God the Father, or God from none; (...), in that sense we believe
in One God the Father Almighty, and to us there is but One God the Father, as
the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 8.6. and Christ is the Son of this God the Father,
who had his Being and Nature from him, but he is God of God, very God of very
God, as the Nicene Creed expresses it, has the Divine Nature and Divine
Perfections Naturally belonging to him, and in that Sense is true God. This I
shall prove further.

3. From his being joined with the Father in the Baptismal Office, and in the
Christian Form of Benediction, as we have them, Mat. 28 19. 1 Cor. 13.14. Now
can we think that Christ and the Holy Ghost would be joined together in both
those with the Father, if they were only Creatures though of the highest
Dignity and Quality, and were not truly God and of the same Nature Honor and
Dignity with the Father. We may as well and much better suppose that a Charter
of Privileges should be Granted in the name of the King and of two of his
greatest Subjects, or Homage Sworn to them and to the King both together, and
that they should be joined in the same Royal and Sovereign Acts of Favor, and
have the same acknowledgements and Oaths of Fidelity made to them, as that God
the Father should be joined with two mere Creatures in such Solemn Religious
acts of Christianity: Baptism is the Highest and most Solemn Devoting, and
Dedicating our Selves to God, and professing the Christian Faith by the special
and distinguishing Characters of it, as containing the Belief of Father, Son
and Holy Ghost; which are the Fundamental (...) of Christianity, as distinct
from natural and Jewish Religion: Now to do this to Creatures, or in the name
of Creatures as well as God, would be a strange anomally and unaccountable
absurdity. The Jews indeed were Baptized into Moses in the Cloud, and in the
Sea, 1 Cor. 20.2. as our Adversaries often remind us; but this was only
Mystically and Figuratively and almost into the Religion delivered by Moses;
they were not Devoted to Moses, but to the God of Israel, nor were Baptized in
the name of the God of Israel and of Moses joined together, as Christians are
in the name of Father, Son and Holy Ghost; nor was there ever any Benediction
given in the name of Moses, or of Abraham, and the like, but only in the name
of God, the God of Israel; who would not give his Glory to another, nor allow
any Creatures to be his Rivals, or share with him in the most Religious Acts of
Homage and Fealty, and in the incommunicable rights tenders and acknowledgments
of Divine Honor paid to Him, or in the Grants and Donations of special Favor
that flowed and issued from himself alone. So that I take this Form of
Christian Baptism, and Christian Blessing to be a very strong Evidence to all
but perverse Unbelievers of the Divinity, both of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, who are thus joined with the Father in very short and solemn Forms, as
of equal Honor, Power and Dignity with him, to whom Christians are alike to
Devote themselves, and to expect like Blessings and Favors from all of them.

4. The Divinity of Christ is fully proved and Demonstrated from such Divine
Acts, and operations, such Divine Excellencies, Attributes and Perfections as
belong only to God and the Divine Nature, and which are expressly ascribed to
Christ in the Holy Scriptures, as to Create and make the World to be
Omnipotent, Omnipresent, Omniscient, Eternal, and the like: The Notion we have
of a God, is a being endued with these Infinite Persections, which cannot
belong to a Finite and Limited Creature however excellent, unless we confound
the Idaea's of Finite and Infinite of God and a Creature, and bring the one
down so low, or raise the other so high as to make no difference between them.
These are the proper Attributes, Properties and Excellencies of the Divine
Nature; and he that has these must have the Divine Nature, from whence they
Result, and to which they peculiarly belong. Now that Christ is Omnipotent,
appears from his making the World; for nothing but Almighty Power could do
that, and produce all Things out of nothing, which is what we mean by Creation:
Now the Scripture is positive that all things were made by him; and that
without him was not any thing made that was made, Joh. 1.3. For by him were all
things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisibe,
-- all things were created by him, and for him. Colos. 1.16. and by him God
made the World, Heb. 1.2. To say all this is meant of a Spiritual Creation, or
of Christ's making a new Gospel World, and not a Natural, is such an unnatural
and ridiculous force and violence to the Words, as not only Confutes, but
Exposes it self, and makes the plainest words in Scripture, even those that
describe the Creation in Genesis, and Christ's Birth in St. Matthew, and the
whole Scripture History to be liable to be rarefied away by a strained and
forced Allegory. If Christ then Created all Things, He is certainly God, for he
that Built or Made all Things is God according to the Apostles Argument, Heb.
3.4. And if his Creating the World does not prove him to be truly God, then we
cannot prove a God from the Creation, and that undoubted Argument for the proof
of a God must be given up, which the Atheists will very much thank the Arrians
for.

That Christ is Omnipresent appears by his Promise to his Disciples, Mat.
18.25. that where two or three of them were gathered together in any part of
the World, there he was in the midst of them. That he is Omniscient is
testified by St. Peter, Lord thou know all things, Joh. 21.17. and that he
knows the hearts of all Men, and will judge all Men at the last Day. That He
is Eternal and was not only before Abraham, but in the beginning before the
World, which is a Jewish Phrase for Eternity, is plain also from Scripture,
notwithstanding all the little Cavils of our Adversaries: If Christ then be the
Omnipotent Maker of the World, who upholdeth all things by the Word of his
Power, by whom all Things subsist, who is an Omnipresent, Omniscient and
Eternal Being, He is a God by Nature of whom we cannot have a higher Idaea and
Conception, only that He is not from himself or from none, which belongs only
to the Father from whom he received his Being, and all the Perfections of it.

5. The Divinity of Christ appears from our Praying to him and Worshipping him,
our invoking and Adoring him as we are Commanded to do in Scripture, and as has
bin Observed by the Christian Church in all Ages. For nothing is an Object of
Divine Worship but God; or a Being that has the Divine Nature and Perfections,
Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve, is a
standing Rule both of the Jewish and Christian Religion, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Mat. 4.10.
and of Natural too; for the Glorious and Infinite Excellencies of the Divine
Nature, which cannot be Communicated to a Creature, and wherever they are
Communicated Constitute that Being a God; these are the Ground of that Peculiar
and Incommunicable Honor which we give to God, and the Infinite distance
between God and Created Beings, who however Excellent, yet are Infinitely below
the supreme and transcendent Excellencies of the Divine Nature makes Creatures
incapable of Divine Worship, and makes it always unlawful in us, and a robbing
God of his Glory to give it them. The Arrians therefore were always accused by
the Orthodox of Idolatry for Worshipping Christ, and believing him to be a
Creature, though of the highest Order that could be: And when Socinus had
persuaded his Disciples to Dis-believe Christ's Divinity, Davidis, and several
of them rightly concluded that then he was not to be Worshipped; and our late
Sophisters seem inclined to agree with them in this, finding it impossible to
avoid the same Charge in Worshipping Christ as a Man, though never so exalted,
that lies against the Church of Rome for Worshipping Saints and Angels, and the
Virgin Mary; and that they can no way come off, but by the same distinctions of
(...) and (...) Sovereign and Inferior Worship, which are equal, but very weak
Pleas to Defend Popery, Paganism and Socinianism. But how bold and rash an
Assertion is it on the other side, to deny that Christ is to be Worshipped,
when all the Angels are Commanded to Worship him, Heb. 1.6. and when all Men
are to Honor the Son, even as they Honor the Father, Joh. 5.20. and he that
does not thus Honor the Son, Honors not the Father that sent him. No pious
and good Christians, who own Christ to be their Savior will ever be brought
off from worshipping and praying to him, and calling upon his name as the first
Christians did, Acts 9.14, 21. and St. Stephen, Acts 7.59. and St. Paul, Acts
12.8. and the whole Christian Church afterward. Socinus was so sensible of
this that he set himself most zealously to defend and assert both the
Lawfulness and Necessity of it, though many of his Followers have been against
both. But this is such a weight upon Socinianism as will help to sink it. It
can never free it self from one of those streights that will ruin and destroy
it, Either to throw off wholly the worship of Christ, which is to throw off
Christianity, and which will never be born by any number of Pious Christians,
or to own that Idolatrous Principle, That a Creature may be worshipped, which
will never be admitted by Protestants. They who will not worship and pray to
Christ cease to be Christians; and they who do pray to him, must own him to be
Omnipresent, Omniscient and Almighty, to be able to grant their Requests, to
know their Hearts, and to hear their Prayers, and be present with them in all
places, and so to have those Divine Attributes and Perfections that belong only
to God.

6. And Lastly, I might prove the Divinity of Christ from the Universal Consent
and Belief of the Christian Church, and from the Testimony of the greatest
Adversaries to Christianity, who always supposed and charged this as the
Sentiment of Christians, that they held Christ to be God. The Consent and
Belief of the Christian Church is evident from its Creeds, and its Prayers, its
Doctrine and its Practice in worshipping Christ, and from its Zeal against all
those early Heretics that opposed this Doctrine and its determinations both in
Private Synods and General Councils for the maintaining and asserting it. It
must be very strange that the whole Christian Church should be mistaken in a
matter of this Importance, and should have all along a False Object of Worship,
and when it was so zealous against all Idolatry, and had so many Martyrs upon
that score, that it should bring in the same another way, and worship a mere
Creature. It must be very arrogant in our Adversaries to oppose themselves to
the Belief of the whole Primitive Church, and to disagree with all those Holy
Men and Learned Writers whom we call the Fathers, who have transmitted
Christianity and this Doctrine down to us; and this Socinus even frankly and
openly owns, Patres omnes ab ipsis dissentire, in his Answer to Wiekus, ( Tom.
2. Resp. ad 2 Cap. Wieki Clas. 7. c. 9. p. 618.) and says, Haec authoritatum
and testimoniorum ex Patribus and Concilii congeries, nullas vires habet,
praesertim adversus nos, qui ab istis Patribus and Conciliis, quae extant nos
dissentire non diffitemur. This was said with great freedom but greater
insolence, his followers have had more cunning and less Honesty than to own
this. It is not proper at this time and place to prove what their Master owns,
and to prove the Divinity of Christ from the Ancient Church, and from the
universal suffrage of its Writers in all Ages, that has been done beyond all
possibility of an Answer from the boldest Pretender. But our very Enemies have
all along bore witness to this Truth, that the Christians believed and
worshipped Christ as a God; so says Pliny in his Letter to Trajan, that the
Christians met and sang a Hymn to Christ as to God; and Celsus charges the
Christians with worshipping Christ as a new God; and Julian writ to this purpose
to Photinus, agreeing with him that Christ was but a Man against the Churches
Doctrine of a Galilean God, as he blasphemously speaks; so Lucian in his
Philopatris exposes the (...) and (...), as the God of Christians; and Mahomet
all along through his Alcoron, finds fault with the Christians for believing
and worshipping Christ as God, whom he owns to be a Prophet, and a great Man
sent of God, as well as Socinus. The Christians would have disowned this charge
had it not been true, especially when in the hands of their Enemies and under
Persecution for it, when they might have escaped Death, and the greatest
Tortures and Sufferings had they been Socinians, and denied Christ's Divinity.
They had none of their subtle distinctions of a God by Nature and a God by
Office to help them out, but they believed Christ to be as true a God by Nature
as he was a Man; and they took God in the true and plain sense for a Divine
Almighty Being, who was to be worshipped by them, and that Christ was such an
one as well as a Man. This was the Doctrine they were taught by the Church, and
by the Scriptures, and that all Christians believed, till the Subtleties of
Arrius, Eunomius, Artius, and others, and the greater Subtleties of the
Schoolmen afterward in making One to be Three and Three One, and the as great
Subtleties of the Socinians in opposing them darkened, and obscured the plain
Christian Doctrine, which we are Baptized into, of Father, Son and Holy Ghost;
and that the Son who was born of the Virgin, and dyed for us, and rose again,
and was Christ the Savior of Mankind, that he was also the Son of God, and the
only begotten of God the Father, who had the same Divine Nature with him, and
so was God, and to be worshipped and prayed to. The Usefulness and Necessity of
which Doctrine I should come now to show had I time. In a word, I take all
Christian Faith, and Hope, and Worship to depend upon it, and even Christianity
it self as it is a distinct Religion from Natural, and as it obliges us to such
peculiar Articles of Faith as well as to such common Rules of Morality. If
Christ be not God, and have not the Divine Nature belonging to him, but be only
a Man, as he is not to be worshipped, as I have shown, so how we trust and hope
and believe in him for Salvation, and put such a full confidence in a Creature
that it would not be greater if he were a God. A poor finite Creature, like our
selves, is not a fit object of our hope and trust for so great a matter as an
Infinite Divine Being, who has all Power and all Goodness. The great God may
exalt, if he pleases, any of us, or any other Man, to as much Power and
Dignity, as the Socinians say he has done Christ, and they may have been made
their own Saviors, or Saviors to all the World, in the Socinian Notion, as
well as he; but surely none but a God, no Man or Creature could be the Redeemer
and the Savior of Mankind. Our Redemption is a greater Work than our Creation,
and the Lord that bought us deserves as great Thanks and Gratitude, Praise,
Honor and Acknowledgment from us, as he that Made us; and therefore we should
necessarily run into Idolatry, if he were not God also. Could this great and
Mysterious Work have been accomplished any other way than by the Son of God, a
God Incarnate and made Flesh, the Divine Wisdom which does nothing in vain
would in all likelihood have found out an easier and a cheaper Method, and not
have been at the expense of such a Miraculous, such an Extraordinary, such a
Mysterious way, as Men and Angels are astonished at when they look into the
mighty depth and profound greatness of it. God the Father showed his utmost
Love to Mankind, and exhausted the Riches of his Mercy to Sinners, in sending
his Son, his only begotten Son into the World to save us, and his Son showed
the greatest Condescension and utmost Humiliation and emptying of himself, thus
to come into the World and become a Man; but had he been only a Man where had
the Mystery of this been? This great Love of the Father, and this Condescension
of the Son, on both which the Scripture lays such a particular weight and
Emphasis, had been lost and sunk and dwindled into very little, and had all its
mighty Figures and Characters, in which it is represented in Scripture, abated,
lessened and diminisht, if Christ had been only a Creature and a meer-Man, and
had not been truly and properly the Son of God, begotten of him from all
Eternity as well as of the Virgin afterward, and One with the Father in
respect of his Divine Nature and Original.

To him, God blessed for ever, be all Honor and Worship, Praise, Glory and
Thanksgiving, now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

