A Brief VINDICATION OF Free Grace.

Endeavoring to prove,

1. That we are not elected as holy but that we should be holy; and that
Election is not of kinds, but persons. 2. That Christ did not by his death
intend to save all men, and touching those whom he intended to save, that he
did not die for them only if they would believe, but that they might believe. 3.
That we are not justified properly by our believing in Christ, but by our
Christ believed in. 4. That that which differences one man from another, is not
the improvement of a common ability restored through Christ to all men in
general, but a principle of grace wrought by the Spirit of God in the Elect.
Relating to several Positions asserted by M. John Goodwin in his late Book
entitled Redemption Redeemed, and in his former Treatise of Justification.

Delivered in a Sermon before the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of the City of London, at Paul's, May 30. 1652.

By John Pawson late Follow of S. John's College in Cambridge, and now
Minister of the Gospel at Hemmingford Abbots in Huntingdon shire.

1 COR. 15. 10. By the grace of God I am what I am. LONDON, Printed by Peter
Cole and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Printing Press in
Cornhill, 1652.

Kendrick Mayor, Tuesday the 15. day of June, 1652.
IT is thought fit, and so Ordered by this Court, that M. John Pawson be
desired to Print his Sermon preached at Paul's, before the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, on the thirtieth day of May last.

Sadler.

To the Right Honorable, John Kendricke Lord Mayor; His Honored Uncle, THOMAS
ATKIN; His honored Friends, John Dethicke, and Robert Tychburne, Aldermen of
the City of London; With the rest of the Court of Aldermen.
MY Intent in the ensuing Discourse, is, to contribute my Mite toward the
vindicating of Free Grace; in the Dedication to testify my thankfulness to
several of you, for real courtesies; to you all, for ample expressions of
undeserved respect toward me. In both which I endeavor brevity; esteeming
many words but cumbersome, when the mind may be delivered and received in few.
The sum of what I lately preached before you, and now again at your call, here
present to you, appears in the Title page: which things I have briefly
contended for; as conceiving them truths, once and again delivered to the
Saints, and owned through successive generations by the choycest of Saints. The
substance aad strength of what Arminius and others with him, have heretofore
pleaded for the contary is now Englished, by the Reverend Author of Redemption
Redeemed: And therefore I have all along related to some material passages of
his book without the least dishonorable reflection upon his person, whom I
really honor for piety, parts, and painfulness (during many years past) in the
work of the Lord. Though we cannot meet in the acknowledgment of these points,
yet I hope to meet him in the bosom of Christ. In the mean time it concerns
you, and us all, who make mention of the Lord, to pray out the performance of
those promises which God has made to these latter ages; one whereof is this,
that he will turn to his people a pure language; Zeph. 3. 9. they shall not
speak a mixed language, one, one way; and another quite contrary, but shall all
serve the Lord with one consent.

Till that fullness of time come, there will be great running to and fro in the
* Prophet's sense, i e. great debating things to and Dan. 12. 4.
fro, even amongst the Saints: which yet in this regard will be an advantage,
that hereby knowledge shall be increased. Every considerable debate will either
further draw out, or clear up some truth or other. So that though the many and
hot disputes of this age, be in some respects trouble some to the people of God
at present yet the Remnant of Israel in after time will inherit the benefit of
them.

May your City be not only as old Tire the (...) whose Merchants were Princes
and Traffiquers, the Honorable of the earth; but as the new Jerusalem, a holy
City, a City of righteousness, a faithful city; the Citizens, Saints, and each
family a household of God. So prays

Your Servant in Christ Jesus John Pawson.

A Brief VINDICATION OF Free Grace.
EPHESIANS. 2. 5. By Grace ye are saved.
GOd's great design in setting up the World, and disposing of the things in it,
was, to manifest himself in all his Attributes. In some things God is said to
have manifested his wisdom, Ps. 104. 24. O Lord how manifold are thy Works? In
Wisdom have thou made them all. In some things God had regard to the
manifesting of his Might and Sovereignty; in several Texts this and that
(says God) I will do and you shall know that I am the Lord. Now as God has
made provision in his several Dispensations, to manifest all his several
Attributes one way or other; so he has contrived to carry on the work of our
Salvation, in such a way, as might manifest his Mercy and Grace in a special
manner.

And therefore it concerns us, to be careful in all our thoughts and
discourses, to advance and keep up free Grace. We should not, nor need not
throw down any other Attribute, to advance this; but yet we may safely in some
sense advance this above any other, It Is an Attribute God himself seems to take
exceeding pleasure in manifesting. He is said to delight in showing Mercy, or
Grace.

Beside it is an Attribute that we are more beholding to, then any other
Attribute whatever. The Wisdom and Power of God have a great hand in making of
us; but the Grace of God has the greatest hand in saving of us: By his Grace
ye are saved.

Observe. The whole business of our Salvation, is carried on in a way of free
Grace, from first to last.

This God has contrived on purpose, that he might exclude Boasting; that no
flesh should glory in his presence; but that he who Gloryeth should Glory in
the Lord; and say, what have I that I have not received. Heaven it self is a
Donative; and every step in the Ladder to Heaven, is free Grace; every Stone of
our spiritual building every Beam of our day, every Link in our chain of
salvation, is free grace.

There are four main links Election Redemption Justification and Regeneration
which I name the last, because the proper work of the Spirit: I shall endeavor
to show, that each of these is made out of free Grace.

1. Election is made out of free grace, Romans 11. 5. we read of the election of
grace. i. e. such an election as grace makes, an election of grace's making; as
Beza expounds it. Grace elects and picks out this and that person. M. I.
Goodwin Red. redeemed, page 63.
Election is of persons, not of kinds; of individuals, not of Species's. God
elected such and such persons in particular; not persons so and so qualified in
general: he elected Peter, as Peter; not Peter, as a Believer, or as a
righteous person; for such an election would not have been an election of
grace, but an election of justice.

Ephesians. 1. 4. We are said to be chosen before the foundation of the world:
Therefore God does not stay to see what we will prove before he choose us. If he
chose us so soon, his election rather makes us holy, then finds us holy: and
this is clear from the next words; He has chosen us before the foundation of
the world, that we should be holy. If he chose us, that we should be holy; then
he did not choose us as holy. There is no such phrase in Scripture, that God
elected us as believers, or in case we believe; and therefore to say that *
election is only the standing good pleasure Idem page 62.
and purpose of God, to give life to all those that believe, is gratis dictum;
nor is it true: for though there be such a purpose in God, yet this is not that
purpose which the Scripture calls election. Election always carries salvation
along with it, Romans 8. 30. Whom he predestined (and consequently whom he
elected) them be also calls, and justifies, and will glorify: But now,
notwithstanding such a purpose to save whoever believes all might perish;
therefore such a purpose is not that which Scripture means by predestination
and election; for such a purpose might stand, and yet God have no people,
Christ be a head without a body, a King without Subjects.

Some affirm that * election is not an act of God, that is passed; Idem page
62.
but that when God prevails by his word and spirit with men in time to believe;
then he is said to have erected them.

But this is flat contrary to the Apostle, for Ephesians. 1. 4. the Saints at Ephesus
were elected before the foundation of the world; and yet ver. 13. they believed
not, till after they heard the word of truth. This seems to overthrow what some
build upon as a foundation, viz. that * no act of God is before any act of the
Creature, in Idem p. 53.
respect of time. If by time be meant duration (as surely must) that saying is
void of truth, for the act of God electing, was before the foundation of the
world; and the act of the Ephesians believing, was not till after they heard
the word of truth: therefore one apparently before the other, in respect of
duration.

Whereas it is said, that * God acts but once for all; and that Idem p. 58.
* God by one act produces all things; it is true, in some sense, Idem p. 60.
that God by one act does all things: but yet if we will speak after the manner
of men, and so as to be understood, we must say, that this one act in God, is
diversifyed, and multiplied in the creature, according to the objects upon
which it is terminated. Who knows not but that in some sense, whatever God did
heretofore, does now, or will do hereafter, is but one continued act as in God,
because it is himself, who is but one, and done in eternity which is duratio
tota simul. But yet though it be but one single act quoad esse;
notwithstanding, it is diversifyed and multiplied, quoad ^erminar^. though all
the acts of God, are the same as subjectively in God; yet as they are
objectively put forth upon the Creatures, so they are different; and one before
another. We cannot truly say, that God created the world, and burned down Sodom
and Gomorrah both at once; they were different acts, as from God, and one done
before the other. It Is clear enough that some of God's acts are before others;
and much clearer that some acts of God are before some acts of the creature.
Did not God make Adam, before that Cain whom Adam begot slew his brother? To
say that no act of God is before any act of the Creature, is new Metaphysics;
and thereupon to say, that God's electing is not before our believing is new
divinity; both contrary to the Apostle, who says, that the Saints, at Ephesus,
were chosen before the foundation of the world; and yet believed not, till
after they heard the word of truth.

Gods grace and love was on work in electing Peter, before either Peter or the
world was: * nor does it follow, that when Idem p. 63.
Peter came into the world, and lived in a sinful estate before his
conversion, that then God must have changed his affection, and take off his
love from him till after his conversion; for God loved Peter before his
conversion, even while he was in a sinful estate; though not with a love of
well-likeing in him, yet with a love of wellwilling to him.

Peter after his conversion loved God, but God loved Peter, before Peter loved
him; 1 John 4. 19. We love him, because he first loved us. God loves us first,
he begins to us in point of love, therefore he loves us before our conversion,
for after our conversion we love him.

It Is true, the scripture says, God hates all workers of iniquity; and such are
all elect persons before conversion: but yet, though he hate them as workers of
iniquity, i. e. takes no pleasure in them; yet he loves them as elect persons:
i. e. bears a good will to them. Nor is it any contradiction in this sense for
the same person to love and hate the same man, at the same time, upon a several
account, as a father may hate a son, as he is unruly and undutifull, and yet at
the same time bear a good will to him, as he is his own flesh and blood, and
one who he hopes may be reclaimed hereafter: even so may God hate an elect
person, as he is a worker of iniquity before conversion, and yet at the same
time bear a love of good will to him, as he is a chosen vessel, and one who he
knows will be converted and come in hereafter. In Ezekiel. 13. 18. God is said to
have poured out his fury upon the Israelites; this was an argument of hatred:
and yet while he was doing so, he is said to have pittyed them, ver. 21. and
this was an argument that he bare love and good will to them; as they shed
blood in the land; and poluted it with Idols, so he hated them, and powered out
his fury upon them, ver. 18. but yet Israel was his own peculiar people; and
upon that account he bare such good will to them, as that he promises, ver. 25,
26. to cleuse them from their filthiness, and from their Idols, and to give
them new hearts, and new Spirits. Which argues, that though at present he took
no likeing nor pleasure in them, yet even then he bare good will, and intended
good to them. God may bear love, and intend good to those whom at present he
hates as workers of iniquity; and thus it is in the case of every elect person
before conversion.

God loves us before our conversion, yea before the foundation of the world;
for he elected us so soon; and therefore God's love electing, does not stay for
our believing; free grace was up and at work more early then so.

The decree of election is no impediment, and therefore should Appl. 1.
be no discouragement to any. No decree of God causes any to sin, nor will damn
any that repent and believe: whoever perish, it is because of their
not-believing, not because of God's not-electing; and therefore to reason thus,
God's decree must be fulfilled upon me, therefore no matter what I do, nor how
I live; it argues both a wicked heart, and a weak head: it argues a wicked
heart, forwhen men once begin so to reason, it is a sign they are resolved to
sit down in their wicked ways, and to run a hazard for salvation; and then it
argues a weak head, for as it is an argument of wisdom to use fit means for
obtaining an appointed end, so it is an argument of weakness, from the
appointment of the end, to infer a neglect of means: it is as if Hezekiah after
notice of God's purpose to prolong his life 15. years, should thereupon have
determined neither to eat nor drink thenceforward. A decree about the end does
not exclude but include the use of means: though God had decreed to save all
those that were in the ship with Paul, and had revealed so much to Paul, Act.
27. 24. yet the Apostle cries out, ver. 31. except the Mariners abide in the
ship, ye cannot be saved; notwithstanding the decree of election, without faith
and holiness, no man shall see the Lord. Let none presume they can be saved by
election, without a closeing with Jesus Christ; and let none doubt but they are
elected, if they feel that they close with Jesus Christ upon Gospel-terms; this
is making our election sure: a true sense and feeling* that we rely firmly
upon Christ, and endeavor unfeignedly to be conformable to Christ, is a good
assurance of our election: if we can find the law of God writ powerfully in our
hearts, we may be assured our names are writ infallibly in the book of life.

The decree of election as it is no discouragement to any so it is App. 2.
an exceeding encouragement to believers, when they labor and groan under the
pressures of the world the weaknesses of the flesh, the out-breakings of
corruption, the in-breakings of Satan; what an encouragement is this to
consider, that their salvation is not founded upon their own changeable wills,
but upon the will of God, which is unchangeable? All our own foundations would
have been unsure, but the foundation of the Lord is sure; and this is that
foundation.

Let Conscience, Law, Sin, Hell, and Devils, bring in all their strength, we
are more then Conquerours, says Paul, Romans 8. 37. why what is the reason? This
is one reason, who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? ver. 33.
election is one ground of confidence and encouragement, to a believer that has
made his election sure.

2. I proceed to the next link in the Chain of our Salvation, which is
Redemption. And this likewise is made out of free Grace. Ephesians. 1. 7. in whom we
have redemption through his Blood, according to the riches of his Grace. Mark
how the Apostle in this Ephesians. 1. passes from one link of the Chain to the other;
from Predestination and Election, to Redemption; fastening both the links upon
the same persons. Whom the Father before the Foundation of the World Elected,
to the praise of the Glory of his Grace, ver. 6. those the Son in the fulness of
time Redeemed, according to the riches of his grace, ver. 7. whom the Father
out of free Grace elected, he gave them to the Son; and the Son out of free
Grace redeems them, and gives eternal Life to them.

It Is said John 17. 2. that the Son was to give Eternal Life to as many as the
Father gave him: To as many, therefore not to any more. Some the Father did not
give to Christ in the sense spoken of; for Joh. 6. 39. Christ tells us, that of
all which the Father has given him, he would lose nothing, but raise it up at
the last Day: i. e. to eternal Life as the next verse explaines it. Christ
loses none that the Father gave him, and therefore they who everlastingly
miscarry, the Father never gave them to Christ, and consequently Christ never
gave himself for them. That place John 17. 12. does not prove that the Son of
predition was one of those the Father gave to Christ, but rather the contrary:
for the sense may, and (compared with John 6. 37, 39.) must run thus, viz.
Those that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost: but the Son of
perdition is lost: i. e. As he is none of those that thou gave me; the term [
but] being here taken, not by way of exception, but by way of opposition; as it
is else where in Scripture: Luke 4. 26, 27. Gal. 2. 16. Rev. 21. 27. and as we
frequently use it in common discourse.

Nor will that Text, John 17. 2. endure to be restrained to * the Idem p. 118.
Apostles only; where Christ is said, to give eternal Life to as many as the
Father gave him: for the term [as many (...) quotquot] is too comprehensive and
large to be restrained to so few as the Apostles; especially considering it is
put as a suitable subsumption under that general term [ all flesh immediately
foregoing; it would make the lense run thus, thou have given him power over all
flesh, that he might give Eternal Life to a few Apostles; which seems not a
little incongruous. Indeed at ver. 6. Christ begins to speak more particularly
of the Apostles, and so goes on for some verses; But at verse. 20. he inlarges
his discourse, and apparently speaks of all Believers; and at verse. 24. still
speaking of all that ever shall believe, he uses the same form of speech as he
did before in verse. 2. Father, I will, that they whom thou have given me, be
with me, where I am, that they may be hold my Glory: this word Glory, likewise
explains what is meant by eternal life, in ver. 2. i. e. * not Idem p. 117.
means of Grace only, but Glory it self, with Christ in Heaven. Father I will,
says Christ; he speaks not only by way of entreaty but as it were, by way of
demand. He had said before, Father, I have finished thy work: and as one that
had done his work, now he comes to demand his wages; what is that? Father, I
will that they whom thou have given me, may partake of my glory: who are they?
they are the same whom ver. 23. the Father has loved, as he loved Christ: How
is that? he loved Christ verse. 24. before the foundation of the World. From
whence this will clearly follow, God did not love only the Apostles before the
foundation of the World; therefore they were not the only persons whom the
Father gave unto Christ. Neither did he love all men, as he loved Christ,
before the foundation of the World; he did not love Cain and Judas so;
therefore they were not of those whom the Father gave to Christ, and
consequently he did not give all. But whom the Father chose before the
foundation of the World, it is a sure argument, that those he loved before the
foundation of the World, and those he gave to Christ; for those Christ
undertook the work of Redemption; and having finished the work, for those he
demands Heaven, and Glory, as having Redeemed them from Hell and Misery.

No doubt but there was worth enough in Christ's death and merits, to have
redeemed as many worlds of men, as there be men in the world; but the intent of
Christ in the work of Redemption, was to pursue the design of God in election.
And this (no other) is the meaning of that distinction betwixt the sufficiency
of Christ's death, and the intention of it. We do not say, that Christ dyed
intentionally for the elect only; and yet dyed sufficiently for all: and
therefore all the * arguments mustered up against the distirction in that
sense, do but strike at a shadow, and beat the Idem p. 94. 95. etc.
Air. But we say, it being impossible Christ should have a design beyond and
distinct from his Father; therefore he intended to redeem his Fathers elect
only; though otherwise, there was in the price he paid, a sufficiency to have
redeemed all. We do not distinguish betwixt Christ dying sufficiently and
intentionally, but betwixt the sufficiency of Christ's death, and the intention
of Christ dying. Christ's death was sufficient to have redeemed those whom he
never bare any love to; but whom Christ intended to redeem and save, and to
that very end laid down his life for them, those he did love; yea he could not
possibly bear more love, nor intend a greater good to any, then that amounts
to; Greater love has no man then this, to lay down his life for another.
Therefore if Christ laid down his life for all and every one, even for Cain
and Judas, with an intent to save them; then he did bear no more love, nor
intend no more good to Peter, and Paul, then he did to them; no more grace to
one, then to another. This does exceedingly derogate from the worth of free
grace, and makes it no such peculiar choice thing, as the Scripture sets it
sorth. For the vindication of free grace in this point, I shall (...) two
arguments, to prove, that the intent of Christ in dying was to pursue the
design of God, in electing, and not to redeem all.

1. Whom Christ intended to Redeem, he laid down his life to make a purchase
for them; and Faith was one part of the purchase, one of those things which he
purchased for them; Phil. 1. 29. Unto you it is given, in the behalf of Christ,
to believe, etc. In the Original it is, To you it is given to believe, (...),
for Christ's sake, upon his account, as purchased by him. So that Faith is part
of what Christ purchased by his death: But Christ has not purchased faith for
all, therefore he did not lay down his life for all.

Whom Christ intended to save by his death he did not dye for them only if they
would believe, but that they might believe. Whoever believes, Its given to them
to believe, (...) for Christ's sake, as an effect of his merits. God intended
that none should have salvation without this condition of believing: Christ
intended by his death and merits, to purchase both salvation for the Elect and
this condition also in order thereunto.

2. If God and Christ intended all should be redeemed and saved, then all would
certainly have been saved: For whatever any Understanding Agent intends to
effect, he always effects it; unless he either find the thing first intended,
to prove afterward inconvenient, or else want power to bring to effect what be
intended, Now God being infinite in Wisdom to foresee all inconceniences, and
infinite in power to effect what he sees convenient, it is impossible that ever
he should intend to effect any thing, and that thing not be effected. And
therefore to maintain that * God may be said to intend to effect what never is
effected, is Idem p. 33.
a new Notion, where Reason and Truth are so far from greeting one the other in
it, that neither of them will come near it.

Nor is there any ground either in Scripture or Reason, to distinguish betwixt
Gods intentions or purposes and his decrees. To say that * God does not always
decree the effecting of what he Idem p. 36.
purposes, is gratis dictum; and to say, that * though what God Ibidem.
Decrees does always stand, yet what he purposes, does sometimes not stand, is
expressly contrary to that Text, Isa. 14. 24. As I have purposed, it shall
stand. Gods purpose is eternal, and what he works in time, he works according
to that eternal purpose, Ephesians. 3. 11. therefore his purposes change not, and
what he purposes must stand. The Purposes or Decrees of God are the foundation
of all his workings; and the foundation of God stands sure: Therefore if God
and Christ had purposed and intended to save all, then all had surely been
saved.

As for those Texts which are alleged to prove that Christ Redeemed the World,
or all men in it, they are indeed many and I cannot there insist upon them
particularly, only thus much to them in general.

They prove that all men in the world who are redeemed and saved, are redeemed
and saved by Christ; his merits the only ransom for all, and he the only
Savior of all who are saved in the world: But that he intended to redeem and
save every particular man in the world, not any, nor all of those Texts
together, speak home to the proof of it; and till that be proved, Universal
Redemption is not Redeemed, but must unavoydably perish notwithstanding all the
language and wit that is laid down and sacrificed for the saving of it.

Toward the clearing those places, where the World and all men are said to be
redeemed these four things may be considerable.

1. The Apostle Romans 11. 12, 15. by the world, means the Gentiles, as a people
to whom Christ was to be a Messiah, as well as to the Jews; Therefore to say
that the world may be taken for the Gentiles is not a speech to be hooted at,
for the Scripture will avouch such a sense of the Word.

2. The Texts alleged will bear such a sense, viz. That though formerly the
Covenant of Grace was restrained only to the Jews, and all the Gentiles (the
rest of the world) excluded; yet now God would have a people even among the
Gentiles, throughout the wide world, redeemed by Christ out of all Nations and
Languages.

3. Such a sense is agreeable to the analogy of other Scriptures, Rev. 5. 9.
Thou have redeemed us by thy blood, out of every kindred, Tongue and People and
Nation. This Text lifts up its voice aloud against Universal Redemption; For if
Christ has redeemed out of every Kindred Tongue, People, and Nation; then he
hahnot redeemed every Kindred; People and Nation. Pertinent hereunto, is that
Prophecy of Caiaphas, Joh. 11. 51, 52. who though a wicked man yet he spoke not
of himself, but as high Priest that year: which implies that his tongue was
guided from above, and that he spoke a Truth, prophesying that Jesus should die
for that Nation of the Jews, and not for that Nation only, but that also he
should gather together in one, the children of God that were scattered abroad.
Which compared with the former place, imports thus much, That Christ dyed not
only for the Nation of the Jews, but for all other Nations: Yet how? Not for
all particular persons, but for the children of God, both in that Nation of the
Jews, and scattered abroad elsewhere, throughout the world in any other
Nation. Even as under the Law the Jews were God's only Covenant people, i. e:
not every particular person of the Jews was spiritually in Covenant with God
but the faithful elect of that people: So now, not only the Jews, but all
Nations, all the world have title to Christ's death, i. e. not all Individual
persons but the Elect in all Nations throughout the wide world.

4. The Jews generally run upon this mistake, that the Messiah and salvation,
by him belonged only to themselves 1 These. 2. 15. 16. They are contrary to all
men (where by the way mark that all men is taken in opposition to the Jews) so
bidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved. They made
account salvation by Christ concerned only themselves not the Gentiles; yea the
Disciples and Followers of Christ were for a time doubtful at least, as to this
case, supposing (it may be) from that Text, Mat. 10. 6. that they were to
preach Christ only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel: For if you compare
Acts 8. 1. with Acts 11. 19. you shall find, that they which were scattered
abroad upon the persecution that arose about Stephen though they traveled far,
yet still they preached the word to none, but unto the Jews only: and in Acts
10. 45. when the Believing Jews heard that the spirit was poured out also upon
the Gentiles it is said* they were astonished. So Acts 11. 1, 2. When some of
the Apostles and Brethren, heard that the Gentiles received the word, through
Peter's ministry; they contended with Peter for meddling with them; till Peter
gave an account of it, and then at ver. 18. they glorified God; saying, then
has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life; wondering at it, as
a thing which before they did not it seems) understand.

Now seeing not only the Jews generally but even some of the Apostles and
Disciples of Christ, were for a time in this mistake; it is no marvel that the
new Testament is so abundant in general expressions, importing that Christ's
death, and the promises, did not only belong to the Jews; but to the wide world
of the Gentiles, and to all men: meaning by all, not all particulars, but all
kinds; as the word is undeniably used, Luk 11. 42. Romans 14. 2. Mat. 4. 23. and
as that place of renown does necessarily evince, Rev. 5. 9.

Though Christ did not die with an intent to save all yet ministers of the
Gospel have sufficient ground to preach the Gospel unto all. The death and
merits of Christ were of that infinite Appl. 1.
worth, that they might have been a price for all, but that they became a price
for any, is to be attributed to the intention of God and Christ: not the worth
of the thing offered, but the intent of the offerer and accepter, is that which
gives it the formality of a price. Genesis 33. 19. Jacob bought a parcel of ground
of the children of Hamor for an hundred pieces of money; whether the ground was
just in value answerable to the 100 pieces, is not so considerable; it is
possible the 100 pieces might have sufficed to purchase a thing of more worth;
but that which made the 100 pieces formally a price for that particular parcel
of ground, was, because Jacob paid them, and the children of Hamor accepted
them for that very intent and purpose: So likewise in this case, that the death
of Christ became formally a price, whether for all or some, does not arise from
its own worth, but from the intention of Christ offering, and God accepting it
for that purpose. Now this intention of God and Christ being unknown; who those
particular elect persons are, for whom Christ's death was intended as a price,
and yet his death being of it self sufficient to purchase all, hereupon there
is ground for the Gospel to be preached to all, and that we may and ought to
call upon all to believe. For when we call upon men to believe, we do not call
upon them to believe that Christ dyed for them, but to believe in Christ, and
to believe there is no name under heaven whereby they can be saved, but only
Jesus Christ; and that there is enough in Christ to save all that believe in
him: leaving the secret counsel and intent of God and Christ, as a thing not
discovered to us, till it appear by the effect.

That Christ intended by his death to save only the elect of God Appl. 2.
is no little comfort to those that have already made their election sure; and
no manner of discomfort to any. For believers to consider that they have
another kind of interest in Christ then those that perish, is matter of great
Consolation, Christ loved me, and gave himself for me; This Paul tryumphed in,
Gal. 2. 20. Nor is this just matter of discomfort to any, as long as this is
held forth to every one, Believe in Christ, and you shall be saved. He that
will find comfort in any Doctrine, must seek it in the right way, wherein
according to Gods Word and Will, comfort is to be found. No Doctrine whatever,
if true, holds forth comfort to any while they resolve to continue in a sinful
way. Be careful in walking close with God, and seeking him, and you shall
thereby find, that you are of the number of those that Christ died for. As Soon
as your own hearts assure you that you repent and believe, the Scripture
assures you that Christ died for you. All those that walk in faith and holiness
will find that Christ dyed for them. If corrupt reason, and distempered
affections cavil at this as uncomfortable, we cannot help it; the Doctrine it
self is sweet: and if any complain of bitterness in it, let such consider
whether their own Palate be not distempered.

I go on to the third link in the chain of our salvation, which is
Justification; and this likewise is out of Free Grace; Romans 3. 2, 4. Being
justified freely by his Grace, etc. Justified freely, The word in the Original
is (...), without any price, without any valuable consideration; importing that
we are justified gratis, without any price, without any valuable consideration
on our own part from our selves. For the vindicating of Free Grace in point of
Justification, I shall endeavor to clear this Proposition.

That nothing in our selves is of any valuable consideration in point of
justifying us. The Papists say our works are; but that is an opinion now dead
among us, and therefore let it lie. Others say our faith is: What the Papists
attribute to works, these upon the matter attribute the like to faith to To
credere. They express themselves to this effect, * In the same way that God
required perfect obedience M. 1. Goodw. In putat of Faith. part 1. page 14.
in the first Covenant he now requires faith instead of it in the second
Covenant, so that as works should have justified them before the fall, so Faith
now. Christ in dying (say they) * did not Idem ibidem, part 2. p. 33.
bear the curse of the Law for us but only obtain that God should justify us
upon other terms then before, i. e. by accepting faith for our righteousness.

In opposition hereunto, I shall endeavor to prove, that as faith of it self
has no such worth in it, so Christ has not purchased any such worth for it,
that it should be accounted or pass for righteousness. How harmless soever this
opinion seem at first view, yet if we thoroughly examine it, and the consequences
that attend it, we shall find that it does in the issue, attribute too much to
self, and too little to Christ, and that it derogates from Free Grace, and is
contrary to the Gospel way of Justification. I deny not but that Faith is a
Gospel condition, without which we cannot be justified, yet not an immediate
condition, the very performance whereof is our righteousness, but such a remote
conditio, as the performance thereof gives us interest in the righteousness of
Christ the Lord our Righteousness. It Is not a condition so as works were before
the Fall; for the performance of works was that wherein righteousness before
the Fall, was to consist formally; If faith succeed works in such a sense as
being instead of works (as some affirm) then the performance of faith does make
formally righteous: if so then we may plead our faith at Gods Tribunal in the
great day, as Adam if he had not fallen, might have pleaded his performance of
works. But this cannot be, for 1. When we appear before God's judgment seat,
we must plead such a righteousness, as will countervail and answer God's
justice: we cannot be justified, but by a righteousness that will answer
Justice, for God is just in justifying, Romans 3. 26. therefore such a
righteousness must be found out, either inherent in us, or imputed to us, as is
every way perfect; that so God in justifying of us for such a righteousness,
may appear to be a just justifier Now the righteousness of Christ imputed to
us, is such a perfect righteousness, as will fully answer the justice of God.
But for our faith, it is so far from being a perfect righteousness that it is
not a perfect faith: That is perfect to which nothing can be added, but our
best faith stands in need of addition and increase: The Apostles prayed, Lord
increase our Faith; our faith therefore is not perfect, much less a perfect
righteousness. To say it will find acceptance in mercy, though not approbation
in justice, and so pass for righteousness upon that account, is to make Gods
mercy shut out his Justice, whereas Gods great design was, to manifest both
those attributes in the justification of man, not only (though chiefly) his
mercy but likewise his justice. This appears by that fore alleged place, Romans
3. 24. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth or appointed etc. That God would admit of
any Redemption for us, and that he would likewise provide and appoint a
Redeemer herein was Grace and Mercy manifested; But yet you shall see, he had
an Eye likewise to the manifestation of his Justice; for it follows in the next
words, whom he set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood; to
declare his righteousness or his justice, that he might be just. This is quite
contrary to that passage forecited out of the promoters of To credere. Christ
in dying say they, did not bear the curse of the Law for us i. e. satisfy
justice in our steed, but only obtained that God should ust fie us upon other
terms, 1. e. accept of our faith for righteousness. No (says Paul) Christ did
satisfy justice for us, God appointed him to be (...) a propitiation, which
argues satisfaction and appeasment of Justice; and God so ordered it (...) for
the declaration of his justice, that he might be just, or that he might appear
to be just in justifying, as Paroeus clears that place.

Should Christ only obtain of God to accept of imperfect faith in stead of
perfect righteousness how would there be any manifestation of justice in it?
yea, consider well whether there would be any truthherein if that should pass
for righteousness which is not so indeed, Romans 2. 2. the judgment of God is
according to truth; that which is not righteousness, cannot be judged and
esteemed so before God. Indeed there is in some sense, a difference betwixt
Gods judging according to justice, and according to mercy: But Gods judging
according to mercy is not judging a person perfectly righteous for a
righteousness which is imperfect, but for a perfect righteousness, which is not
his own: In this judgment there is both truth and mercy. Truth, in that God
esteems us perfectly righteous, for that righteousness which is every way
perfect even the righteousness of Christ. Mercy in that he esteems us
righteous, for that righteousness, which is not our own only by imputation ours
and of his providing for us. When God judges, declares or esteems us righteous
it is for some righteousness in us, or imputed to us: we cannot be righteous but
by a righteousness; faith is not a righteousness.

2. If faith were a righteousness it would be a self righteousness, for faith
is mentioned in Scripture as a thing that is our own. Mer. 10. 5. Thy faith,
says Christ to Bartimeus. Col. 1. 4. I have heard of your faith. When we
believe, it is not God believes in us, though we do it by his sepcial
assistance: though it be done by grace in abling and assisting and not by
strength of Nature, yet it is we that do it, and the act is properly ours; and
being so, if we were justified by it there would be place for our boasting in
it more or less: If To credere deserve the name of a righteousness, it is
apparently our own righteousness; but Paul in point of Justification, utterly
disclaims his own righteousness; Phil. 3. 9. He desires to be found in Christ,
not having his own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. In
which Text the Apostle does not distinguish self-righteousness into two sorts,
disclaiming only one of them, but he distinguishes inter propriam justiciam and
alienam, discaiming utterly all self-righteousness, of what sort soever, as a
law-righteousness, and laying hold upon another righteousness, i. e. Christ's.
This seems clear from the antithesis, that I may be found in Christ, not having
mine own righteousness; i. e. in Christ's righteousness, not in mine own; Not
having mine own righteousness, says the Apostle, but that which is through the
faith of Christ; or what if we construe it thus? Not having mine own
righteousness, but that of Christ's through faith? the Original will bear such
a construction, though I will not ground upon it. However this is clear from
that latter part of the verse; the righteousness which Paul rested upon is such
a righteousness as comes in through faith, and by faith; therefore faith is
neither it, nor any part of it. When faith is said to justify, or to be
imputed for righteousness, it is not meant faith of it self, but faith in
regard of its crucisied object. That we do not speak this gratis, but upon
Scripture grounds, we will instance in a chapter where the Apostle expresses
himself fully and punctually to the very case in hand; it is Gal. 3. one of the
most pregnant places which the promoters of To credere make use of; where
indeed Paul affirms that we are justified by faith, and that faith is imputed
for righteousness; But we shall find that Paul in that very chapter uses the
word faith again and again, for the object of faith; so v. 23. before faith
came, we were kept under the law, etc. and again v. 25. after that faith is
come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster: By the coming of faith, is here
undeniably meant the coming of the object, not the act of faith: and so twice
in that chapter, v. 7. 9. they are said to be the children of Abraham, who are
of faith, i. e. they who are of Christ by faith. So that we see the Apostle in
this very chapter wherein he speaks of justification by faith, uses the word
faith in a relative and metanimical sense, as it imports Christ. Now add
hereunto that faith in a proper sense To cred^re, the very act cannot be
imputed for righteousness, cannot justify as the arguments before evince.

It Is true faith in a proper sense, is faith in Christ and so includes Christ's
righteousness as the object of it; but yet we must distingnish betwixt the act
and the object though the act cannot be without the object: and so the
adversaries themselves do, when they say, that To credere is imputed and not
Christ's righteousness they do in those very words distinguish betwixt the act
and the object as we do: Only the thing in question betwixt us is whether we be
accepted righteous for that act of ours, of which Christ's righteousness is the
object; or for that righteousness of Christ upon which our act is terminated or
for both taken together. The first makes our act the thing for which we are
righteous, Christ only the object of it, and so establishes a
self-righteousness wholly. The last makes us to be accepted righteous for a
righteousness, from two distinct subjects our selves and Christ, which cannot
be, and beside it establishes a selfrighteousness in part which must not be.
The middle way only attributes all to Christ, when we rely for justification
not upon our own act but upon Christ's righteousness the object of it.

To shun all ambiguity in terms, we mean in plainer terms thus; There is an
apparent difference betwixt believing in Christ and Christ believed in. We are
not justified by our believing in Christ, but by our Christ believed in; even
as we are not clothed by putting on the garments but by the garments put on; nor
cured by applying the plaster, but by the plaster applied Christ's
righteousness is not only the object of that act which is imputed to us for
righteousness but it is the very thing the formal cause, the formalis ratio
that makes us righteous in point of justification.

To say that only the merit of Christ's righteousness, not the righteousness it
self is imputed to us, even as the demerit of Adams sin, not his sin are both
spoken gratis; they tend to prove that Christ merited that faith might be
accepted; which is such another shift as that of the Papists Christ merited
that we might merit; and therefore there is subtlety enough in so saying, but
no truth in it For unless the sin of Apam, and the righteoufnes of Christ be
imputed the demerit or merit cannot; one being the foundation of the other, and
inseparable. Beside, it is contrary to that of the Apostle, Romans 5. 19. As by
one man's disobedience many were made sinners so by the obedience of one, many
righteous. We are sinners by Adams disobedience, not by the demerit of it only;
his very act of disobedience is imputed to us, not only the demerit of it; and
so for Christ's obedience: and it stands with reason, for Adam bare the person
of all mankind and therefore his act was ours, Romans 5. 12. In whom all have
sinned, says the Apostle, speaking of Adam: Our Translation renders it
forasmuch, but in the Original it is (...), In whom all have sinned. As a
father selling or forseiting his estate, his act is the act of all his
posterity: so it is in this case, the very disobedience of Adam is imputed to
us as our sin not only the demerit of it; and likewise the very obedience of
Christ is imputed to us for our righteousness, not only the merit of it.

Romans 4. 6, 11. in both verses a righteousness is said to be imputed; now there
is no righteousness any where to be found, but the righteousness of Christ;
Beside, it is said a righteousness is imputed; now imputation properly is, when
something that is in another person, is reckoned and accounted ours set upon
our score, our account, though indeed not in us, but in another person. That
this is the signification of the word, appears from that of Paul to Philemon,
v. 18. If Onesimus ow thee any thing, put that to my account, (...), the same
word which before and elsewhere is used and translated impute; and so both Reza
and the old translation render this Text; if Onesimus owe thee any thing, illud
mihi imputato; impute it to me, or set it upon my account, as we read it. Thus
the righteousness of Christ is imputed to us set upon our account, reckoned
upon our score, though not a thing in us of our own.

If thus it be then let us in point of justification, give unto Christ ^pl. 1.
the things that are Christ's, and unto faith, the things that are faiths. It Is
honor enough for faith, that it is the grace whereby on our part we have union
to Christ, and interest in the righteousness of Christ; but to make faith it
self our righteousness is to attribute more to it then it can bear, or will
own. Set all due honor upon the head of faith, but do not break the back of
it, by laying the whole weight of justification upon it; faith is too weak to
bear it: God has laid help upon one who is mighty, even the Lord our
Righteoufness. And herein appears the free grace of God in point of our
justification that he was pleased to provide Jesus Christ, and to accept of his
righteousness in our stead, that we believing in him, should have his
righteousness imputed, and set upon our account. Christ is said to have
fulfilled all righteousness and all the righteousness he fulfilled, is imputed
to us, both active and passive doing and dying. Not that his passive redeemed
us from guilt and hell and that his active made us righteous and gave us title
to heaven; but both of them jointly concurred to effect each: both of them laid
together, make up that price which Christ paid, that satisfaction which Christ
made. Though the law does not require both obeying and suffering. yet Christ
paying not the idem* but the tartundem, not the strict debt it self, but a
valuable satisfaction, he might and did put the merit of his obeying to his
suffering; that so there might be copios^^ redemptio, and that he might save to
the utmost (...) altogether, and all manner of ways. It Is a material enquiry,
whether Christ's intercession do not come in upon the like account? I only hint
it.

This is infinite matter of comfort to Saints that the righteousness Appl. 2.
of Christ, who fulfilled all righteousness, is imputed to them; for, hereby
they stand as righteous in the sight of God, as the righteousness of Christ can
make them; yea, as righteous (in some sense) as Christ himself; righteous with
the same righteousness, though not righteous in the same manner; He with his
own inherent, we with his imputed; truly ours, though not in us* And this may
be one sense of that (if it be understood of Christ in: Joh. 4. 17. Therefore
have we boidness in the day of judgment, because as he is, so are we etc. If
in point of sanctification, much more in justification. We are just, not only
for, but with the righteousness of Christ that righteousness which will befit
only the person of a Mediator. God-man, by way of inherency, may yet befit a
creature by way of imputation. Nor does the imputation of such a righteousness,
evacuate the duty of repentance: The righteous need no repentance; the most
which can be forced from thence is only, that the inherently righteous need no
repentance, but they who are only righteous by imputed righteousness do.
Touching the best of Saints, though a most perfect righteousness be imputed to
them, yet sin is inherent in them, and therefore repentance needful for them.

4. I come to the fourth link in the chain of our salvation which is
regeneration; whereby we mean Gods making us new creatures, or his quickening us
with spiritual life. And this the Apostlein Esh. 2. attributes to Free Grace:
Having told us v. 1. that of our selves we are dead in sins, he explains in the
next verses what he means by it; not only dead in person, because of the guilt
of sin; but dead in Nature, because under the power of sin. He does not say,
dead for sins, but dead in sins; which implies the former, and expresses more:
and then in v. 5. he attributes our quickening, unto grace: When we were dead in
sins, he quickened us; By grace ye are saved. This quickening of us, the
Scripture calls Regeneration. A man must be born again, Joh. 3. 3. and that not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God;
Joh. 1. 13 or born of the Spirit, Joh. 3. 8. These Texts compared, show what is
the adaequate principle of Regeneration, whether man's will, or Gods spirit,
and tells us expressly, totidem verbis, not the will of man, but the spirit of
God. Imagine Regeneration to be divided into a 1000 degrees, yet we must not
attribute so much as one of them to man's will, but all to Gods spirit: For the
Scripture puts a flat opposition betwixt them in this point; born not of the
will of man, but born of God, or born of the Spirit. As in the first birth we
do not form our selves in the womb, but God, as the God of Nature does all: So
in this second birth, we do not form the newcreature in our own hearts, but God
as the God of grace does all. It Is true indeed, when once the will of man is
principled and acted by the spirit of God, it acts with the spirit; Voluntas
acta agit; and in this sense we need not refuse that former resemblance,
allowing only one part of a thousand to the will of man, and the other nine
hundred ninety nine to the spirit of grace in every spiritual act. But this is
after Regeneration, and therefore comes not home to the case in hand; Voluntas
acta agit, sed non agit nisi acta; after regeneration the will acts with and in
the strength of the Spirit; but in the first moment of conversion, as to the
work of regeneration, the Will stirs not it self, but lies dead; and like the
Chaos in the first Creation, moves not till the spirit of God move upon it. We
are by Nature dead in every faculty, till the Lord quicken us, not only by the
Spirits energetical presence, but by the Spirits working a new principle in us;
call it by what logical term you think fittest, whether habit or power, it is
such a principle as the Scripture calls Grace; 1 Cor. 15. 10. By the grace of
God I am what I am; and his grace which was bestowed upon me, was not in vain;
but I labored more abundantly then they all; yet not I, but the grace of God
which was with me. By grace here, is not meant only the favor or grace of God
toward Paul, but the grace of God in Paul; for he speaks of it as a principle
of action within him, inabling him for what he did: I labored; yet not I, but
the grace of God. And so Heb, 13. 9. It is a good thing that the heart be
established with grace: beside grace toward the person, there is grace in the
heart, whereby the heart is said (...) to be established, or poysed and made
steady. In both these places (to name no more) by grace is meant a principle
put into us.

There is another pregnant phrase, which clearly imports, that when God
regenerates us, he puts such a principle into us; 1 Pet. 1. 23. We are said to
be born again of incorruptible seed, by the word of God, which lives and
abides for ever. In our regeneration there is an incorruptible seed put into
us, of which the new creature is bred and born within us; which seed is not *
the word of God; for we are said to Idem Redempt. Red, p. 199.
be born of the seed by the word: But by the seed is meant, a divine principle,
wrought by God in the heart and soul, through the ministration of the word,
which lives and abides for ever; i. e. not which word, but which seed or
principle lives and abides in us for ever; as appears by the placing of the
comma's, and as the word incorruptible imports. That this is no forced
interpretation, but the proper meaning, will appear from a parallel Text, 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God, his seed remains in him. By seed is
confessedly understood a divine principle wrought in us; and it is this seed
that remains, says this latter Text; but how long remains it? That the
former Text speaks home to; not only for a season, as some would interpret it,
* but it lives and Idem Ibiden.
abides for ever. This is a strong argument for perseverance, which some
endeavoring to answer, have only knocked one part of the Text against another,
and left the main thing against them untouched.

But to return, till we be thus regenerated and quickened we are of our selves
dead in every faculty; not only in our wills and affections but even in our
understandings as to things of spiritual concernment. The Intellectual frame of
the soul of man, was by the sin and fall of Adam wholly dissolved and shattered
and brought into as great a confusion of ignorance and darkness as can be
imagined.

Now if so, from hence I infer these two conclusions.

1. Every man continues in this state, till he be made a new creature by
regeneration* God by Christ has not so healed this natural condition of
mankind, that every one (even before generation) is reinvested with ability to
apprehend, discern, and subscribe to the things of God. Christ has not
purchased any such general vouchsafement to all the children of men, nor is any
such grace given to the world in general upon the account of Christ, as is
presumed, not yet proved* the contrary appears; for till we be regenerate there
is nothing in us but the old man; and that old man is in the old state of
darkness forementioned: there must be a renewing the spirit of our minds; now
they only are renewed in the spirit of their minds, who have put on the new man
Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. it is the new man, who is renewed in knowledge, Col. 3. 10. As
touching that Text, Joh. 1. 9. where Christ is said to be that light which
lights every man coming into the world; there is difference twixt lighting
and enlightening; one respecting the object and medium, the other respecting the
faculty: if that Scripture prove that Christ lights all i. e. holds forth in
the Gospel sufficient outward light to see by yet it proves not that he
inwardly enlightens all with a principle to see with. The Sun is the light of
the material world, yet they upon whom Nature has not bestowed sight, cannot
see for all that. The Sun sends out its light into the world far and near, yet
the man who is born blind, abides in darkness till his eyes be opened. I am
come a light into the world, says Christ, Joh. 12. 46. yet it is employed in the
next words, that every unbeliever abides in darkness; now we are all
unbelievers till regenerate, and therefore till then abide in darkness, though
under the very Tropicks of Gospel light, yet we discern it not, till God give
us an ey of faith, i. e. till he do that for us which the Scriture calls
enlightening the eyes of our understanding, Ephesians. 1. 18. till then, though the
light shine, yet it shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not.

Some by darkness in this and all other like texts, will needs understand Re.
Re. preface P 14. p. 20.
not a natural but only a contracted blindness; not born with us, Idem in
preface p. 12,
but which some (or it may be the most wilfully bring upon themselves. And
therefore I add,

2. Not only such unregenerate persons, who have darkened their own minds, by
loose and sensual converse and conversation, prepossessing themselves with
erroneous apprehensions, but even the choysest of the unregenerate, those who
are in their purest naturals, they are in darkness, as to the saying
apprehension of spiritual things: for till they be born again or quickened they
are dead, which deadness being universal, runs through every faculty, and
imports not only a lameness, but an utter inability in the understanding, as
well as other faculties. The mouth of that Text is not yet stopped, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
The natural man is not capable of the things of God, nor can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned; the original word is (...), the souly
man, i. e. the man who has no other principles but those connatural to his
soul, no principles super-infused from the spirit: such a souly man cannot
understand the things of the spirit of God, because being things of the spirit,
they are only spiritually discerned, i. e. by the Spirit which he that is only
a souly man wants, I shall offer 3. things toward further clearing this Text.

1. By the Natural man here, is not meant * the weak Christian Idem in preface
p. 13.
the babe in Christ, spoken of in the next chapter; for it is said, the things
of God are foolishnes to him; (...), which comes of the Hebrew word (...) to
rebel. Now the things of God are not foolishnes to a weak Christian, much less
does his heart rebel against them; as the word seems to import: besides the
very word (...) does properly signify a man without the spirit, so S. Jude
defines sin, ver. 19. (...) our translation renders it sensual, but it is the
same word with this in the text; natural, having not the spirit. We find the
same used again James 3. 15. this wisdom is earthly, natural, divelish; in both
these places the word (...) speaks an unregenerate condition; and I cannot meet
the word again in all the new testament, save only in 1 Cor. 15, where the
Apostle distinguishes twixt natural and glorified bodies.

2. It does not at all appear, that by the things of God here spoken of, are
meant only high and deep mysteries, speculations, but rather the substantial
doctrines of the Gospel, which the Apostle calls, the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and him crucified; ver. 2. the things given to us of God, ver. 12.
which are hidden and deep in respect of those, who have only the spirit of the
world and worldly wisdom, ver. 6. 8. but (says Paul) we have received the
spirit of God, that we might know them, and we also speak them; compareing one
spiritual thing with another, though the natural man is not capable of them, as
having not the Spirit.

3. By the incapacity here mentioned, is not understood only a present actual
incapacity, through want of diligent use of means; but an utter incapacity,
through want of a principle, spiritual things are not discerned but
spiritually. (...) vi solius spiritus, non vi. (...): as Beza expounds it: the
spirit is requisite to the discerning of spiritual things, and therefore the
natural man having not the spirit as Jude speaks) wants that very principle
whereby he should discern them.

1. Let grace have its due acknowledgment, by attributing that to App. 1.
it which the scripture terms making us to differ, who makes thee to differ?
says Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Let the answer be, not I, but the grace of God which is
in me; by the grace of God I am what I am. Let this be fully granted with the
clear consequences thereof and we desire no more.

But to say that * grace is the restoration or healing of the natural
condition of Idem preface p. 14, 20.
man in general, through Christ; as if every man was born sound and able, till
he corrupt himself afterward, with the lusts of the flesh, and ways of the
world, this does not make grace to difference one man from another. Not is it
enough to say, that not one of a thousand but does so corrupt himself, that
without a second relief from the grace of God, he never comes to believe: for
this seems to imply a power, though rarely or never exerted into act. Whereas
there is not one man in the world, if it were possible for him nor so to
corrupt himself, that has so much as power to believe, without regenerating
grace Which grace is not a restoration of the natural condition of men through
Christ, whereby they are healed, till they corrupt themselves. Neither is it a
second relief answerable to, and removing such a self corruption; neither is it
a put ing men into a capacity of believing, by vouchsafeing outward means, or
holding so than object to be believed in; which some perhaps may term a power
to believe* subtly, though improperly; neither is it only an irresistible
acting upon he understanding, by way of illumination; neither lastly, will all
these laid together, with an actual assistance in order to believing, come up
to that which is indeed, and in truth, discriminating and disterencing grace.

Differencing grace is an incorruptible seed, put into some, not others;
whereby they are made new Creatures, a divine spiritual principle, running
through every faculty, by which they are enabled, and without which they were
unable to put forth spiritual acts of saving import, ti true indeed, it is not
God, or the grace of God, but man who believe, and who is the subject of such
spiritual acts, having his own natural faculties engaged in them* but yet man
does not put forth those spiritual act, by his own natural faculties, natural,
but as spiritually enabled by this supervenient principle of grace.

And upon this account, we are norto attribute the differencing of us to
anything of our selves, but to this free grace of God: it was one part of
God's great design, to carry on the work of salvation in such a way, that the
creature might have no ground to glory in himself: but all the wit of man
cannot avoid it, but that we may glory in our selves, if there be not such a
peculiar differencing grace.

Take heed of crying down the doctrine of peculiar free graee as harsh; for to
the Appl. 2.
people of God none more sweet. No doctrine does more indear Christ to the
soul, and engage the soul to Christ, then this of free grace, in all the
branches of it. Acts of common love or civility amongst men, do nor lay such a
great obligation, as acts of peculiar love; when we pitch favors upon
particular persons these have always the deepest imprestion, and came the
heart yest returns. That the lot of free grace electing should fall upon me (I
mean it only by way of allusion, let none take advan that expression) that
Christ should love me, and give himself for me, that the spirit of God should
call, and cull our me, an I quicken me (says a Saint) this meits the heart Upon
such a consideratio Paul hows his knee to the master of the families of heaven
and earth, Ephesians. 9 14 and at v 18. prays, that the saints may be able (...) to
overtake the love of God in it, i. e. in some measure to wake up to it, and go
along with it with a love answerable to it. Oh that those who are so ready to
undertake the defense of man's free will, would rather endeavor in the Apostles
sense, to (...) the love of God toward them.

FINIS.

