The Protestant King PROTECTED: THE Popish KINGS Detected and Defeated. IN A
SERMON PREACHED

At St. James Clarkenwell, April 16. 1696. being the Day of Public
Thanksgiving for the Deliverance of His Majesty K. William III. from
Assassination, and His Kingdoms from Invasion by the FRENCH.

By DEUEL PEAD, Chaplain to His Grace JOHN Duke of NEW CASTLE.

LONDON: Printed for T. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
MDCXCVI.

THE Protestant KING protected, etc.
Psalm. II. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1. Why do the Heathen rage, and the People imagine
a vain thing?

2. The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Counsel together
against the Lord and his Anointed; saying,

3. Let us break their Bands asunder, and cast their Cords from us.

4. He that sits in Heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in Derision.

5. Then shall he speak unto them in his Wrath, and vex them in his sore
Displeasure.

6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion.


THis is a Day of Thanksgiving, a Time of rejoicing; not that Babylon is
utterly fallen, but because two Kings, and their People who have committed
Fornication with her, are confounded in their black and bloody Designs.

When I first turned my Eyes to this Psalm, and considered it as applied to our
Savior, I did conceive the Tragedy committed upon him might guide me in
describing that of this time; but I soon found, though in some Circumstances
there was a resemblance, as that the High Priest, Scribes, Pharisees, and
Rulers of the People, laid and cherished the Design, and that Loyalty and
Allegiance to Caesar were pretended to give it the greater Countenance; and
also they were so far alike, that the Devil had a part in it; persuading one
Disciple to betray, another to deny, and the rest to abandon him: Yet there
were other Particulars that did vastly differ, as that the Jews aimed at a
single Person, the Plotters of this Day at multitudes of People young and old.
The Jews carried theirs on by a Form of Law, they had their Sanhedrim,
C^^ap^^^, and Pilate on their side; but these Men design d to perpetrate their
Villainy by Fire, Sword, Blood and Cruelty. Again the Jews declare that what
they did was from a Principle of Fear, Joh. 11.48. for fear the Romans should
come and take away their Place and Nation, their Religion and Country, they
were forced (as they thought) to conspire against Jesus. But now the bloody
Treason at this time was therefore invented and hatched that Men of Romish
Principles might have had the opportunity of destroying our King, our Religion,
our Laws, our Liberties, our Lives, our Wives, Children, and Country, by
introducing Popery and Slavery.

Disappointed therefore of my first Expectation, I considered the Words with
relation to David and his Affairs; and so though I found many things parallel,
yet not all: The Plot against him was very wicked; but this of our Time exceeds
it. However seeing I cannot be so exact as I desired, I must be content to go
so far as I may. The Words read acquaint us with a desperate Contrivance
against the Crown and Dignity, the Life and Person of King David, and also they
give us an Account of a seasonable and glorious Deliverance.

In the Plot we are to consider of Four Particulars.

I. The Persons contriving, and carrying it on; First, The Heathen Secondly,
The People; Thirdly Kings, Fourthly Rulers. II. The distinct Parts of every one
of these. First, The Heathen raged. Secondly, The People imagined. Thirdly, The
Kings stood up. Fourthly, The Rulers took Counsel. III. The Persons against
whom they plot. The Lord, and David his Anointed King. IV. The End and Design
of this Plot. Let us break their Bands asunder, and cast their Cords from us.
In the Deliverance we must consider,

1. The Success of the Plot. All that these imagined was vain. 2. The Person
working this Deliverance. He that sits in Heaven. 3. The Means by which it
was wrought.
First, He laughed at the Conspirators, and had them in Derision.

Secondly, He spoke unto them in his Wrath.

Thirdly, He vexed them in his sore Displeasure.

Fourthly, He established his Anointed Yet have I, etc.

4. The Time, then, when Matters as they thought were ripe, and beyond
disappointment.

1. We begin with the Persons and their Actions. And first, the Heathen raged:
The Philistines, Moabites, and Edomites were in a great Heat against David,
understanding so religious, and Warlike a Prince, a Prince that had an
undoubted Title, having married Readiness Daughter, was come to the Crown, they
now despaired of ever driving Israel out of Canaan; and therefore they ^^ged,
tumultuabantur, turmatim congregabantur, they murmured and gathered together in
a grievous Rage and Tumult against him; they raged bitterly against David, and
Israel's Success and Prosperity.

2. The second sort of Enemies are called the People, and their part in this
Plot was they imagined a vain thing. The People, i. e. David's own Subjects,
who should have both known and behaved themselves better; yet these being
poisoned by the Heathen, imagined vain, false, foolish, and wicked things
against their King, vain things such as they had no occasion for, nor could
expect any benefit by. I will instance in one of these vain Imaginations, 2 Samuel 2.8. Abner with a perverse Tumult set up Ishbosheth Readiness younger Son,
who had no more Right to the Crown of Israel than the pretended Prince of Wales
has to ours, God having excluded him by electing David; and this was foolish,
in that the Person designed by them for the Throne was too weak and unable for
Government, and also because it was apparently contradictory to the Order of
the King of Kings.

For when Men have done all they can, it is God that puts down one, and
sets up another: it is but labor in vain for the Wit and Power of the World
to attempt the deposing a King against God's Consent, and as fruitless it is to
endeavor the restoring one he does not favor.

3. The next sort of Enemies were Persons of greater Eminency and Power, and
therefore might hope to speed better. These were Kings of the Earth, as the
Kings of the Moabites, the Kings of Syria and Edom, and with them joined the
Lords of the Philistines, and their part was to stand up against David to raise
an Army and invade his Country, Reges adstiterunt.

Standing up denotes utmost endeavor of an adverse Party, standing in the way
as the Angel did against Balaam with a drawn Sword. These Kings saw they could
not prevent David's Accession to the Crown, and therefore now they muster up
their Forces, if possible, to take it from his Head; but their standing up was
every whit as vain as the Heathens rage, or the Peoples imagining: For read,
Psalm. 60 8. In a short time Moab became David's Wash-pot, and over Edom he cast
his Shoe; that is, he reduced them to what they deserved, namely, a State of
Subjection and Slavery.

4. The next Enemies were the Rulers; so that David was miserably beset on all
hands, the Heathen accost him with Rage, his own People with mischievous
Devices, his Neighbour-Kings with all their Force and Might, and the chief
Rulers and Statesmen, some of his own, and some of the Enemy's, with their
Counsel labor to ensare him. Rulers, Men of Honor, of choice Education, of
great Parts, and in high Places, (such as should have abhorred the base and
mean Thoughts of Treachery) were drawn into the Plot against King David, such
as should have been a Skreen to defend the King against all Rage and Insolency
of the People, consulted how to destroy him.

We have thus seen the Plotters and their Actions, we come next to see,

Thirdly, Against whom this Plot was devised; and the Text says, they raged
imagined, stood up, and took Counsel against the Lord and his Anointed.

So that this was (...), a fighting against God. Wherever just and righteous
Kings are invaded, God espouses their Quarrel. Hezekiah found it so as well as
David, 2 Kings 19.27, 28. Senacherib was thought to stand up against Hezekiah
only, and to rage against him; but you may there hear what God said to him, I
know thy rage against Me, and because thy rage against Me, and thy tumult is
come up into mine ears, therefore will I put mine hook into thy nose, and my
Bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way which thou came.

So the War of Moab and Ammon against Jeohoshaphat, God interpreted a War
commenced against himself, 2 Chronicles. 20.15. Thus, says the Lord, be not afraid,
for the Battle is not yours but Gods.

You may observe it throughout all Ages, such as God's gracious Providence
places upon Thrones, his mighty Arm does ever defend and protect.

Fourthly, The next thing to be considered, is the End and Design of this
Conspiracy, of this raging, imagining; standing up, and taking Counsel; and we
shall find it was, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast their cords from
us. Their Bands and their Cords must have respect to the Persons preceding,
namely, the Lord and his Anointed; and by this we may perceive that these
Conspirators were Persons of very perverse Minds, they were impatient if under
any Restraint from God or Man, they rage, stand up, and take Counsel against
any that shall attempt to keep them in good order.

Bands, as it has respect to God, may imply the religious Worship of the Jews,
those Precepts that God had given them in Command to observe; and then the
meaning of those Plotters was, they were resolved to extirpate the true
Religion, they would not be under any Obligation to the God of Israel, but
would continue in their blind and devilish Idolatry; and therefore they
conspire this against David, because the Defender of the Faith. It is strange
to Reason, though not to Practice, that Kings should suffer the Displeasure of
their Neighbors and People, merely for upholding God's true Worship.

Let us cast their cords from us. Cords in Scripture Phrase signify Power and
Authority, Psalm. 129.4. God has cut asunder the cords of the wicked; i. e.
has destroyed all their Tyrannical Power: In this sense this bloody
Contrivance against David was to destroy all Legal Authority, that the longest
Sword might carry all.

Cords have another signification, and proper to the Case in hand. The Hebrews
divided the Land of Canaan by Lines and Cords, setting out thereby every ones
Portion, Psalm. 16.6. The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places; so that
this considered, the Heathen, the People, the Kings and the Rulers, though they
pretended Rage against King David only, yet their chief Design was to beat
Israel out of Canaan, to root them out so that they should be no more a People.
Some Rings it is to be feared go to War upon no other account.

The 2d. part of the Text, is the Deliverance from this desperate Plot. And
herein,

1. We may behold the Success of this raging, imagining, standing up, and
consulting, it was all a vain thing: And what is it but vain, false, and
deceitful for Men to take in hand what they are assured God will blast.

It is true if diverse Kings stand up against one weaker, (according to humane
Proceedings) they may compel and force him to alter and change his Mind
suitably to their Will and Pleasure; but when once God shall have engaged, when
the King of Kings shall have sworn that he will not fail David, not all the
Kings, Popes, and Grand Seigniors on Earth can constrain him to alter the thing
that is gone out of his lips: They may dig as deep as Hell, and conjure the
Devils to their assistance; but still he that sits in Heaven will disappoint
them. Psalm. 37.12. The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him
with his teeth. He has whetted his teeth, and is ready to devour him, yet he
shall miss his Prey: For Ver. 13. The Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees
that his day is coming.

2. The Person working this Deliverance. He that sits in the Heavens.

God is described as sitting in the Heavens, not as a regardless Being, but as
having the advantage to behold wicked Men in their secret doings, Psalm. 10.14.
Thou have seen it, for thou beholdest mischief and spite to requite it with thy
hand.

He that sits in Heaven, argues the Power of God that he rules over all,
and will be too hard for the Kings of the Earth, their Adherents and
Counselors.

3. The means whereby this Deliverance was wrought. First, God laughed at the
Conspirators, and had them in derision, he infatuated their Counsels, and
defeated all their Purposes.

Secondly, He also spoke unto them in his wrath. If we look into the 6th.
Verse, we may see the Words God did speak unto them, viz. Yet have I set my
King upon my holy Hill of Sion. Speaking, when referred to God, is put for
doing; for non tam lingua quam manu loquitur Deus, He will speak unto them in
his wrath: Such Rebellion and bloody Designs will kindle God's wrath, and then
he will afflict such Punishments upon them as he is used to cast upon those
that rebel against him.

3. And vex them in his sore Displeasure. These Words manifesting God's
Resolution of upholding his King, must needs vex them. That was so hard a
saying, who could bear it that had evil Will at Sion? It was certainly the
greatest mortification imaginable to these Conspirators to see that the more
they shook David's Throne the faster it should stand.

Fourthly, The last means of the Deliverance was God's confirming his former
Grant to David, when by his good Providence he so overruled all the rage of
the Heathen, the imagination of the People, the standing up of the Kings, and
the consulting of the Rulers, that notwithstanding all David sat fast, he
reigned a long time in Peace and Prosperity; and after he had settled his
Kingdom, died in Peace and Honor.

4. The fourth Particular relating to the Deliverance, was the Time, specified
by the Word then; then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in
his sore Displeasure; then when they least thought on such a thing, when they
were past all Fears and Jealousies, when they scorned all Terms of
Accommodation, as presuming upon Success, when they had filled their own, and
Neighbors Courts with the vast hopes they had of subduing Israel; then he that
sits in Heaven laughed at all.

There is yet the first Word of the Text, this must be regarded also, Why? The
Text is delivered by way of Interrogation; and that first, to evince the Truth
of the Matter. David made not Enquiry of what they had done, for that was
sufficiently apparent; but he wanted to know, Why? Again, this Why argues his
surprise at the hearing of these Designs, not knowing what Fault of his had
thus inflamed their Rage, armed their Hands, and employed their Heads. And
lastly, Why? does upbraid them; as if he had said, Why? to what purpose is all
this ado? What will you get thereby in the end but shame and confusion. Here I
shall break off from David.

I am apt to think that from what has been already spoken, you have some
insight into the rebellious Conspiracy lately transacted among us. However our
Duty this Day being great and necessary; namely, praising and blessing the Name
of God, for fear you should do your Work by halves, I will go through with
mine, and make the Words applicable to our present purpose.

Mercies and Deliverances are not likely to be rightly acknowledged where they
are not fully considered; nor can our Thankfulness be such as it should, if our
esteem and value of the Blessing be not such as it ought; it is unreasonable to
expect they should magnify God's Name for this wonderful Preservation of our
King and Kingdoms, who either know not our Danger, or repine at our
Deliverance. I will therefore endeavor to take away the Excuse of Ignorance,
and I hope that of Prejudice, by giving a particular and faithful relation of
the whole Matter. I have those farther hopes, that if any one crowded in among
you, who have been any ways accessory to the black Design, either in wishing
Success, speaking too favorably thereof, or otherwise concealing the Actors of
it, I may yet prevail upon them to be thankful for this great Mercy; and I may
boldly say theirs is not the least Share; for Providence having interrupted the
perpretation of the intended Invasion, Assassination, and Massacre, they are in
a possibility of repenting; for I must declare I have rarely, if ever, met with
Persons who have murdered lawful Princes, and turned their Kingdoms into Blood,
have ever found the Grace of Repentance; for either when their Heat and Fury,
their Barbarity and Cruelty is over, the Devil takes the advantage of their
Guilt, and precipitates them to Despair; or else he breeds in them such a
Complacency and Delight in what they have done, that they rather expect an
Angel to conduct them to an heavenly Reward, than one of the bottomless Pit to
hurry to them to the Place of Torment; and being thus secure, they come to a
fearful End.

To proceed: In this Plot we have,

1. The Heathen, not Philistines or Edomites, but bloody-minded Papists: And
because I expect some to question upon what account I call them Heathen, who
call themselves Catholics, I therefore answer, I understand nomina to be
notamina, Names to be Indications of the Nature and Properties of Persons; and
upon this account, it is notoriously evident that the Name of Heathen does
better accord with these Papists than that of Christian, in that their
Behavior is not such as becomes the Gospel of Christ, but rather the Customs
of savage Heathen; nor do I see any impropriety in writing him most Heathenish,
who would be called most Christian, because he blushes not to act what Turks
and Infidels, and the very Heathen would tremble at the ^^ming.

And with these Heathen we must rank some Protestants, seeing they are so
become by their vilainous Practices: Having thus told you who these Heathen
are, we now consider their doings, they raged, and tumultuously congregated
against the Lord and his Anointed, our gracious King William, who may truly say
of them in the Words of David, Psalm, 110.12. They came about him like Bees; a
proper resemblance, either in respect of their number or malice; for besides
the several thousands of them belonging to the Hive at home, ten thousand more
were upon the wing to come from abroad. Bees for their malice also are these
Heathen; for when Bees take pet against any thing, they seize it with that
ardent desire of Revenge, that to sting others they disarm and kill themselves:
The like have some of these Heathen done, having most justly forfeited their
Lives in contriving and endeavoring the Assassinating his Majesty. There is
one Particular farther, wherein I hope to see these Heathen like David's Bees;
for they were extinct as the Fire among the Thorns: So these, though they rage
horribly, and make a great noise, shall be able to do no more hurt than a Fire
among a few Thorns.

These Heathen rage, they hum and mutter Slanders and reviling Speeches against
the Lord's Anointed, and such as faithfully adhere to him, they rage against
our Religion, against our Prosperity, and especially because God has raised us
up such a mighty Deliverer. It is observable that they who have the Plague, are
doubly infected in Mind as well as Body, and therefore they use all means to
derive their Disease to others: Such a Plague is Slavery, that these French and
Frenchify'd Heathen are more troubled at our Liberty than their own Thraldom
and would be much easier in their Shackles, could they see a probability of
getting our Feet into the same Stocks; and for this end they jeopard their
Lives unto Death,

2. The second rank of our David's Enemies, from which we may praise God that
He and we are in so hopeful a way to be delivered, is the People.

The People, his People, those very People that by their own Choice, Laws, and
Oaths, as well as God's particular Providence, have made, and owned him their
King.

The People, the People our King has redeemed with the Price of his Blood, and
the Hazard of his Life.

The People, the English People, the greater Shame, seeing they have ever till
now highly honored, obeyed, greatly loved and revered their Wise, Good, Just,
Valiant, and Moderate Princes.

The People, a People that long ere this had been no People had he not been
King: yet this People forgets David, aad the Dangers he has exposed his Sacred
Person to for their sake.

The People, a People that are naturally impatient of Arbitrary Government, yet
they imagine wicked and cruel things against their King that rules by Law, and
with abundance of Prudence and Mercy.

The People, a People that are very jealous of their Liberty and Privileges,
but yet Conspire with them that would enslave them, against that King who has
hitherto defended them.

The People, the English Protestants, and some of their Teachers, who have all
protested against the Idolatry and Blasphemy of Rome, and yet now join with
Papists against a true Protestant King.

The People, the People that pretend greater Veneration for the Gospel than the
rest of the World beside, and yet some of these conspire with Antichrist
against him that would preserve it in its Purity. How odious! how abominable!
is it for such Professors to join with Rebels and Assassines!

The People imagined vain things against David their King, against his Crown
and Dignity, his Life and Person: That People should imagine Evil against their
own King, against a King of their own Blood (for he was Son of a Daughter of
England,) against a King of their own Religion, a King who is whole and entire
in their Interest, seems past Belief, had we not seen it.

Thus David's People dealt with him, 1 Samuel 23.1. They found him extremely
tender of his Peoples Sufferings, and very courageous in repelling the Insults
of their Enemies: for he, for their sakes, adventured his Life against the
Philistines, who were robbing their Threshing Floors, and these he routed: now
who would have concluded otherwise, but that after such an Instance of Love and
Valor in their King, the Keilahites should have erected a lasting Monument for
him in their hearts? For if saving them, their City, their Lives, their Wives
and Children, and the Staff of all their Lives, would not oblige a People, what
would? Yet some of these very People, who the other day were almost frighted
out of their Wits by the Philistines, were no sooner out of Danger, but they
were for serving David such another Trick as some of the People would have
served our King the other day. I. e. They imagined which way to deliver their
Deliverer into the hands of his bitterest Enemies. Who would have thought any
People could have been guilty of such Ingratitude? Did we not read it in the
Word of Truth? 1 Samuel 23.12. Now if this looks so ill in Jews, with what
Arguments will Men excuse or palliate the same thing attempted by Christians?

It was not long since the English did that in earnest to our King which the
Men of Macedonia did to St. Paul in a Vision, Acts 16.9. They prayed him that
he would come over and help them; and behold now some of them are devising how
they may sacrifice their Helper to the Rage of Merciless Tyrants! The blind
Indians are said to Sacrifice to the Devils lest they hurt them; but I question
if these Zealots should have had any Favor for such their Sacrifice: however,
their Drink Offerings of Blood will I not offer. But publish this not in Gath,
tell it not in Askelon, for surely the Daughters of the Philistines will
rejoice at our Ingratitude and Perfidiousness, and will comfort themselves;
expecting God's Revenging it.

Farther, We must look upon these People as in Combination, and in the same
Plot with the Heathen: they laid their Heads together with one Consent against
the Lord and his Anointed.

We read Prove. 3*29. Devise not Evil against thy Neighbor; the Hebrew is, plow
not Evil; and indeed, musing Evil is in many Particulars like Plowing; for as
the Plowman does turn up the Ground, so do such Students of Mischief; they
turn up all and every Corruption that lodges in their Hearts: Again, As the
Plowman tears up all Briars and Thorns, so these Plotters of Rebellion cut out
of their way whatsoever may let or hinder their wicked Purposes; as, the Fear
of God, Love to their King and Country, Pity to their Posterity, and all
Principles of Honor and Conscience. For these are as bad as Briars in their
way. Lastly, As the Plowman, in hopes of a better Crop, turns in his Dung, so
do the Imaginers of Mischief cultivate all manner of Conveniences as may
promote, ripen, and accomplish their abominable Devices; as Sword, Pistol,
Poison, dark Places, narrow Lanes, and Winter Quarters, and what not: thus it
is plain, that they who imagine such Wickedness may be said to plow: But yet I
find 22 Deuteronomy. 10. none are to plow with an Ox and an Ass together; they are not
to join two Beasts of different Species in one Yoke; and yet in this Plow
lately going, in the carrying on this Plot, an Ox and an Ass were yoked
together, a Papist and a Protestant, and still they had the Impudence to pray
God speed the plow. If the former is displeased with the Comparison, I answer,
I took it for proper, because the Scripture calls the Enemies of God's Church
by that Name 22 Psalm. 12. And as for the latter, if he quarrel at it, it is for
want of Consideration; for are not they Asses that would willingly crouch down
between the two intolerable Burdens of Popery and Slavery.

We will now examine their vain Imaginations, that we may understand how great
our Deliverance is.

1. They Imagined (but God be thanked it is but in vain) to Assassinate our
King; I say, it was in vain for they find, and I hope will ever hereafter
remember, that God stands on the Kings Right hand to save his soul, his life,
from such unrighteous Judges; let them also know, that he who keeps our King,
neither slumbereth nor sleeps, and therefore their Imaginations will be in
vain.

2. They imagined another Vain Thing; namely, That having once destroyed King
William, the way was plain and easy for King James to the Throne: but these
giddy People forget the Act of Settlement, which will render all hopes of that
Kind vain and fruitless.

3. These Heathens and People imagined another vain Thing; That we were, or
might be, made such Fools, as to believe, that an Ambitious Tyrant, such as
King Lwis, a Man of no Conscience, and as many good Principles, would not have
the Opportunity of gratifying his own Ambition, when he had gotten the
Advantage to pleasure the Abdicated King. They must count us fit for Bedlam if
ever we be of that opinion.

4. They Imagined further, and as Vain as any of the rest; which was, That we
might be persuaded a Zealous Papist Prince would become a most indulgent
Nursing-Father to Protestants; and yet so vain was this Device, that we must
turn Romanists, and deny our Senses, before we could believe it; we must first
forget what we have heard, seen and felt before we could so expect.

5. They had another Imagination, and a vain one; and that was, they did
imagine that he who could never forget an Injury, was now of a sudden become
Master of so admirable Patience, that he could and would forget and forgive
(what themselves sometimes say is unpardonable.) Will not he, think you, that
once set your Metropolis in Flames to pacify his Father's Ghost, judge less
than an whole Kingdom cannot be a Burnt-offering sufficient to atone for so
long an Abdication?

6. Yet, these People imagine another vain thing: That upon the Restoration,
the Protestant Religion shall flourish as it does now. And in this Imagination
some Book-men are ensnared; they dream of nothing less than Prebends, Deanries,
and Bishoprics; but they will find, if that day should ever come, that they
have Men abroad for these Places. Had they read the Chronicles of our Nation,
they would have found 300 Italians at one time in Benefices in this Kingdom,
besides many from other Countries. But poor deceived Souls! what dream they of,
Preferment? Let them hear what the Duke of Medina chief General in the Spanish
Invasion, said; viz. That his Sword, whenever he had Success, must make no
Distinction between Protestant and Papist, Clergy or Laity. But peradventure
these Men have a sheet Anchor, by which they hope to ride safely in the midst
of those raging Tempests (should they come;) that is, they will turn Papists. I
am so far from disputing it, that I believe it, provided they are not so
already. But this Anchor will be too weak to ride out the Storm, for they will
be told of the great danger of a Relapse: and for fear of such a sad thing, it
is the best Charity to dispatch them while they are in so good a mind.

Now who but Asses, as I said, would draw in this Plow in such vain hopes?

3. The Third sort of Enemies to our King are the Kings of the Earth, and these
are said to stand up against him.

Kings of the Earth, viz. Lewis and James, and these may be called Kings of the
Earth very properly, in that they are Men of this World, they mind nothing
farther than Vanity and Ambition, and from them we may be satisfied that the
Devil is an horrid liar, for he had the Impudence to tell our Savior, That the
Kingdoms of the Earth were at his disposal, which had it been more than sham
and boast, he would certainly long ere this have conferred these Kingdoms upon
those Princes, because none have fallen down so basely, and worshipped him so
zealously as they have done. What Cities and Towns have they in their fury made
Burnt-Offerings of? and what Rivers of Blood have they prodigally sacrificed to
the Devils, of Idolatry, Pride, Vainglory, and Lust.

These Kings have set themselves against the Lord and against his Anointed. Did
not Lewis stand up against our King when he sent a grand Villain called Granvil
into his Camp to stab him; and when one could not do it in the Camp, the other
stood up as well as his Heart would let him, and procured a Kennel of
Hell Hounds to attempt it in his Winter Quarters: How did this become a Warlike
Prince (as some will call him?) he wanted the true Courage to stand up against
him in the Field, but drew up like an Hero as far as Pen and Ink would carry
him.

These Kings make nobile par fratrum, a pair of special Brethren in Iniquity;
how indefatigably have they labored to compass the Death of our King? All true
Protestants may truly say of them in the words of Jacob, Genesis 49.5. Instruments
of Cruelty are in their Habitations, O my Soul come not into their secret, unto
their Assembly, mine honor be not thou united: Let none that have a Soul, or
but a spark of true Honor associate with them; let no Christian favor them in
Heart, or defend their ungodly Practices with their Tongues.

The Fourth sort of Enemies to our David, according to the Text, were Rulers,
chief and leading Men, and those took Counsel, and laid their Heads together.

Among the Jews we read of two sorts of Rulers, the one Rulers of the
Synagogues in particular Cities, the other of the People, and those were the
Sanhedrim, which consisted of the High Priest, Elders, Scribes and Pharisees;
Persons of different Opinions, Orders, Degrees and Functions; and thus the Plot
(the Discovery whereof we this day most thankfully Commemorate) was carried on
by great Personages; and who knows if the great High Priest (falsely called his
Holiness) had not his Cue in it? For few of his Church dare undertake a
considerable Villainy without the encouragement of his Blessing: Swords, Daggers
and Pistols, when designed against Protestant Princes, never yet wanted the
Benediction of that holy Father, and therefore it is very probable he did now
as he used to do upon like occasions.

Gregory the VIIth. was of Counsel, and did hire a Ruffian to murder Henry the
IVth. and engaged in a multitude of Treasonable Practices against Fredrick the
I^d. King John was murdered by a Monk, but not without the privity of Christ's
Vicar. Henry the VIth. was poisoned by one Bernard a Friar, but it was by
instigation of Clement the Vth. and it was done in the Sacrament. Well may
Princes be in danger of Assaults in their Winter Quarters, when they are not
safe at God's Altar. Time would fail to tell what they have done to Protestant
Kings and Queens; for if they did such things to Emperors and Kings of their
own Church, to be sure they accounted nothing bad enough for those of ours:
witness this last horrid Plot. I will briesly show you how these Rulers of the
Romish Faith are degenerated from the old Heathen Romans; King Pyrrhus was at
War with Rome, and his Physician conveyed a Letter to Caius Fabricius the Roman
General, wherein he offered to destroy his Master if Fabricius pleased; but in
Fabricius was found such a noble and generous Mind that he sent the treasonable
Letter back to King Pyrrhus. Now, what would the two Kings, we are speaking of,
have given for such an offer? Tell me then what good the Romish Religion has
done, or is possible to do, toward a Reformation of the World, when it is
plain it has so monstrously corrupted it?

Now to particularize how many, or who of those Rulers that thus conspired
against our King are among us, is more than I can undertake, we must leave it
to time: However I can acquaint you with some of their Consultations, which
when you have heard, you will see farther cause to bless God for this great
Deliverance.

1. These Rulers, Roman and Protestant, French, Irish and English, consulted
the aspersing the glorious Name of our King.

Envying the Happiness they saw likely to accrue to this Nation under a Wise
and Valiant Protestant Prince, they consulted to prevent and spoil all, by
instilling into the Ears of the giddy People false Reports of their Sovereign,
they set Men of cunning Wits to write, compose, and publish, Scurrilous Libels
and Seditious Pamphlets, and these like Birds of Prey flew up and down the Land
to devour the King's Honor and Goodness; in these they were not slack to throw
Dirt enough, hoping if some only stuck, it might do their Work. Thus they
charged him with prolonging the War, barely to raise more Trophies to the
Memory of his own Prowess. Again, they consulted how to lay it to his Majesty's
charge, that we were taxed to be beggered, and the Dutch favored, to the
increase of their Wealth and Riches. It is true, the Dutch are in some
considerations gainers, but were they not, how should they subsist? and admit
their gains were greater, yet I believe few to have them, would consent that
our Country should be the Seat of the War.

But however, if any become disaffected upon those Clamours, they would be
wiser if they did a little bethink themselves, whether they had by this time a
Penny their own, had it not been for this present Government.

I will yet offer one thing farther to unsting this Slander, when your Enemies
consulted to set you in a rage upon this Article, did they ever tell you a word
how greatly the King had engaged his Paternal Inheritance for our sakes and the
defense of these his Kingdoms?

2. These Rulers took Counsel how they might persuade evil-minded Men to clip,
and debase, and adulterate the Coin of the Nation; they well knew the dreadful
Consequences that would ensue thereupon, and therefore doubted not but that if
one among the many, ( viz. a stop to Trade) should take effect, that alone were
sufficient to embroyl the Nation, and give them a fair opportunity for the
Invasion, Assassination, and Massacre: You read this plainly in that, that
precise time was chosen and pitched upon.

3. They took Counsel together how to weaken the Walls of the Nation; I mean,
destroy and dispirit the Seamen.

Were not they very unkindly dealt with in respect of their Meat and Drink? And
did not many thereupon dye like rotten Sheep? and are there not sufficient
numbers whose ulcerated Bodies can yet manifest the truth of this cruel
Counsel? and yet, which was another instance of their consulting, this
barbarous dealing with the Seamen was so cunningly carried, that it was said to
be a just consequence of the Revolution, and that it would never be otherwise
till the Abdicated King was restored.

Did not others again, consult either to conceal or else bring off the Actors
of this horrid Villainy, no doubt those Rulers told their Agents as the Scribes
and Pharisees told the Watch, That if any thing came to the Ear of the
Government, we wilt persuade that, and secure you: I dare be bold to say, had
that ma^ter been more exactly scanned we had never heard of this Invasion; but
at this the Villains took Heart, and when they sound their Abettors so
powerful, they resolved to stick at nothing; for no wonder if in this Age we
see Impunity produce Impudence.

Again, Those Rulers consulted, and it was to cheat and defraud such as they
had not the advantage to kill; and this they got by so consulting; they forced
many poor Seamen to enter the Enemies Service merely for subsistence; nay, the
Matter has been so carried, that they whom they feared to kill themselves, they
found a way to kill by the hands of others; for it was no more than dealing
roughly with such French Sea men as they took, and they well knew that in a
little time this would be repaid to the English with Interest: This very
Consultation cost some hundred Lives.

4. Having consulted thus far, and brought these things to pass, a little
Counsel was sufficient to put the Nation in a Ferment; sober Men were amazed,
ordinary well-minded People were sorely terrified; and when they beheld this,
these Traitors posted some to France, with an Embassy to Court, and draw on the
destruction of their King and Country; others were employed to buy Arms, and to
wheedle what unthoughtfull, and wanting Persons they could into the Service;
and if we are not mis-inform'd, two especially of the Assassines were ready to
dispute it with Sword in hand, who should carry that acceptable Sacrifice of
our King's Heart to the Tyrants in France: They had before consulted to
circumvent and carry him alive thither; but some, wiser than the rest, and
better understanding the Tempers of their Masters, approved not of that design;
because they knew, as much as those Tyrants coveted King William's Heart; yet
if the living Body must come with it, they would never be able to' behold it,
but with as great Consternation as Balthazar did the Handwriting on the Wall;
i e. not only with terror of Mind, but with a panick fear upon their Bodies.

But one thing I must confess in this Design was remarkable; to wit, that one
of those hasty Zealots was a Player, peradventure a person accustomed to act
Tragedies: But however, it might be questioned if his bold daring Heart would
not have failed him in acting this to the Life; however, surely this is a fair
warning, that persons may not be so encouraged to act and represent, lest they
may come to it in earnest at the last.

5. One Point more on which they consulted, was by various Arts and Pretenses
to draw in crafty Men of sundry Opinions: This was great Policy, and to great
Ends no doubt; for having taken those Foxes, they served them as Sampson did
his, they tied them together cunningly with Firebrands, to set the fairest
Fields in Christendom in a blaze.

6. Though they had thus laid their Plot as deep as Hell, and, no doubt, had his
assistance, (who delights so much in the Children of Disobedience, that he
works in their Hearts as in a Shop,) yet they had some Intervals of doubting,
some Rays of Light did sometimes force themselves into the Minds of these dark
Workers; As, what if he that sits above in Heaven, would not be persuaded by
all their Prayers and Processions so much as to a neutrality? Or else, what if
some of their own should grow faint, and seriously recollecting the fatal
Consequences of this intended Assassination and Massacre, should relent and
confess? That such thoughts arose in their Minds, is likely; yet were their
Hearts so hardened, that they were not sufficient to lead them to Repentance,
but only set their Wits upon the tenters, to provide Expedients against such
extremities; and accordingly they by consulting found out this: If unhappily
their Plot should be discovered, and any therein concerned should be
apprehended and brought to execution, such must be instructed to sweeten their
Death with the thoughts of the honor and greatness of the Undertaking; and for
their Souls they had made an ample provision; for if they died in the Roman
Communion, they had Jesuits of that Church; and if they would rather choose to
make profession of dying Protestants of the Church of England; they had also
Jesuitical Men of that Church, to Absolve them: And this, no doubt, hurried on
the design. But as serviceable as this project may have been to their bloody
Cause, yet is it the Wonder of the World, and would be the indelible Scandal of
our Church, were it not sure that, All are not Israel, which are of Israel. In
the last days we were foretold by our Savior that grievous Wolves should
appear in Sheeps-cloathing; and such those unhappy Gentlemen (that lately
suffered) met with; who, instead of drawing them out of the Jaws of the Lion,
it is much to be feared thrust them farther in: For had not these supposed
Friends by a too hasty Absolution sealed up their Mouths, it is very probable
they had, upon their ingenious Confession, found the sweetness, mildness, and
mercy, of a gracious King, and not have died with the burden of Treason and
Rebellion, of Murder and Violence upon their Consciences.

But why does the World call this Absolution? Whereas by God's Rule, without
Confession, there can be no Absolution: In plain terms, these bold Undertakers
either knew not their Duty, or else wilfully neglected it: I would not that any
should think me transported with too much Zeal for the Cause, wherein I, and
all true Englishmen are embarked; nor yet that I am blinded with so much
Passion or Malice as to lay more to the charge of these Persons than what they
are verily guilty of, For Josh. 7.19. It is said to Achan, about to suffer, My
Son, give I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession
unto him. The Case was this in short: Achan had, contrary to God's Command,
secretly stolen from among the Spoil a Wedge of Gold, and a Babylonish Garment;
he rested secure, believing that no eye had seen him; yet God, by Lot, detected
him; and he being brought to suffer, Joshua, the Supreme Magistrate, advises
him to confess his fault; and that he might the better prevail, he tells him
the Effect of his Confession would be giving Glory to the God of Israel: No
Evidence could be brought against him, farther than the Lot that fell upon him,
(as for the things found in his Tent he might have pretended, they were his
long before, as some do the abundance of Arms now found in their possession) by
which means some less acquainted with the Methods of Divine Justice, when he
was dead, might say, it was mere Malice that occasioned the Lot to fall upon
Achan: And therefore it highly became him to make a full and free Confession,
that so the Wisdom and Justice of God might be had in greater Reverence and
Honor among Men.

Now peradventure some may say, quorsum haec? what need all this? who can think
otherwise but that those Gentlemen were Men that did really confess their Sins
to God? It may be so, and I hope they did; yet I must tell you, if they did
confess their Designs and Intentions of Invading the Realm, and Murdering the
King, a Sins; nay, if they did confess their being privy to this Plot, as a
thing that they ought not to have been: Then, I say, how will you reconcile
this Confession with that hypocrisy in their Dying Speech, delivered with
their own Hands; wherein they are so far from confessing those as Sins, or
Crimes, that they rather justify them? This weighs with me so much, that if I
must own they had the grace to confess to God; yet I must say, they wanted Wit
to deliver such Payers (let who will Pen them) as gives the World so just cause
to fear they died impenitent.

However, I will admit what their friends did pretend, that they did confess to
God. yet did they not acquit themselves so charitably to their Country as in
all good Conscience they ought to have done, for read the rest of the Verse,
Josh. 9.15. and tell me now what thou have done; hide. it not from me; Men
under Sentence of Condemnation ought to discover to the Magistrate the Nature
and Circumstances of their fact; for by this means they bring Glory to God: For
when the guilty acknowledges their guilt, it abundantly evinces the Justice of
the Laws by which they suffer; and likewise of the Judge, that by those Laws
condemned them: This was the case with Achan: Joshua knew what a peevish
unsettled Temper the Jews were of; how hardly they had handled Moses, and
severely reflected upon his Ministration of Justice; and therefore pressed
Achan to confess, that the People might be satisfied he had Justice done him,
and did deserve to die: Farther, there was a great Reason of State, requiring
Achan's Confession; and that was others peradventure might have conspired with
him; and if they by his silence escaped, the Wrath of God would still abide
upon the Congregation, notwithstanding his Execution: Therefore in pity, and
love to his Countrymen and Brethren, that he might glorify God by dying in
Charity, it became him to confess.

And had not these Malefactors, lately Executed, the same thing to consider?
how much Blood might they have saved with a little breath! They might have
extricated us from the Snares and Traps our Enemies have laid for us, had they
not been prompted to that tonguety'd Departure; as therefore they knew not what
they did in holding their peace, so it is evident the other knew not what they
said when they took upon them to Absolve them.

The ignorance of these Absolvers is farther apparent in this. What did they
absolve? if not all their Sins, then what was left unabsolv'd, were sufficient
to hurry them from one fire to another. But if they own they absolved them from
all; I answer, this makes their ignorance more plain, for they knew not all;
no, nor they whom they absolved: For observe, whatever Blood shall be spilt,
what Cruelty and Injustice shall hereafter be committed, which their Confession
might have prevented, must without dispute, be charged to their account; how
then will these Absolvers absolve themselves? unless they tell us the truth,
that they are Jesuits in Masquerade, and only used a Privilege of the Church
they are lately turned to; which is, to sell or give a Pardon of Sins
beforehand.

This shows their Ignorance: But what if it was not so much That, as
Wilfulness, that brought forth this Absolution? I deny not but that these
Absolvers might, by virtue of their Ordination, have full Power to pronounce
Absolution, when fit and requisite; but yet it is too plain, they wanted the
Judgment to distinguish on whom to bestow it, Prove. 17.15. We are taught, that
he that justifies the Wicked, is full as abominable in the sight of God as he
that condemns the Just.

It is well if they were not instigated to this rashness from their earnest
desire, that this accursed Plot should still proceed; and therefore urged not
the Malefactors to a full and open Confession, or peradventure
Self-preservation was in the case, they dared not allow them the freedom, for
fear their own Doings had been discovered; and then, in plain English, their
hasty, unwarrantable, and imperfect Absolution, was no other than venturing the
Souls of their friends to save their own Necks. But however, I will here leave
them, and proceed.

7. These Rulers and great Men had one Consultation farther; which was, how to
preserve their credit in the World; for generally wicked Men, though they* care
not to be good, yet love to appear so; and though they are sorry at their
hearts that they have missed their aims, yet by no means would they be thought
to have had the least hand in a thing of this nature. Therefore after long
Consultation, as by our Observations it may be gathered, they came to this:
That whosoever should unfortunately be discovered and apprehended, though
condemned, should never own the fact; and for this end it is said they had an
Oath of Secrecy; they had found that the English were subject to great
Credulity; and if Men could die impudently, they were reported to die bravely;
and if with the last Breath, or by a Paper they denied the fact, Men would put
such confidence in the declarations of dying Persons, as to believe them
innocent. And by this we may see what service the Jesuits do their Cause, by
instructing their Disciples in the Art of Equivocating; for they have taught
them, that whenever they shall have forgiven them, they are absolutely
acquitted, both in the Court of Conscience and the Court of Heaven; and
therefore these poor deluded Souls, believing this for Gospel, dare avow upon
their Death, as it is the Speech of a Dying Man, as they are to answer to God,
that they are as innocent as the Child unborn of the Crime laid to their
charge: And by this bold and daring Affirmation, and calling God to witness, in
the last Minutes of Death, some poor tenderhearted Protestants, for want of
understanding this Juggle of the Priests, are apt to mistrust the Justice of
the Nation, and to pity the greatest Malefactors, as fearing they had hard
measure dealt to them.

And farther they consulted a general Salvo; which was, That the Principals,
viz. the two Kings should purge themselves by a Manifesto. so they did,
protesting against the Knowledge of ought of this Plot, farther than an
Invasion, which they accounted justifiable: If there were any such thing as an
Assassination, it was owing to some of our own dissatisfied Protestants; but as
for the Papists, their dying Friend acquits them: See the horrid nature of
Treachery and Treason. Men will boast of other Wickednesses and declare them;
but this, this appears so monstrous ugly in the Eyes of the very Authors, that
they are ashamed to own it; but however, let them Manifesto it, and shift it
where they can: The Fact is so barbarous, should they charge it upon the
infernal Feind, we should have a Manifesto from thence.

Time will not permit that I should proceed in every particular; I shall
therefore briefly speak to Two more, and so draw to a conclusion; That is, to
the End they had in this Plot, and to the Manner of their disappointment.

Their End was the same with David's Enemies and Rebels; Let us break their
bands asunder, and cast their cords from us: Their Spleen and Malice was not
only to put him down whom God will exalt, but principally to disanull all Laws
sacred and civil: The Laws of God were their great Eyesore, in that they did
so upbraid their open and gross Idolatry: Our Religion could not justify the
Immoralities they indulged; and therefore as it is natural for them that do
Evil to hate the Light, so they took all this pains to extinguish our Religion,
that did so plainly discover their grand Impieties, Dishonesty, and Injustice.

They were also as much aggrieved at our Cords, at the Authority that upheld
and maintained our whole ome, just and necessary Laws, particularly those Penal
Laws against these turners of the World upside down. Another there is which
they cannot endure, that is, the Constitution of our Government is such as will
not admit of Arbitrary Power, and none but Princes seduced to their Church have
ever pretended to it.

The chief End of this Invasion and Assassination being to bring in Popery and
Slavery, a blind Religion, and a miserable Servitude; they counted them their
principal Enemies that did most oppose it, which was, the King and the Laws:
And thererefore that these Wretches might make Havoc of the Vineyard they are
for slaying the Possessor.

The last thing is their Disappointment.

1. He that sits in Heaven laughed and had them in derision.

It is true, they had got a Wheel within a Wheel, that is to say, Protestant
and Papist, French, English and Irish, Men of diverse Countries, Opinions, and
Interests, were engaged in the same Design, but God so laughed at this
Combination that he took off their Wheels, and their Imaginations and
Consultations could not march so fast as to escape a Detection; and truly this
was so much the Lord's doing, that had they a spark of Grace left they would
acknowledge that the Lord fights for his Anointed.

God laughed; there is more in this laughter than our Enemies dream of, or are
willing to believe; for laughing is a token of Joy, it being an outward
expression of our inward Content and Satisfaction; so that when we say, God
laughed in respect to the discovery of this present Plot, we mean, as if God
had said, The time is now come, Ah! I will ease me of mine Adversaries, and
avenge me of mine Enemies, Isai. 1.24. Again, laughing is an argument of
neglect, and thus God laughed, that is, he left those Men in the hand of their
own Counsels, and so they were discovered; but God laughed at these
Conspirators, that is, he has made us to laugh at them, for in Scripture
phrase God is said to do that which he makes us to do, Romans 8.26. The Spirit
makes Intercession for us, i. e. The Spirit of God teaches and assisteth us
in pouring out our Prayers and Intercessions, and we are this day met to praise
God that we have experienced the truth of this Interpretation; for God by
discovering their Black and Devilish Designs has filled our Mouth with
Laughter and our Tongue with Joy.

2. He spoke unto them in his Wrath: What God spoke I told you, namely, what
you read v. 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion.

God had at sundry times spoke to those Heathen, People, Kings, and
Counselors, the professed Enemies of our King, in a soft gentle Voice, and by
many gracious Providence and wonderful Works, declared to the World, that it
was his Will that our present King should sit upon the Throne and govern these
Nations; but they regarded not this, nor would they believe it; but seeing they
have stoppy'd their Ears, like the deaf Adder, and will not hear, now God has
spoken to them louder in this Disappointment, the effect of his Anger and Wrath
toward them, God has both convinced and vexed them, in which condition I must
now leave them, and turn to such Inferences as follow upon the Premises, the
gracious and wonderful Deliverance of the King's Majesty and these Kingdoms.

1. The King as Principal in the Deliverance is to be so in the Thanksgiving.

And blessed be our Eyes we so see it, and he has this day called us to join
with him in offering up our hearty Praise and Thanksgiving: The King well knows
cessat decursus donorum, si cessat recursus gratiarum. God will stop the
Windows of Heaven and restrain the golden showers of his Blessings, if his
Anointed, when thus wonderfully delivered should keep back his Sacrifice of
Laud and Praise.

King David is a President to Kings in Thankfulness as well as Deliverance,
Psalm. 116.12, 13, 14. I will take the Cup of Salvation and call upon the name
of the Lord: What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?
I will take the Cup of Salvation and call upon the name of the Lord, I will pay
my Vows now in the presence of all his People, precious in the sight of the
Lord is the death of his Saints. Here David most thankfully praises the
Goodness of God in that he would not gratify his Enemies so far as to give
them leave to take away his Life.

2. Kings when declared Favorites of Heaven by signal Deliverances, should
study to promote the Honor and Glory of that God who did deliver them.

And in this, King David will direct them, for after the forementioned
Deliverance, Psalm. 116. v. 16, 17. he professes, O Lord, truly I am thy
Servant, and the Son of thy Handmaid, thou have broken my bands, I will offer
to thee the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and will call upon the Name of the Lord;
in our dialect that is, O Lord, I am now, and ought to be more devout, diligent
and zealous in thy Service than formerly, for thou have strengthened all thy
former Obligations by this fresh one of my wonderful Deliverance; thou have
redeemed my Life, and therefore the chief business of my Life must be to
advance thy Glory and Honor.

It is the reasonable Duty of Kings to be zealous for God's Glory, especially
when they have experienced how Jealous God is for their Preservation; and in
truth I now think it seasonable to give you one account of the late Revolution;
it may be a standing warning not only to Kings and Princes, but to persons in
far lower stations, Who could expert other than that the Crown should tumble
from the Head of the late unhappy King, for did he not by all ways imaginable
discountenance and tread under foot the true Worship of God? Was it any more
than Justice, that such a Prince as should erect Houses for Idolatry, should
find his own Palace made desolate? What wonder was it to see the Peoples Hearts
taken from such a Prince, as had estranged his own from God?

But not the King only, but we and all the Inhabitants of the Land, nay, our
Posterity have a share in this gracious Deliverance.

1. Therefore it is our Duty by all true and acceptable ways to express our
Thankfulness, and also to leave this Deliverance upon Record, that the Ages to
come may bless the Name of God when they read how wonderfully he preserved us,
our Religion, Laws, Lives, Liberties and Land from the Enemy that was so
wrathful, so subtle, so powerful, so cruel, and in a way so hopeful to ruin
and destroy us.

Oh that we had Hearts to praise the Name of God as we ought, and that we may,
hearken unto the Prophet David, Psalm. 118.1. Oh give thanks unto the Lord, for
he is good, because his Mercy endures for ever. Had God forgotten to be
Gracious? had the Fountain of his Love been exhausted? we had certainly
perished when desperate Men thus rose up against us.

V. 2. Let Israel now say that his Mercy endures for ever; Let all that are
true Israelites, that are Protestants in Deed as well as Name, declare and
confess that God is still Gracious and Merciful; for though our sins have long
cried for Judgment against us, yet our God still exercises Mercy and Goodness
toward us.

3. Let the House of Aaron now say, that his Mercy endures for ever. Let all
that God has called to wait at his Altar, and to minister about Holy Things,
praise the Lord in his Temple, and make his Name glorious. Let them
acknowledge, that God's Mercy is everlasting; for had their Enemies prevailed,
either they had been driven from, or murdered at the Altars of God.

4. Let them now that fear the Lord say, that his Mercy endures for ever: Let
all that truly fear God, be they of what Nation or Language soever, be they
Protestants or Papists, Churchmen or Dissenters; Let all that name themselves
Christians give God the Praise, Honor, and Glory belonging to his Name.

But Thanks are nothing worth if they are only made up of Words, and do not
effect the Heart with Piety and Devotion; therefore,

2. The next Duty of the Day is, to be so thankful as to endeavor after
Reformation; to praise God in Holiness, that is, by holy Lives and
Conversations. God has saved you out of the hand of your Enemies; do not you
therefore harbor any of his Enemies in your Hearts: it is a great Mistake, to
think that we are delivered to continue longer in our Sins: therefore if the
right Praises of God are in your mouths let the two-edged Sword of his Word be
in your hands to take Vengance of all his Enemies, your Sins and Vices.

3. Let our Thankfulness to God for delivering our King and us, learn us the
Duty of Allegiance.

Shall God appear so wonderfully in the King's Defense and shall not we take
that notice of it as to direct our Love and Affection where God manifests his.
Our Reason, our Interest, would easily confute all disloyal Principles if we
did attend their Teachings; but could they not, yet our Religion and Salvation
would tell us, it is our Duty to Love, Honor, Obey, and Stand by that King, by
whose Preservation God has preserved all that is near and dear to us.

4. The Deliverance of this Day should press us to love Unity and Concord among
our selves: whatever Difference may be in Men's Judgments and Opinions, there
ought to be none in their Affections.

The Church of God is frequently compared to a Ship: And now if the Winds rage
without, and the Mariners are at variance, what can be expected but Shipwreck?
It is high time therefore in a common Danger to consult a Community of Love and
Affection; and the rather; because is the Maxim our Enemies steer by, Divide
and Impera, Divide them and Conquer them.

Now God of his infinite Mercy teach all and every of us these and all other
our Duties in this great Day of our Deliverance: that we bringing forth such
Fruit as answers God's Expectation, may see our King sitting fast upon the Holy
Hill of Sion, and our Jerusalem in Prosperity all our Lives long.

Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere was lately Printed a SERMON (Preached by the same Author) on the
Association; in which, the Printer unhappily Omited the Word France in the
King's Titles, beginning the Dedication.


