A SERMON Preached At St. Paul's Covent Garden On the Day of Thanksgiving Jan.
XXXI. 1688.

For the great Deliverance of this Kingdom by the Means of his Highness the
Prince of Orange FROM POPERY and ARBITRARY POWER.

By SIMON PATRICK, D.D. Rector of St. Paul's Covent Garden.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Bentley at the Post House in Russel Street in
Covent Garden. M DC LXXXIX.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Earl of Bedford Knight of the Noble ORDER OF
THE GARTER, My most honored LORD and PATRON.
My Lord,
I Had not the least thought, either when I penned or preached this Sermon, to
publish it to the World; but have been overcome to yield to it, after a long
resistance (which is the reason it comes forth so late) by the importunity of a
great number of my Parishioners: who persuade me, they shall reap some profit
by the Reading, as, they tell me, they did by the Hearing of it.

If they so do, they are bound very much to your Lordship for it: by whose
Eavour I was promoted to this Place: where your Kindness has not grown less to
Me, but so much increased; That I cannot but take this Opportunity to assure
your Lordship, it shall never be forgotten by,

My Lord, Your most Humble and Affectionate Servant Simon Patrick.
Feb. 7th 1688/9
Psalm LXXV. 1. Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give
thanks: For that thy Name is near, thy wondrous works declare.
AS it is impossible to look upon the Curious Frame of the World, and consider
the Admirable Contrivance and Harmony in every part; but we shall be inclined
to Reflect upon a Supreme and Almighty Wisdom which was the Author of it: So
we cannot take notice of the several Wonderful Events that fall out in the
World, beyond all Humane Expectation; the strange Changes (for instance) and
unlookt for Revolutions that there are in our own Affairs; but it will dispose
us to confess the Providence of God, who with a Careful Eye does superintend
and see to the Government of every thing that he has made.

The First of these, is the Foundation of that Admiration, Reverence, and Awful
Regard which we pay to the Divine Majesty: As the latter is, of that Devotion
of Mind, which we express in Humble and Hearty Prayers and Thanksgivings to
him. For were we never so sure, that there is a God who Created all things by
his Power, yet we should not think of addressing our Supplications to him, and
offering him our Thankful Acknowledgments; did we not also believe, that his
Care extends it self even as far as this Earth, and reaches unto us the
Children of Men.

That Is the ground of this Hymn, which the Divine Writer Composed, in
consideration of some Remarkable Passage of that Providence.

And that is the Occasion which has brought us now together; to acknowledge
with Thankful Praises, as wonderful (I am sure as unexpected) a turn in the
Assairs of this corner of the World, as ever was. In which, if we do not see a
Finger of God, it is because we are Blind, or, which is worse, shut our Eyes
against the most evident Tokens of a Divine Hand. Which has given us Reason,
to express our Joyful Resentments, in such Words as these; Unto thee, O God, do
we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks: For that thy Name is near, thy
wondrous Works declare.

What the Occasion of this Hymn was, will be seen in the Progress of my
Discourse. In the entrance of which, I cannot but take notice, that the
Psalmist was so full of Admiration, Love and Joy, when he considered what God
had done for them; that he was Transported thereby, out of the Method of common
Writers. Who are wont to proceed from the Relation of Matters of Fact, to set
down the consequents of them, and the Passions which they are apt to produce.
But here his Heart was pressed with such a mighty Sense of God's Goodness, that
he bursts out at the very first word, into as Pathetick a Strain of
Thanksgiving to him, as can be conceived; before he Relates what he thanks him
for. His Affection was suitable to the Benefits they had received; both were
extraordinary, which Transported him to the greatest height of Devotion. And
that does not so much follow Art, as Nature; which can attend to nothing else,
when it is possessed with Delightful Passions.

According to which Method of the Psalmist; I shall in the First Place, Treat a
while of the Duty of Thanksgiving. And then,

Secondly, Proceed to show that the Works of God's Providence in the World,
ought to excite us thereunto.

And Thirdly, that the more wonderful those Works are, the greater, in all
Reason, ought our Thankfulness for them to be.

And Lastly, (if I have time for it) that we have this Reason for it among
others; that when God does any wondrous Works they are an earnest of some
greater Blessings he further intends to bestow; if we do not unthankfully
deprive our selves of them, for his wondrous Works declare, that his Name is
near.

I.
I begin with the Duty of Thanksgiving. About which you must not expect an
exact Discourse; because it is not here to be considered in it self so much, as
in order to something else. It will be sufficient to gather together such
passages in this Book of Psalms, as will, in a plain and familiar manner,
express the Temper of a thankful Mind; and show, withal, from whence it arises.

I. And it begins in a diligent observation of the Benefits which are done unto
us: Of which, if we take not a special notice, they will be like the things
that pass by a Blind Man's Eyes, of which he never speaks, and with which he is
not at all affected.

Therefore after the Psalmist had so often Repeated this as the Burden of his
Song, O that Men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful
Works to the Children of Men, (Psalm. CVII. 8, 15, 21, 31.) he concludes all
with these Remarkable Words, which show us the Fountain from whence these
Devout Acknowledgements spring, Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things,
even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. None but wise
observers can have any Sense of God's Goodness, in the greatest Benefits which
he bestows upon them: Especially in such Providence as were brought about by a
long Chain of Events; one of which drew on another in a silent manner.

If a Man's Eyes be closed, or if they roll about in unsteady and giddy
motions, he cannot take notice of such Objects as present themselves unto him;
nor receive their Salutations, with any Sense or Acknowledgment. And it is the
same case, if a Man be lulled Asleep in the Lap of sensual Pleasure, or be
grubbing like a Mole in the Earth: If he attend, I mean, only to his own
Private Gain and Advantage; if he has a thousand Projects in his Head for
himself, which busy all his Thoughts, or be of a murmuring discontented
Humor, at every little cross occurence: This alone will turn his Thoughts from
the Infinite Goodness of God, in the most Signal Blessings which he bestows
upon the Nation wherein he lives. By which Means God will lose all the Praise
of his Mercies, because they will not be at all observed or regarded by such
ungrateful Souls. Who must first be disposed to be Serious, Sober-Minded, and
Attentive to what is done in the World, and is of universal Concernment to it;
before they can be made sensible of the loving kindness of the Lord.

II. Which, when we observe, we must carefully remember and lay up in our
Minds: Or else these two Mischiefs will ensue. First, that we shall have only a
Flash of Devotion kindled in us, for a few moments. And Secondly, we shall
thank the Divine Goodness only for present Mercies; but not for those that are
past.

We must imitate the Psalmist therefore, in that Admirable Hymn, Psalm. CIII. 1,
2. saying, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his holy
Name. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits. Of which
there is no more remembrance in some Men's Minds, than there are footsteps of a
Bird newly flown by, left in the Air. One may as well go to search out the Path
of a Fish in the water, as ask them which way God has gone to do them good. So
thin, so fluid, and inconsistent are their Minds, that they retain no
impressions that are made upon them. A most fearful Example of which we have in
the Israelites, who too soon forgot the Works of God, and remembered not the
multitude of his Mercies, that they provoked him at the Sea, even at the Red
Sea: At that very place, where they had been newly saved by a most miraculous
Providence, Ps. CVI. 7. 13.

I beseech God, we may never be guilty of the like Horrid Ingratitude: Unto
which there seems to be too great an Inclination in some among us; who a few
Weeks ago longed and sighed for Deliverance from those Dangers, which were
ready to swallow us up: And were no sooner delivered, but, as if nothing had
been done for them, they fell a murmuring against their Deliverer; the great
Instrument, I mean of their Preservation: Because every thing was not managed
according to the model of their desires.

This is an Humor we must endeavor to cure, if any of us have been infected
with it: Because it makes us soon forget the Works of God; and that will make
us unthankful. For a thankful Temper of Spirit must be made and maintained by
considering, and often revolving those Observations of the Divine Providence,
which we have reposited in our mind. We must frequently turn over, as I may
say, the Leaves of the Book of Remembrance, which we have written in our
Hearts, of the several Notes we have taken of the loving Kindness of the Lord.

Which is so much of the Essence of Thankfulness, that when we would express
the contrary, Ingratitude, we say Men are unmindful of their Obligations.

Now that which will most impress the Benefits we have received upon our Minds,
is the observation of those Circumstances where with they were Clothed, and
came attended to us. As the manner how they were conveyed; and that they were
unlikely to be effected by such means; that a Deliverance was unexpected and
unlooked for; and yet the arrival of it most seasonable to save us from Ruin;
and that there was nothing in us to invite it; but we rather deserved to be
made more miserable: and yet God took compassion upon us, and made those very
things contribute to our Salvation, which were designed for our Ruin.

These and such like other Circumstances (which are very applicable to our
present Case) will make God's goodness admirable in our Eyes: And that which
strikes us with admiration will be longest remembered.

III. When we would give solemn thanks to God for his Mercies, we must set our
selves to consider and ponder the worth and value, as well as count the
multitude of them. We must weigh as well as number them.

So the Psalmist teaches us, if we compare the LVII. Ps. 7. with the CXXXIX.
17. In the former he tells us, his Heart was fixed, his Heart was fixed (so
steadfastly settled, that is, that he would not let it stir from this Work) and
then he sang and gave praise. And in the latter he admires God's Mercies,
first, as they are invaluable, O how precious are thy Thoughts toward me, O
God; and then as they are innumerable, how great is the Sum of them.

Thus if we apply our Thoughts to the present Deliverance, which God has
wrought for us, we shall find the Miseries from which we are preserved so
innumerable, and consequently such a multitude of Mercies for which we are
indebted; and those so dear, so precious, all that we are worth, either as Men,
or as Christians, our Civil Rights, and Liberties, but especially our Holy
Religion secured to us; that it is impossible not to have our Hearts affected
with God's goodness at present; and if we keep those things in mind, not to
give thanks unto him as long as we live, and praise him while we have any
being. That Is the next.

IV. We must by these Considerations affect our Hearts with God's Innumerable
and Inestimable Mercies vouchsafed to us: And make them sensible of the
Obligation which they lay upon us. So that we may say with David, Ps. LXIII. 3.
etc. Because thy loving kindness is better than Life, my Lips shall praise
thee. Thus will I bless thee while I live, my Soul shall be satisfied as with
Marrow and Fatness; and my Mouth shall praise thee with joyful Lips. He speaks
you see, of God's Benefits with such a sensible relish, as demonstrated he more
than tasted the Sweetness of his Loving Kindness, and valued the Love that gave
them more than the best and most excellent of them.

We had need practice the foregoing* Duties well, of serious fixing our Heart,
and setting a just value and due price upon God's Blessings; for otherwise we
shall not be so affected toward him as we ought; nor make him those Returns of
Gratitude which he expects. For such is the Imperfection of our Nature, we are
least apt to mind and observe those things which are nearest to us, and in our
quiet Possession: Our Souls being herein like to our Eye which sees nothing
that lies upon it and touches it; but discerns it clearly, when the Object is
removed to some distance from it.

We mind not those Blessings while we enjoy them, and have them in our hands;
which we hold to be very precious, when they are taken away and carried from
our Embraces.

Without serious Consideration and frequent Reflections, the more we have of
the best things, the less we shall be affected with them. The Plentifulness of
the Choicest Fare in the World, makes it no Dainties with us; but breeds in us
such a fullness and satiety as makes it less esteemed. And so it is with all the
rest of God's Blessings. Those which we commonly and constanly enjoy, though of
never such value, move us little; unless we duly poise them in the Scales of
serious Consideration. Witness that great Blessing of Health, of which it is
pity we should not know the worth, without being Sick. And the Blessing of
Liberty; which I beseech you let us learn to prize, without being made Slaves.

V. When our Hearts are thus affected wtth God's Mercies, and the Love from
whence they flow; there Naturally arises in us an Holy Joy in God, which is the
most agreeable Passion of all other, and disposes us to say; it is a good thing
to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing Praises unto thy Name, O most High.
For this Joy is apt to burst out into Songs of Praise; and indicted all the
Thankful Hymns we read in the Book of God.

Such as that of the Children of Israel, when the Lord turned their Captivity,
by an amazing Deliverance out of Babylon: Then was their mouth filled with
Laughter, and their Tongue with Singing: Then said they among the Heathen the
Lord has done great things for them. The Lord has done great things for us,
whereof we are glad. Ps. CXXVI. 2, 3. It is not casie to enumerate all the like
instances of Joy and Gladness for private as well as public Blessings, which
produced Songs of Praise, as a part of their Thanksgivings. According to that
of the Psalmist, Ps. LIX. 30. I will praise the Name of God with a Song, and
will magnify him with Thanksgiving.

VI. But thankfulness does not consist merely in these Devout and Joyful Songs:
But in paying our Vows we made to God; either in the time of our Affliction and
Trouble, or upon the first approaches of a Merciful Delivrance. For these are
two Seasons which commonly engage Men in Pious Vows to God; when they are
oppressed with Grief and Sorrow; or when they are suddenly eased and overflowed
with Joy. And the discharge of these Vows God himself requires, as a Proof of
our Sincere Thankfulness to him for his Benefits, Ps. L. 14. Offer unto God
Thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows unto the most High. Which the Psalmist promises
in Ps. CXVI. 17, 18. I will offer the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and will call
upon the Name of the Lord. I will pay my Vows unto the Lord, in the presence of
all his People. And makes the whole World speak the same Language in Ps. LXV.
1, 2. Praise waits for thee, O God, in Sion, and unto thee shall the Vow be
performed. O thou that hear Prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. Not
merely with Prayers, but with Dutiful Performance of their Vows.

VII. And Good Men thought themselves bound upon such Occasions, to renew their
Pious Resolutions, and tie themselves faster to God in holy purposes, to please
him in all things; who was so gracious to them in such singular Benefits, as
challenged their highest Praises. Thus you find David resolving, never to
forget to thank God for his Mercies to him. Ps. XXX. 11, 12. Thou have turned
for me my Mourning into Dancing; thou have put off my Sackcloth, and girded me
with Gladness. To the end that my Glory may sing Praise to thee, and not be
silent; O Lord my God, I will give Thanks unto thee for ever. And in the LXXI.
Ps. 15, 16. he says, My mouth shall show forth thy Righteousness and thy
Salvation all the day; for I know not the numbers thereof. I will go in the
strength of the Lord God; I will make mention of thy Righteousness, even of
thine only. Which is a Resolution to trust in God for ever, of whose Goodness
he had had such large Experience: And never to depend upon any thing, but only
his Power, Holiness, and Faithfulness, in performing all his Promises. Which
engaged him in a further Resolution, to do the will of God in all things, and
live suitable to his Obligations: Ps. CXVI. 7, 8, 9. Return unto thy rest, O my
Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. For thou have delivered my
Soul from Death, mine Eyes from Tears, and my Feet from falling. I will walk
before the Lord in the Land of the Living.

These are three proper Resolutions, to be made when our Hearts are dilated
with Joy in God, for the Benefits he has bestowed upon us, and we should
endeavor to Seal such Resolutions upon our Hearts, in those Solemn Words of
the Psalmist (which follow that affectionate Exclamation, What shall I render
unto the Lord for all his Benefits toward me? v. 12. And his Resolution to pay
his Vows in the Presence of all God's People, v. 14.) O Lord, truly I am thy
Servant, I am thy Servant, and the Son of thy Handmaid, thou have loosed my
Bonds, Ps. CXVI. 16. Where he not only Solemnly Devotes himself to God's
Service; but binds himself to be entirely his; as much as a Servant was his
Masters, when he was Born in his House of the Body of his Slave; or as a poor
Captive was wholly his, who had redeemed him from Thraldom, or rescued him out
of the hand of an Enemy in which he was like to Perish. For that is the proper
Notion of the word SERVVS a Servant; one that is Saved and not Slain, when it
was in the Power of a Conqueror to take away his Life. Such a one owing his
very Being in this World, to him that Saved him from Destruction; stands bound
in all the Duty and Service that it is possible to be performed by him, as long
as he has a day to live.

VIII. But our Thankfulness is not completed, till we arrive by these Means,
at such an habitual Sense of God's Goodness; as powerfully inclines us
frequently to reflect upon it, and always to be making good our Promises and
Resolutions of Obedience.

Our first Thanksgivings are to conclude in a Thankful Disposition; which is
the best Security for Future Performance.

Constant thanks will flow from those, who are of a thankful Nature. Which will
incline us to a comportment agreeable to the liking of those who have obliged
us; that by a constant study to do what is pleasing to them, we may become more
acceptable in their Eyes, and invite their further Favor. According to which,
God himself declares, he expects our thankfulness should end in this; if we
expect his endless Love. Psalm. L. 23. Whosoever offers Praise, glorifieth me: and
to him that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of God.

Whatsoever falls short of Obedience, is either but a Complement, or no more
than a good natured Fit.

And as for Complements, the more finely they are adorned, and trimmed up with
Songs of Praise, with Vows and Protestations; the more Nauseous and Fulsom they
are; because a studied piece of Flattery, which the Divine Majesty abhors.

And as God himself calls this Flattery of him (Ps. LXXVIII. 36. they slattered
him with their Mouths. etc.) So fits of good nature, the more passionate they
are, the more they are apt to flatter and abuse our selves: by persuading us we
have discharged the Duty of gratitude unto God, when we have only eased
ourselves of a Burden, which at that present lay upon us.

And indeed all Passions that come by sits, are apt to do us hurt; especially
if they be very violent. It is a constant motion, which is most profitable to
us. Thus Physicians observe, that the perspiration which is made by a violent
Motion of the Body or Mind, is wont to weaken us: When that which is made
equally all the day and night long, gives us strength and vigor. So it is in
the Exercises of Devotion: The vehement Expressions men make of their Love and
Gratitude in their Prayers and Praises only; the Heat they put themselves into,
and the Labor they take to raise up a Passion, is nothing so Beneficial, as a
constant Quiet sense of God's Love warming the Heart, and insensibly breathing
forth it self, in the whole Tenor of a Man's Actions in a regular Life.

The former, if he take not care, may prove hurtful; for by spending himself
too much in one thing, he is the less able to perform his Duty in other
matters. His Affections being all evaporated in that great Commotion; he
afterward grows so cold and feeble, that he can do nothing but sigh and groan
that he is no better.

But it is time to finish this part of my Discourse, which may be briefly
reduced to these Four Heads.

To the performance of this Duty of thankfulness, there is required,

1. First, an Act of the Mind, to observe and take a true survey of all the
Blessings which the Divine Goodness does at any time confer upon us.

2. Secondly, an Act of the Memory, to represent them again* as occasion
serves, and set them before the Eyes of our mind. For that is the Treasury of
those Observations which we make; the Storehouse in which we lay up the Notes
of God's Mercies.

3. Thirdly, an Act of Reason and Consideration; who it is that gives us all
these good things; for what end; by what means, and in what measure, both as to
their value and their number. Which when we have well performed, we shall be
prepared for the fourth and last, which is,

4. An Act of the Will; that must frame an Affectionate acknowledgement of God
and of his great Goodness; binding us fast to him, by Acts of Love and joyful
Devotion, by serious performance of our Vows, and hearty Resolutions
perpetually to obey him.

I will not stay to tell you what Title God has to such Thanksgivings: But
immediately pass to the Second general thing I propounded.

II.
That the Wonderful Works of God in the World, justly challenge from us our
most grateful Acknowledgements. They ought, that is, to be so diligently
observed, so faithfully remembered, so carefully laid to heart, and often
Revolved; that we may be so affected with them, as to give continual Praise to
God for them: With such Joy and Gladness, and such a sincere Performance of our
Vows, as may testify the lively and lasting Sense we have of his Love, and
engage us in his Service forever

I will content my self at this time, with that Instance of God's Providence,
unto which this Psalm it self directs our thoughts: In those discriminating
Acts of God's Justice; whereby he makes a remarkable difference between one
sort of Men and another; and renders unto them severally according to their
Works.

And those Acts of God's Discriminating Justice were twofold; having Respect
both to the punishment of the wicked, and the Salvation of the Good. v. 7, 8.
God is the Judge; he putetth down one, and sets up another. For in the hand
of the Lord there is a Cup, and the Wine is Red. It is full of mixture, and he
pours out of the same; but the Dregs thereof, all the Wicked of the Earth
shall wring them out, and drink them. The words, I think, refer to the Insolent
and Haughty behavior of Senacherib and his Captains, who having got all the
Fortresses of the Kingdom into their hands, except Jerusalem, and reduced that
also into great Straits; insulted over Hezekiah and his People in a most
imperious manner; till God the Righteous Judge took the matter into his Hand,
and decided the Quarrel, by a most remarkable Vengeance, which humbled the one,
and exalted the other more than ever. For though God's own People had, for a
time, tasted of the Cup of astonishment, and felt the smart of sharp
Afflictions (which is the meaning of those words, he pours out of the same;
upon them, as well as others) yet the Dregs of this Cup, the stupifying and
intoxicating Ingredients, were reserved for their Enemies; who were made to
drink them up to the very bottom; until they reeled, and staggered, and fell,
and never rose up any more. Which is expressed again, in plainer words, v. 10.
All the Horns, that is the power, of the Wicked will I cut off; and the Horns
of the Righteous shall be exalted. In such Acts of these God ought to be
admired and acknowledged; in his punishing the good some time, to make them
better; and in destroying the bad, who can by no means be persuaded to become
good.

We of this Nation particularly have great reason, to observe these things at
this time. For after a long invasion of all our just Rights and Liberties, the
Popish Party had intruded themselves so successfully into all places of Trust
and Authority every where; that they wanted but a little of making themselves
Masters of these Three Kingdoms, and were just upon the Point of confirming all
their Usurpations, by the Formalities of a Legal Establishment, in such a
Parliament, as they were about, by all manner of indirect means, to pack
together. When, behold, the outstretched hand of Heaven appeared against them,
to confound the Babel which they had been so many Years a Building. On a
sudden their long studied designs were dashed in pieces, like mere Bubbles, and
that in a Moment.

By which defeat the great Judge of the World, has made a Notorious
distinction between those who stood firm to their Religion and Liberties; and
those that were about to betray them: And has demonstrated to us all, that
nothing is safe but what is just; that they are no better than Fools, who go
about to separate Interest from Honesty; and that there is no such way to
thrive as to keep in his ways, though they expose us to seeming disadvantages.
For he has taken the subtle in their own Craftiness, and ensnared them in the
work of their own Hands: Whereby he has rescued us from becoming a Prey to the
Teeth of those ambitious and ravenous Spirits, who thought to devour us.

And therefore we ought to bless and praise him above all other People, in
these acts of his Providence and just Government of the World: which can never
be enough admired. For when God does such things, he keeps, as I may call it, a
little day of Judgment: the great day of all, which we expect at the end of the
World, being a day of general separation and distinction, of the bad from the
good; for which he prepares us before hand, and warns us to it, by the petty
Sessions (as they may be called) which he holds in all Ages. Wherein he ascends
his Tribunal and sits in the Throne, (as the Psalmist speaks) judging right:
beginning that dreadful day, by remarkable punishments upon notorious and
numerous offenders; and as remarkable preservations of those, who being
oppressed by them, were in danger to suffer an utter ruin from their violence.

By this he shows to all Men, that he will be partaker with none in their
wickedness: But be they never so great, they shall be all confounded and perish
who do unjustly, though for a time they may prosper and flourish in the World.

Thus we have not only heard with our Ears, but our Eyes have seen it: and this
very day bids us mark and observe, how gloriously Gods Providence has
triumphed over the bold injustice, and daring usurpations and impieties of
insolent Men.

And it is a thing to be carefully noted by us, for this reason among other;
that it may be a Caution to us, never to take any unlawful courses; but to make
as exact a difference between good and evil in our practice, as God has made
in his Providence.

We ought, in Prudence as well as Conscience to take warning by other Men's
miscarriages: and not be bold to encourage our selves in an evil matter,
because it is not presently punished.

Optimum est aliena insania frui, as Pliny speaks: its a singular hapiness to
reap the benefit of other Men's Madness, and wild Extravagances.

It Is much better to be taught by other Men's mishaps, than by our own.

Wise men learn to beware by the disgrace and shame, which they see others
suffer.

As wholesome Remedies are drawn from Poison, so from the ruin of Men of evil
Principles, honest Persons may derive Precepts for their direction.

And the greater and the more Powerful they are who fall, and the stronger they
seemed to stand by evil Practices; the more wonderful is the hand of God, and
the more instructive when he throws them down.

What is more amazing (says an eminent Historian) then to see a lofty
Mountain, commanding over a goodly Plain, sink and swallowed up in a Moment?
And yet it is not less strange to behold a Man of mighty Power, a great
Collussus, surrounded with numerous Supporters, overthrown in an instant. This
cannot but breed some astonishment for the present; though the Example, alas!
be very much neglected: Posterity still trusting to their own judgment, and
adventuring to walk the very same way; but with another pace, and more
cautiously, they fancy, then those that went before them.

One Ship alone, with happily returns from a long and dangerous Navigation,
has more power to encourage bold undertakers to attempt the like Voyage; than
the Shipwreck of a hundred Vessels has to divert them from it.

For such is the vain conceit we have of our selves, so apt we are to be
flattered with our own Imaginations that no Man believes ill success is
ordained for him; especially if he prosper in his evil way at the first attempt.

But this their way is their folly; and who so is wise and has the fear of God
before his Eyes, will believe that no artifice, no power can secure him, who
has God for his Enemy: as they all have who are ungodly.

Remember the Counsel of the Psalmist LXIl. 10, 11, 12. Trust not in
Oppression, become not vain in Robbery, God has spoken once, twice have I
heard the same, that Power belongs unto God: also unto thee, O God belongs
Mercy; for thou rendrest to every Man according to his work. That is, Let no
Man oppress others, let no Man cozen and cheat, lie and dissemble, nor promote
his end by any violence: for many a time has God declared that he is the
Governor of the World, who will see right maintained. His works have spoken
more than once, that Power, Dominion and Strength belongs to him, and that no
evil doer is great enough to defend himself against him: unto whom also belongs
Mercy, which he will show to all good Men; for whom he has the greatest
kindness, and therefore will bless them and do them good: Because he renders to
every one according to his work.

And so I proceed to the Third General Observation,

III.
That the more wonderful the works of God are, the greater in all reason ought
our thankfulness to be. Which the Psalmist denotes by the Repetition of his
Gratitude, and doubling his words, unto thee O God, do we give thanks, unto
thee do we give thanks: because his Power was so stupendiously great, in
defeating of Senacherib, and all his Forces. The like you may read in the IX.
Psalm. 1, 2. where there are Four several Declarations of his resolutions to be
thankful to God, for that marvelous act of his Providence in the overthrow of
Goliath, the Champion of the Philistines, who boldly defied Israel. I will praise
thee, O God, with my whole heart; I will show forth all thy mavelous works; I
will be glad and rejoice in thee: I will sing praise to thy Name, O thou most
High. In many other places, you may meet such repeated acknowledgments;
particularly in the LXXII. Psalm. 18, 19. Where he not only himself blesses the
Lord, but wishes his Name may be blessed for ever; and that by all Mankind:
which hearty desire he confirms with a double Amen, Amen and Amen.

Now in this very Psalm, there are Two remarkable passages; which serve to
illustrate the wonderfulness of those works mentioned in my Text: and may be
applied to that wondrous Work, for which we give our thanks to God this day.

First, In preserving and raising up good Men, when they were in their lowest
depression?

Verse 3. Below my Text. The Earth and all the Inhabitants thereof are
dissolved: I bear up the Pillars of it. The whole Country, that is, was in a
Flame, and such a terrible Combustion made, that it melted away, and one part
of it was separated from the other. All the sodering, whereby they were united
together was dissolved; so that the whole Frame of the Government was in a
manner broken, and likely to come to utter ruin. But now the Pillarsof the
Earth (that is, Men of excellent Virtue and of Authority, who are the Props of
their Church and Country) were born up by a Divine hand, which kept them from
falling. So the Jews call their Wise men; The Pillars of the World, and by the
same Name St. Paul calls the chiefest of the Apostles ii. Gal. 9. Such eminent
Persons were supported in their constancy, when they were assaulted by the hand
of Violence, and in danger to be shaken, nay subverted: And they by their
prudent Advice, and pious Endeavors, by their Prayers and by their Tears,
quenched those flames; and prevailed for a happy settlement again.

Secondly, The Providence of God, was as mavelous on the other side; in
pulling down the Wicked, when they were at their greatest height and
exaltation, v. 4, 5. I said unto the Fools, deal not foolishly; and to the
wicked lift not up the horn. Lift not up your horn on high, speak not with a
stiff Neck. These words show, that the Folly of wicked Men made them
prodigiously insolent, and so vain as to imagine it was impossible they should
meet with a check; much less see their Power broken. But in the midst of these
vaunts, they not only recived a sudden rebuke, but had their horn (that is
their Power) cur off and utterly disabled from doing any further mischief.
Whereby the Almighty showed them their senseless confidence; and taught them (if
they could learn) to be no more so bold and arrogant.

The very same remark, the Psalmist makes in another place, upon one of these
insolent, haughty boasters, viz. Cush the Benjamite VII. Psalm. 16, 17. His
mischief shall return upon his own head and his violent dealing shall come down
upon his own pate. I will praise the Lord according to his righteousness, and
will sing praise unto the Name of the Lord most High.

You see the use which David's pious heart made of such wonderful deliverances.
Which ought to be the more regarded, because the Divine Wisdom, on purpose,
suffers things to come to such an extremity (the wicked to be lifted up so
high, and the good laid so low) to make us sensible, that it is a divine hand
whereby we are delivered; and that he may get himself a greater Name in the
World; and excite all our hearts to the higher gratitude.

And if these things may be applied at this day to any Nation in the World, I
think, they may safely, and in the very first place, be applied unto us. For
our Earth and the inhabitants thereof have been, in a manner, dissolved. The
very foundations of our Government were about to be rased. The whole Fabric
did not only shake and totter; but was upon the point of being buried in its
Rubbish. When, behold, the hand of God supported it (by supporting the Spirits
and assisting the endeavors of many good and great Men, who labored to
preserve it) and on a sudden has broken in pieces the Power that pusht at it
to overthrow it: and given us hope to see it shine in its Ancient Splendour and
Glory. For the Cloud that covered us and filled us with Melancholy
Apprehensions, is not only scattered; but dispersed without a Stormy Wind and
Tempest. Salvation is come to us, by the help of that Illustrious Prince, whom
God has made the great Instrument of our deliverance, in a perfect Calm;
without any considerable disturbance.

We may take up the words of the Psalmist LXVI. 10, etc. Thou have proved us, O
God; thou have tried us, as Silver is tried. Thou broughtest us into the Net,
thou laidest affliction upon our Loins. Thou have caused Men to ride over our
heads, etc. but have brought us forth into a wealthy place, a State, that is,
of Liberty, Prosperity and Ease. And therefore every one of us should resolve,
as it therefore follows, I will go into thy house with burnt Offerings, I will
pay thee my Vows: Which my Lips have uttered, and my Mouth has spoken when I
was in trouble. Come, and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he
has done for my Soul.

And truly it is but just, that upon such a day as this, we should recount the
wonders of Gods Providence: for which we ought to give him our highest thanks.

Come therefore, and hearken, while I declare what the Lord has done for us,
in this Church and Kingdom.

First, he has in a signal manner, vindicated himself, from the aspersion, of
favoring unjust and irregular Courses. In which Men prospered so long, that
they looked upon it as an encouragement to proceed: and presumed God was on
their side; whom they entitled to every ill favored Design and Practice of
their own.

Which now he has so notoriously discountenanced, that all the World may see
he is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace: And every one of us may learn
to avoid that which is Evil; though we should be invited by never such fair
Opportunities to greaten our selves, and to advance, as we may fancy, his Glory
and the Interest of Religion, by unlawful means.

Secondly, God has also marvellously justified the Truth of his Holy Gospel
here professed; and confounded the vain Traditions of Men, which arrogantly
coping with it, and being made equal to it, were in danger to subvert it.

We may truly say, the Bible Triumphs in this Deliverance; and has gotten a
glorious Victory over human Inventions: Which are no less confuted by this
Divine Providence, then they have been by dint of Argument. For the bold
Asserters of them were no less confident of their Prevalency, than of their
Truth. Both were presumed, with equal assurance. Which may induce us to hope,
there is no better Foundation for the one, than we are sure there is for the
other: but that they both (their Principles I mean, and their Prevailing here)
stand upon the like tottering Terms.

Thirdly, God has vindicated likewise our Religion from that Contempt and
Scorn, which they cast upon it. The Northern Heresy, as they reproachfully
called it, has got the better of their Catholic Religion. The Suporters of
which lately lifted up their horn so high, and pusht at our Church so
furiously; as if they not only intended, but were assured, it should not stand
much longer. But the Righteous Lord has made them fall, by their own violence;
and has put this New Song into our Mouths (which is as proper now, as in the
days of Old.) They are brought down and fallen; but we are risen and stand
upright. XX. Psalm. 8.

Fourthly, whereby God gives us the fairest Opportunity, that ever was put into
our hands, of healing all the Divisions and Breaches that are among good Men:
if they have any heart to make use thereof. And we ought to rejoice and give
Thanks, if it be but for the hope that we may become One: and no longer look
upon each other as Enemies, but as Friends and Brethren; who ought to come to
Terms of Agreement.

Fifthly, He has hereby also preserved the best Laws in the World: which
contain the Wisdom of many Generations.

Sixthly, And consequently has put us into a way of settling the English
Liberties: which were sealed by the Blood of many of our famous Ancestors, but
in eminent danger, by one bold stroke, to be ravished from us.

Seventhly, He has revived likewise, by this means, the hope of all
Protestants in the World; whose Eyes are upon us as the most potent People of
that Religion, in whose prosperity they rejoice as in their own.

Eighthly, And why may I not add, that this Providence gives us hope to see some
deeds of darkness brought to light: Whereby the innocence of such worthies
will be vindicated, as have been unjustly defamed?

Ninthly, All which God has done for us, on such a sudden; that he would have
been counted a Fool, who should have spoken of such a Revolution, a quarter of
a Year ago.

Tenthly, And it is brought to pass with the loss of very little Blood; which I
hope will not make this deliverance less, but more, valuable, because we come
by it so easily.

Eleventhly, Nay, more than this, God has made our Enemies themselves the
first, and not the mean est, Instruments of their own Destruction. All that
they contrived against us, turned most manifestly upon their own Heads. Every
step they took carried them backward; and set them further off from the end at
which they aimed.

Twelfthly, and lastly, we may hope that God has vouchsafed these Blessings to
us, as a return of many earnest Prayers, which have been made by good People
among us.

And therefore in all these regards, we ought to make the greater returns of
Praise and thankful Obedience unto God. Who, if we prove ungrateful to him, can
turn all our Joy into sudden Mourning, our singing into sighing; and instead of
the garments of joy and gladness, clothe us with Sackcloth and Ashes: because
of our unworthy behavior toward so gracious and great a Benefactor.

Let our Thankfulness therefore be great, in some proportion to his wondrous
Works.

1. First, in the Intenseness, as I may call it, and earnestness of our Minds,
to praise him with our whole heart (as the Psalmist speaks cxi. Ps. 1, 2.) and
to call up all that is within us to bless his Holy Name, ciii. 1. where the
reason he gives for it ( v. 6.) is very pertinent to our purpose; the Lord
executes Righteousness and Judgment for all that are oppressed.

2. And Secondly, in the extension of it. The greater our deliverance is, the
more the hand of God has appeared therein, so much the more time should we
spend in thinking of it, and laboring to affect our hearts with it: that so we
may praise his Name for ever; saying with the Psalmist, cxlv. Ps. 1, 2. I will
extol thee, my God, O King, I will bless thy Name for ever and ever. Every day
will I bless thee, and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever.

For great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; especially in such Works as
these, which we cannot sufficiently praise: and therefore should desire and
endeavor, that Posterity may praise him for them, as it there follows, v. 4.
One generation shall praise thy Works to another, and shall declare thy mighty
Acts, etc.

But we are most of all concerned to express our unfeigned Thankfulness, by a
more solicitous care to please God, in an exact Obedience. Without which our
Religious Services are but Hypocrisy: and may prove a dangerous deceit, making
us cry peace, peace, when there is no peace; for there is no peace, says my
God, to the wicked.

Especially if we should continue to do wickedly, after such obligations to
reform; which will highly increase our guilt. According to that of Ezra when
the People were joining themselves with the Heathen, after their deliverance
from Babylon ix. 14, 15.

Seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our iniquities deserved,
and given us such a deliverance as this: should we again break thy
Commandments? Would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us; so
that there should be no remnant nor escaping?

We have the greatest Reason in the World to dread this: and therefore let us
fear the Lord and serve him, and obey his Voice, and not rebel against the
Commandment of the Lord, and then shall we continue to follow the Lord (1 Samuel
xii. 14.) that is, be an happy Kingdom; settled in the secured possession of our
Religion, Laws and Liberties: and not fear what Man can do unto us.

For God shows, by what he has done already, that he has a mind to do more.
He will not leave his own work imperfect; but finish it in the firm
establishment of what we enjoy; and in the Addition of other blessings, which
may make these Churches and Kingdoms a praise in the Earth. For that his Name
is near, his wondrous Works declare.

IV.
This is a point I would gladly have pursued if there had been room for it: but
the time will not suffer me to do much more than explain this phrase, Thy Name
is near.

The Name of God is in holy Language, God himself; who is therefore said to be
near, when any wondrous Work is done; because it could not have been done
without him.

1. That Is certainly imported in this Form of Speech, thy Name is near, etc.
The Works are so strange, that they plainly speak thou had a hand in them;
else they could not have been wrought. The disappointment of the crafty speaks
God's Wisdom: the throwing down the mighty from their Seats declare his Power:
the great benefits he bestows on his People shows his Goodness; his Punishments
on the wicked proclaim his Justice: the unexpected Evidence of all these,
manifests his Sovereign and uncontrollable Dominion: the blowing away all the
contrivances of many Years in a Moment, tells us there is a vigilant
Providence, which sends deliverance in the opportunest Seasons: the very
changes and mutations that are made in the World, are an argument of his
immutable and unchangeable Nature, which carries on one constant design, of
correcting Vice and encouraging Virtue. For he makes no Changes merely for the
Love of particular Men; but for the Love of Religion and Piety: which he
resolves to promote by other hands, when it is neglected by those who have
Power to do it.

2. But this may also be further suggested by this form of Speech; that we
ought to look upon every wonderful Work of God, as a token of some other
blessing he intends us, besides the present he bestows upon us. Its apparent,
he approaches, and is desirous to join himself unto us, and (as the Scripture
speaks) to be Our God, else he would not have done such strange things for us.
This was the way in which Manoah's Wife reasoned; If the Lord were pleased to
kill us, he would not have received an offering at our hands; neither would he
have showed us all these things; nor would, as at this time, have told us such
things as these.

And may we venture to argue with our selves after the same manner, when he
does any thing extraordinary for us: if he had a mind to destroy us, nay did he
not bear a favor to us, he would not have taken such a seasonable care of us;
and wrought such an unexpected deliverance, as this for us.

Which is a Meditation that renders the Goodness of God, most admirable in our
Eyes; when we consider he is not content to bestow a single benefit upon us.
There are none of his blessings that come alone; but are accompanied with a
numerous train of good things, which follow and attend every one of them; if we
will heartily receive the present Favor that he does us. We find this true in
his Spiritual Blessings. He not only prevents us with the Blessings of his
Goodness, and is found of them that seek him not: but when we do set our
selves, seriously and diligently, to seek after him, he not only graciously
meets us (as the Father is said to do to the Prodigal Son) but is desirous to
dwell with us, and to take up his abode in us. He would not give so little as a
Pardon to a returning Sinner; but his Holy Spirit; the joys and comforts of an
holy Life; an assurance of eternal Bliss. All his Laws likewise whereby he
governs us, not only gives inward Peace and Satisfaction to our minds, when we
are ruled by them; but the happiness of our Bodies, and of our Families, and of
whole Kingdoms and Churches, inseperably twisted, with the faithful observance
of them. For by these we come to be united in the most sweet and pleasing
Relations of Familiars and Friends. Nay, his whole Religion, if we would
receive it, secures the rarest Friendship among Men that is imaginable. It Sows
the Seeds of Love and Kindness, of Peaceableness and Christian Communion, of
mercifulness and good works, in their highest Perfection: which must needs
spring up into such a Familiarity, as the Heathens themselves, accounted the
greatest Blessing in the World.

There is nothing more demonstrable than this, and it is no less plain, that as
all his Spiritual Blessings draw Temporal along with them: so likewise the
outward Blessings he bestows, are intended as pledges, not only of more Mercies
of the same kind; but likewise of diviner and nobler favors to our Souls.

There is no deliverance he gives us from temporal Calamities, but he designs
should draw us nearer to him, who is the Fountain of all Good. He would give us
himself together with it; he would fill us with his love; and increase our
confidence in his goodness; and make us more fruitful in all good Works; and
dispose us to such a sense of him and of our duty, that we may be every way
happy, together with all those who enjoy the same Blessing in common with us.

This is the Use we ought to make of all the mavelous* Works of God, which
have been done among us; far surpassing all our expectations. They declare that
God is near us. He comes to see what entertainment we will give him. He opens
the door, to see how we are disposed to receive him. But let us not presume, he
is only near; we may put him away, and his Mercy from us. We may shut the door
against those divine Blessings, those heavenly Graces, which he would introduce
into our Hearts.

3. On these let us set our affections; and since Gods presence with a People
is the greatest matter of praise, as these words intimate (for he gives thanks
for Gods wondrous works, upon this account, because they declared him to be
with them) let this be the principal cause of our joy this day: because we hope
true Religion will be more than ever promoted; unfeigned godliness
countenanced; profaneness and debauchery every where curbed; regular and
orderly piety encouraged; all our unnatural heats quenched, and our rigors
abated; brotherly love and kindness, peace and concord firmly established.

For if we rejoice merely, because we hope peace and quietness will be secured;
plenty and abundance flow in upon us; trade and commerce quickened; riches
increase and grow to a greater height; and the strength and power of the Nation
much exalted; we may justly fear we shall have none of these long to rejoice
in: but God will find some way, as unexpected as our deliverance, to punish us
for our ingratitude to him.

Did not Jerusalem presume it was for ever secured, after such a miraculous
preservation as that in the days of Hezekiah, for which the Psalmist, it is
probable, in my Text, gives the highest thanks to God? And yet this very City,
in process of time, was burnt with Fire (not to mention the preceding
calamities, before this came) the Temple destroyed, and the People carried
Captive into a strange Land.

And after God had inspired the heart of Cyrus to send them back to their own
Country, and given them such favor in the sight of the Heathen, that they
built their City, and their Temple again, and grew a very great Nation: its
very likely that sleepy and careless minds might dream, they were now under
such a peculiar care of Heaven, that no evil should henceforth befall them. And
yet they were again miserably harazzed and afflicted by Antiochus, with a rage
against them, that differed little from madness.

The very same Confusions has impiety made in the Christian World, and that by
the hands of contemptible Instruments. Those that they despised, and thought
themselves able to resist (though they had been far stronger than they were)
got the the Mastry of them; when the Sins of Christians had taken their Defense
and Protection from them.

Many Examples of which have been observed by diverse Authors out of Salvian.
What was it, says he, that abandoned Spain to the Vandals? Were they the
strongest of all the barbarous Nations? No such matter; but God would show
these two Things. First, how much he hated the lusts of the flesh: for he
delivered the impure, filthy Spaniards, into the hands of a chaste People: And
then he put them under the yo^e of the weakest Enemies: that he might show it
is not strength which prevails, but something else: they being overrun, not by
the force of their sluggish Enemies, but by the Power of their own vices.

And how came France also to be vanquished? Why, at that time it was but one
great gulf of riot, one Brothel-house of filthiness and uncleanness.

And when some objected and said, these Goths and Vandals are all Arian
Heretics: sure God will give us the better, who are good Christian
Catholics: Alas! replies that good Father, what a folly is it to rely on this
fancy? what do you talk of being good Catholics, when almost all Religion is
dirided by us? what can the Prerogative of a Religious Name profit us? what
good can it do us, to boast that we are the Faithful, and they the Heretics?
When we live as wickedly, as the wickedest Heresy can make us; and we our
selves could be no worse, if our Opinions were as bad as theirs?

Once more, how came these People to take the confidence to invade Africa? had
they an infinite number of Legions, whereby they might hope to prevail? No, we
are expressly told, by good Authors, that they were very small forces, wherewith
they wasted themselves over to those shores. But it was an hand from above
(says Salvian) which carried them thither, to punish the horrid Vices of those
Countries: the whole Territory of Africa, being nothing less, than one huge
House, wherein all vices met and dwelt together.

It is a madness then (unless we could show some privilege and protection we
have, to secure us from those punishments which have come upon others) to plung
our selves into ^^ose vices; that Irreligion, that Filthiness, that Debauchery,
which has undone so many.

They are the more deadly in us, after such a deliverance as this. They will
cry to Heaven for vengeance on such Miscreants as are not satisfied to have
undone a Kingdom once or twice; but in defiance of all that they have seen with
their eyes, as well as of what they have heard from the Report of ancient
Times, will proceed on still in their Trespasses, to undo it, over again.

God of his infinite Mercies inlighten our Eyes, that we may see these things;
and strike our Hearts, that we may consider them; and implant in us such a
reverend Sense of himself, and of his righteous Providence; that we may fear
before him, and obey him for our Good, all the days of our Lives, Amen.
FINIS.

