DR. PATRICK'S Two Sermons AGAINST MURMURING and CENSURING.

IMPRIMATUR.

April 23. 1689. Z. ISHAM, R. P. D. HENRICO Episc* Land. a Sacri^.

TWO SERMONS; One against MURMURING, The other against CENSURING, Preached at
St. Paul's Covent Garden.

BY S. PATRICK, D. D. Rector there.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, M DC LXXXIX.

A SERMON AGAINST MURMURING, PREACHED At St. Paul's Covent Garden, on the Fifth
SUNDAY in LENT, March 17. 1688/9.

By S. Patrick, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell. M DC LXXXIX.

1 Cor. X. 10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer.
AMong the many Demonstrations we have of the infinite Goodness to us, this is
the greatest; That he has been pleased, out of the excess of his kindness, to
leave no way untried, to omit no means that has any force in it, to reduce us
unto the Obedience we owe His Majesty, and thereby bring us to everlasting
Happiness. For this end, he sent his own dear Son among us; who dying for us,
and rising again, sent the Holy Ghost, by whom the Apostles were instructed and
empowered to call us back to God, both by Injunctions, and Exhortations, and
Beseechings; by promises of Eternal Life, if we hearken to them; and threatening
of Eternal Death, if we refuse to obey them.

And because some Minds are so dull, at least at certain seasons, that they are
little moved with the Hope and Fear of Rewards and Punishments so far off, as
the other World; therefore, together with those future things, they represent
the present advantages or mischiefs which attend upon our good or bad behavior
toward God in this World, who invites us to obedience by the memorable
Examples of those who were faithful to him, and followed him fully: whom he
therefore extraordinarily blessed, and multiplied his Mercies on them, as
Persons highly in his favor: And on the other side deterrs us from rebellious
Works, by the fearful Examples of those, who being an untoward, faithless, and
stubborn Generation, were therefore as remarkably punished, with one severe
Judgment after another, till they were utterly consumed.

Of this last sort, the old Israelites were the most famous Instance; who
having received singular Favors from God, by whom they were brought out of
Egypt, carried through the Red Sea under the protection of a glorious Cloud,
baptized there into Moses, did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and drank the
same spiritual Drink; yet proved the most ungrateful of all Men living; and not
only forgot his Benefits, but turned them into wantonness and rebellion against
him: For which cause, he was not well pleased with many of them; for they were
overthrown in the wilderness; into which he had brought them by a mighty Hand
and outstretched Arm, in order to their settlement in the Land of Canaan.

All this you read in the five first Verses of this Chapter; from whence the
Apostle proceeds to warn all Christians, by their disastrous fall, to take good
heed to themselves; and not to fancy the case was now altered under the
Discipline of Christ. No such matter: These things, says he, v. 6. were our
examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also
lusted; neither be idolaters, as were some of them, v. 7. nor commit
fornication, v. 8. nor tempt Christ, v. 9. neither murmur, as some of them also
murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. For all these things happened
unto them for ensamples (or Types of what shall befall us) and are written for
our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Wherefore let him
that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, v. 11, 12. As much as to
say, If ye do as they did, expect to suffer as they did: Do not presume upon
the Grace and Favor of Christ, nor imagine you are so settled in it, that, do
what you can, you shall not fall from it; for he will not bear you out in evil
courses, but proceed against you, according to these former Precedents of the
Divine Vengeance upon an ungrateful People.

Now the Ingratitude of the Old Israelites appeared in nothing more, than in
their Murmuring; which the Apostle here mentions in the last place, as the very
upshot of all their Provocations: And I have chose to treat of it at this time,
because this sin, which in it self is most unworthy, and in its effects very
dangerous, is, I fear, too common, and yet very slightly passed over, without a
particular Repentance for it, in this Age wherein we live.

In handling of which, I shall, first, show what it is to murmur; secondly,
whence it proceeds; thirdly, what reason we have to obey this holy Precept, and
not give way to a murmuring humor.

First, For the first of these, every body, I believe, by murmuring,
understands that dissatisfaction of Mind, which makes us repine at, and find
fault with our present Condition.

But if we search into the propriety of the Greek word, we shall find that it
signifies something more, than merely an inward repining and dissatisfaction of
the Mind; denoting withal, the outward Expressions of that discontented Humor
in undutiful words: That Is the import of (...), which in our Language, we may
translate, to grumble and mutter, by speaking against such things or persons as
we dislike, without a just Reason for it, or upon slight causes; especially
when we ought rather to be very thankful.

And here in my Text it has a peculiar signification, for speaking
disrespectfully of their Governors and Guides, out of a dislike of their
Conduct; which, in the issue, burst out into reproachful Language against them:
For this was the Sin here taxed by the Apostle, in the old Israelites; who
murmured against Moses and Aaron, because they fansied they had brought them
out of Egypt, to perish in the Wilderness. This they began to do so early after
their deliverance, that they were no sooner come out of the Red Sea, and had
sung their Song of Praise to God for it, but immediately (as you read in the
very same Chapter, Exodus XV. 25.) when they had traveled but three days, The
people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink? And again, Chap.
XVI. 2, 3. The whole congregation murmured against Moses and Aaron, and said,
Would to God we had died by the hand of God in Egypt, when we sat by the
fleshpots, and did eat bread to the full. For ye have brought us into this
wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger. With these two first
Murmurings, the patient Goodness of God was pleased to bear, expecting they
would be cured of this distemper, by the care he took to provide both Drink and
Meat for them in the Wilderness: But when his Gentleness would do no good upon
them; and they were so far from laying to heart his tender Mercies, and
remembering what he had done for them, that they fell into new and more
desperate fits of this Disease; then his Displeasure arose against them, and
moved him to begin to destroy them: With lighter strokes indeed, at the first
breaking out of his Anger; fos when the people complained, in Numb. XI. 1. he
only sent a fire which consumed those who were in the skirts of the camp. But
when they would take no warning by this, he proceeds to heavier; for you read
in Numb. XIV. 2, 3. their murmurings grew so high, that they had the face to
say, not only Would God we had died in Egypt, or in this wilderness; but, Let
us make us a Captain, and let us return to Egypt. A most unaccountable fit of
discontent; which so infatuated them, as to make them think of their late
slavery, without any trouble; nay, speak of throwing themselves voluntarily
into the hands of their cruel Tormentors. Now this was so provoking, that God
sent a Plague to cut off those that were the cause of that murmuring, v. 37.
unto which the Margins of your Bibles direct you, as an explication of my Text;
the Destroyer here spoken of, being the Angel whose Ministry God used to
destroy them with a Pestilence, as it is explained in the Case of David, 2 Samuel
XXIV. 16. And they that escaped this Plague, were only reprieved for a time,
but not acquitted; for they had this heavy Sentence passed upon them all, That
not one of the evil congregation, which murmured against God, should enter into
the good Land, to which he intended to conduct them, but wander in the
Wilderness, till they were utterly consumed, v. 27, 35.

And yet this did not cure them of their Wicked Disposition; but you read of a
far more grievous Murmuring after this, which broke out into an open Mutiny.
Read Numb. XVI. where you will find a great Party of the most eminent Persons,
gathered together against Moses and Aaron, saying, Ye take too much upon you,
seeing all the Congregation are Holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among
them; that is, they pretended Moses and Aaron stretched their Authority too
far, and assumed a Power which did not belong to them; or not more to them than
any other; there being no Man in the Congregation, but had as good a title to
it, as themselves: And therefore they boldly demanded, Wherefore do ye lift up
your selves above the congregation of the Lord? As if they had said, By what
right do you govern us, who are your Equals?

This so incensed the Divine Displeasure, that you read there of a more
terrible Destruction than the former: For Lightning burnt up those who
affronted Aaron; and the Earth opened her Mouth, and swallowed up those who
disputed the Authority of Moses. Which were such frightful examples, that they
make us tremble now at the thoughts of them: And yet so hardened was that evil
Generation in this discontented humor, the very next Morning, All the
congregation of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron, saying, Ye have killed
the people of the Lord, v. 41. whereupon they had all been consumed, without
any further reprieve, as in a moment, if Moses and Aaron whom they so grossly
abused, had not interceded with God, and made an atonement for them.

Now as they thus murmured, because of the Difficulties they met withal, when
they first came out of Egypt; so there were such kind of Men, it seems, in the
beginning of our Religion, who being made pertakers of the Redemption that is
in Christ Jesus, were so insensible of God's great Grace to them, that when
they saw the straits into which the profession of Christianity brought them,
and other things were not suitable to their Expectations, they murmured against
the Apostles themselves, and against other Ministers of Jesus Christ, as if
they had undone them: Or, at least, they were very discontented and impatient
under the troubles which befell them, for Religion's sake; and distrusted the
conduct of the Apostles; and were apt to betake themselves unto the guidance of
other Persons, Who promised them liberty, when they themselves were the
servants of corruption, 2 Pet. II. 19.

For, notwithstanding such warnings as this of St. Paul in my Text, we find by
St. Jude there were some Christians, chiefly of the Jewish Nation, who were
Murmurers, Complainers, walking after their own Lusts, v. 10. that is, were of
the same disposition with their Forefathers in the Wilderness (Numb. XI. 4, 5,
etc.) complaining bitterly that they were in a distressed condition (as the
Church was generally at that time) and had not that rest, ease, liberty and
prosperity which they longed for, and perhaps expected to enjoy. And it is very
probable (which is Grotius's conjecture) that they complained of the present
Government, and were desirous to throw it often: For we read, v. 8. They despised
dominion, and spoke evil of dignities: Going in the way of Cain and Core, v.
12. though there was so little reason they should be discontented upon this
account, that of all the former Monarchies to which the Jews had been subject,
whether Babylonian, Persian, or Grecian, none had treated them with such
gentleness and Lenity, as the present did; which was that of the Romans.

But a murmuring humor is utterly insensible of any thing, but only present
Griefs or Wants: Having no remembrance of former evils either suffered or
feared; nor being at all observant of present Blessings, though never so many,
and though never so big with future Hopes and Expectations. This is visible in
the whole History of that People; with whom the Divine Goodness was grieved
forty years long in the Wilderness.

From which we may also learn, that though this be the propriety of the Word
Murmuring in this place; yet it has also a larger signification (as we
understand from several other passages of the Holy Scriptures) and does not
denote only discontent with the present Government; but with a Man's own
private condition, when it is not suitable to his desires.

For the History of the old Israelites informs us, that their Murmurings were
as much at the state of their private Affairs, as at the public management.
This was their common fault in the Wilderness, that they complained upon every
occasion, if they had not such plentiful Provision; nay, such variety of it, as
might gratify their fancy, as well as satisfy their necessity: Or, if they
fell into any difficulty in their travels unto that good Land, to which God
promised, if they would have patience, in due time to conduct them.

And as we find them complaining upon this account; so we find (if we look into
the rest of the Scriptures) other Persons complaining upon diverse other scores.

1. Some because they were not regarded according to the deserts they fansied
in themselves. As we read in the Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard,
Matthew. XX. 11. that some murmured at the good Man of the Family, because they
who came early into his Service, and had born the burden and heat of the day,
received no more wages than those who came later, and had taken less pains in
his business; which they thought to be unequal.

2. Others we find murmuring, because they seemed to be neglected, while great
care was taken of their Neighbors: So we read in Act. VI. 1. That there arose
a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their Widows were
neglected in the daily ministration.

3. Others murmured at such Doctrines as they did not relish, finding fault
with them, as the manner is, before they understood them, Joh. VI. 60, 61. Many
of his disciples, when they heard that, said, This is an hard saying, who can
hear it? And when Jesus knew that they murmured at it, he said, Does this
offend you? that is, Turn you away from me? As much as to say, there is no
cause for it; the fault is in your selves, and not in me or my Doctrine.

4. Another sort murmur because all do not consent to their little Opinions,
and comply with their Customs: As the Pharisees did at the Disciples of Christ,
because they transgressed the tradition of the Elders, and did not wash their
hands before they sat down to eat, Mat. XXV. 2. And because they plucked the
Ears of Corn, and rubbed them in their hands, on the Sabbathday, Luke VI. 1.
All which I pass over, with the bare mention of them, because that is sufficient
for my purpose: Which is to show, that any thing we dislike, because it is not
according to our Fancy, Opinion, Humor, Inclination, or Interest, may be the
matter of murmuring and complaint: Whereby we reflect very reproachfully upon
God and his Providence; and sometimes upon those who are God's Ministers, or
upon our innocent Brethren, who may have good warrant for that which we condemn.

And now from what has been said, it will be easy to show from whence this
murmuring humor proceeds; which is the second thing I propounded, and may soon
be dispatched.

Secondly. 1. For it is evident it proceeds from false Opinions, and wrong
Notions of things, which must be examined and corrected, or else there will be
no cure for it. Hence it was that the Scribes and Pharisees murmured, because
our Savior and his Disciples, did freely eat with publicans and sinners, Luke
V. 30. not considering that the whole needed not a physician, but the sick: And
that he came not to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance. The
other Jews had done the same upon other occasions beforementioned; but very
unreasonably and unjustly, as they might have understood; if instead of
murmuring, they would have pondered his Instructions. They murmured at him
(says St. John, VI. 41.) because he said, I am the bread which came down from
heaven. But why did they not rather complain, (as Musculus glosses upon those
words) that they could not understand things of such weight and necessity? Why
did they not pray to be enlightened from above, and desire him to instruct them
more clearly in these matters? This had become Men of sense. But in this we see
the Genius not only of Judaical, but of all carnal Minds; who sooner murmur
against the Truth they do not understand, than accuse the grossness of their
own Hearts, and pray to God for the Gift of right Understanding, and of Faith.
If they had understood in what sense he said he came down from Heaven, they
would not have murmured; and therefore they ought to have desired to be
instructed in the sense of his words, and not have murmured at that which they
did not understand. But thus it fares, as I said, with the Doctrine of Christ,
that it sooner finds those that dislike it, and condemn it, before they know
it, than hearts that desire rightly to understand it, and to embrace it when it
is understood. Thus he.

2. It arises also from impatience of any Troubles or Inconveniences which
commonly attend our Condition here in this World, or which arise from our
present Circumstances; as we see in the History of the Hebrew Nation
beforementioned; whose case this was upon several occasions.

3. From Pride and Ambition, Envy and Malignity of Spirit; as in the case of
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; who imagined themselves to be altogether as
deserving as Moses and Aaron; and to have as much right as they to that
Authority, which they pretended those great Ministers of God had usurped over
the People.

4. Sometimes from Luxury and Wantonness; as when the Israelites murmured,
because they had not such dainty Food as they looked for, though they were
otherwise plentifully and miraculously fed, with Manna from Heaven, which they
were cloyed withal, and loathed, Numb. XI.

5. Sometimes, or rather always, from unthankfulness for the great Mercies we
enjoy; which are, in all Conditions, so many, that they might well silence all
unmannerly Complaints, did we but take the pains to lay those Blessings to
heart: Especially, if we compared them with the bad Condition wherein we have
sometimes been; or deserve to be, if we be not more grateful than to complain
in a better. This was also the case of the whole Hebrew Nation in the
Wilderness; who forgot the Works of God, and remembered not the Wonders he had
done for them, nor the Evils from which he had delivered them; and so fell into
fits of discontent, upon every occasion. And it is the case of all other Men
who are guilty of this sin at this day: For, as Oecumenius notes upon those
words of the Apostle [Do all things without murmurings and disputing, (...).
Phil. II. 14.] He that murmurs, is unthankful unto God; and he that is
unthankful, speaks hardly of him.

6. Sometimes from vile Covetousness, though covered under specious pretenses;
as when Judas the Traitor murmured at the waste of the precious Ointment poured
on our Savior; which he would have had sold, that the Money might have come
into his pocket.

Lastly, From want of a lively faith in God, and in his good Providence; which
was the sin of the old Israelites also; who murmured, saying, Can God furnish a
table in the wilderness? Behold he clave the rock, that the waters gushed out.
Can he give bread also? Can he provide flesh for his people? Psalm. LXXVIII. 19,
20. The former instances of his Power, did not breed such a Confidence in him,
as they should have wrought in their Hearts; but they still distrusted him,
whom they could not but acknowledge had done things as wonderful for them, as
those which they further desired.

And thus Origin observes (upon Exodus XVI.) it is common among Men to murmur,
if the Weather be not seasonable, if the Years be not so fruitful as they were
wont to be; nay, if every thing do not fall out according to their Wishes and
Expectations: That is, we would have no trials of our Faith and Patience, and
submission to God; but a constant stream of prosperous successes, just
according to our own Contrivances or Hearts Desires.

Which is a very dangerous distemper of Mind, which must be cured by removing
these Causes, from whence it proceeds. There is not the like danger, it must be
acknowledged, in every one of them; but none of them are safe, and therefore we
ought to seek after a speedy remedy. It makes a considerable difference in this
case, who it is that murmurs, against whom, and for what cause: If he be a
Subject who has received great Benefits; if it be against him to whom he owes
much, and therefore ought to love and praise; if it be for a trifling or a
tolerable cause, much more if Thanks ought rather to be rendered, than
Complaints made; it is a most detestable sort of murmuring, as the good Man
beforenamed (Musculus) has observed. It is also much to be considered, from
whence this Vice arises; whether from mere impatience of some Loss or
Inconvenience, or from Pride, Contempt, Indignation, and Envy: For though it be
vicious in it self to murmur against a Superior; yet it is a less fault, if it
arise from some damage a Man has received, of which he is impatient, than it
would be, if it proceed from Pride, Contempt, and a Spirit of Envy; such as was
in Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, against Moses and Aaron, and in the false
Apostles and their Sectaries among the Corinthians, who murmured and spoke
against St. Paul. The first Christians had some among them, as you have heard,
who murmured because their Widows were neglected, in the Provision which was
daily made for the Poor; but it was neither out of Pride, nor Contempt, nor
Envy, but from mere Impatience of the grievance it was to them, to see those,
for whom they had a special concern, not so much minded as others, who had no
more need than they that were neglected. Every Eye can discern the difference
between these murmurings, which are not all of equal guilt; yet none of them
free from blame, nor without danger, if we do not apply our selves, with all
diligence, to the proper means of curing our Minds of this distemper.

Unto which, that I may awaken you, I shall now proceed to consider the reason
we have to obey this Apostolical Precept, and no longer give way to a
discontented humor; which is the third thing I undertook in the beginning, and
may help to remove the Causes of this Disease, if we well weigh the Mischiefs
it does.

Thirdly, 1. And here let it be considered, that this is a most uncomfortable
condition, and puts the Soul into such disorders, that if it did no other hurt,
it ought on this account to be avoided: For who is there that allows himself in
this humor of discontented murmuring, either at the public state of things,
or his own private condition, that truly enjoys any part of those Blessings,
which are fallen to his share in this World? His Spirit is so fowred by it,
that he can relish nothing, though in it self never so pleasant; he is poor and
miserable in the midst of abundance; wanting not only that which he has not,
but even that which he has: He takes no satisfaction in any thing, though
God's bounty has bestowed, perhaps, variety of Blessings upon him; for this
humor will let him take no notice of them, but only of that which is grievous
to him: By this means he possesses nothing, no, not himself; his Soul being
carried away in a hurry, by things without him, he knows not whither: He is
seldom at home; and when he is, he finds nothing there but disorders, tumults,
and disquiets of Mind; such a confusion of Thoughts as hurries him away again
from himself; and that, many times, into dangerous adventures. Who would
indulge then such a temper of Mind, as spoils all our Comforts; even that
Satisfaction, which we should find in our own serious thoughts?

2. But it is not merely an uncomfortable condition; it is also very sinful:
For it proceeds as you have heard from several other sins; and it is the cause
also of many more; both of sins of omission, and sins of commission, as we
commonly distinguish them.

1. First of innumerable sins of Omission, in not recounting the multitude of
God's Mercies bestowed upon us; in not pondering the greatness of them, and our
own unworthiness to enjoy them; in not giving perpetual thanks for them;
neither calling to Mind all the Evils from which we have been preserved or
delivered; nor so much as taking notice of all the Blessings we daily receive,
which call for our most grateful acknowledgments: For they who are given to
murmuring, seldom reflect (as we find by the Israelites) upon the Obligations
they have to God, though never so great, never so wonderful; they forget how he
has saved them from the dreadful dangers which they feared, or delivered them
from the heavy burdens which oppressed them; and mind only what they at present
desire, or dislike.

Which wrought the Israelites into such a very bad temper of Mind, that they
were never pleased. No better pleased out of Egypt, than when they were in it;
for they murmured as much, or more, after their Deliverance, as they did
before; and I do not find they were better satisfied in Canaan, than they had
been either in Egypt, or in the Wilderness; for they carried their ungrateful
Mind along with them thither: And Men can be pleased no where, in no condition,
unless they have a due Sense of God and of his Goodness; and be truly affected
with his benefits.

2. As for the Sins of Commission they are no less numerous, such as envious
distractions, evil surmisings, rash censurings, lying, defamations, and
sometimes Injustice, Oppression, Extortion, if not downright Robberies; which
are the common Effects of Men's discontented repining at their own private
condition. And when they are discontented with the public State of Affairs,
thence proceed evil speakings, clamor, revilings, variance, strife, contention,
quarreling; and many times higher degrees of all these Sins, such as speaking
evil of dignities, etc. For by discontent Men exasperate their own Spirits; and
by Complaints and Murmurings they exasperate Others, unto unruly Passions,
which increase into undutiful Practices, which break out at last into public
Disturbances. And how many mischiefs Men are wont to draw upon themselves by
that means, I shall not now say; because my present business is, to show only
the sinfulness of a Murmuring Spirit.

But the next particular will make you sensible of that also; when I have added
to this these two Considerations.

1. First, That a murmuring humor puts us into a temper of Mind, directly
contrary to the Christian Spirit, which consists in such an happy frame of
Mind, as makes us rejoice in God always; and administer all the Joy and Comfort
we are able one to another. For the kingdom of God (says St. Paul) is
Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans XIV. 17. Where by Joy is
not meant only the joy we feel in our own Hearts, from a sense of God's love to
us; but that which we give to one another, by our friendly agreement: So St.
Chrysostom, and from him, Oecumenius interprets the Words, A Virtuous Life,
Peace with our Brethren, and the Joy which springs from concord, are the things
will bring us to Heaven; and he that subverts this Peace and Joy, does his
Brother a greater injury, than if he had robbed him of his Money; for it is a
thing far more precious than Gold and Silver, being one of the Fruits of the
Spirit, next to love (Gal. V. 22.) from whence it springs as from its source:
For if we love our Brethren we shall be loath to grieve them; and shall study to
please them; which is such an excellent disposition of Mind, that Plato
himself, reports this as an ancient Saying, that he should be reputed the
wisest Man, and the most Victorious, whose business it is to make ^ 2. De
Legibus.
others rejoice and be merry.

Now murmuring is so opposite to this, that it damps all the Joy we should
otherwise take in God and in his Love; and puts us into such a sullen humor,
that it spoils also Christian Society, and that sweet fellowship we ought to
have, by giving such Counsel and Comfort one to another, as may make us rejoice
always, whatsoever happens; and never repine at any thing, though never so
cross to our expectations: Which we should the rather study, because Joy makes
us more serviceable to the World, than otherwise we shall be; both by putting
us forward to do good, and by commending Piety and Goodness unto others. Whence
it is that we read, Act. IX. 31. The churches were multiplied, when they walked
in the fear of God, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost.

Let us take heed then how we any way (particularly by Murmuring and
Complaints) banish this Heavenly Guest from our selves or others; which is the
Page, as St. Basil calls it (or whosoever was the Author (...).
of the Monastical Constitutions) that waits upon Goodness and Virtue;
especially now, when there is such cause for it, by God's wonderful Goodness to
us in this Kingdom, let us not upon any account refuse to take our share in it;
but (to speak in the Psalmist's Phrase, Psalm. CVI. 5.) let us rejoice in the
gladness of our nation.

2. For if we do not, but give way to a murmuring humor, it will spoil all the
good we do, and make it unacceptable to God our Savior. Which is a reason,
more especially, why we should not murmur at any part of our Christian Duty;
no, not at taking up the Cross, nor any thing else, which may seem a hard
saying; which is the worst sort of murmuring that we can be guilty of: For it
is the quality of base, dis-ingenuous and stupid slaves (as St. Chrysostom
observes upon Phil. II. 14.) and therefore ought not to be found in a Child,
Who is about his Fathers business, and labors for himself. Consider, says his
Father, that what thou do for me, thou do for thy self; thou will have the
benefit of it; wherefore then do thou grumble? It is for them to murmur, who
labor and toil when others reap the advantage; but he that labors for
himself, what cause has he to murmur? He had better not work at all, than not
without murmuring He loses his labor; he spoils that which he has done,
though it be well done. Do you not see how in our own Family, we are wont to
say continually, I had rather you would let it alone, than do it with
Murmuring: Nay, we ofttimes choose rather to want ones service, than bear with
his murmuring humor: For it is a grievous thing, very grievous, to murmur. It
is nigh unto blasphemy; which is the reason God punished it so severely in the
Israelites; for it was a piece of ingratitude: He that murmurs is unthankful to
God, and he that is unthankful is a Blasphemer. Thus he.

And indeed it is directly contrary to that Love and Charity, which is the Note
of the Children of God; and believes all things, hopes all things, takes all in
good part, and makes the best construction of them: As on the contrary, where
self-love, Pride, and such like Vices reign, there is nothing but impatience,
suspicious, sinister interpretations, murmurings and complaints, whereby even
things good in themselves are corrupted and defiled. This we learn from that
famous instance of Christian Charity, viz. entertaining Strangers, in which it
was not so much considered whom they entertained, as with what Mind. If they
did it with an ill will, and repiningly, it was so far from being looked upon
as a benefit, that it was taken for a reproach: Whence that admonition of St.
Peter, 1 Ep. IV. 9. Use hospitality one to another without grudging, or
murmuring; (for it is the same Word which we so translate in other places.)
They were not to think much at it, as we speak; much less to grumble at the
trouble or the charge their Brethren brought upon them; but receive them as
cheerfully as Men now welcome their Guests to the public Inns, where they pay
for what they have: And thus, as St. Paul instructs us in the place before
named, we ought to perform our whole Christian duty (do all things without
murmuring) and likewise entertain, in the same manner, whatsoever falls out in
the World, by the direction or permission of God's Wise Providence; for he is
not pleased to see us follow him, or do as he bids us, with a heavy Heart, and
a discontented, complaining Spirit.

And so I come to the Third and last Reason, why we should obey the Apostolical
admonition in my Text, and work out this part of our Salvation, even with fear
and trembling: Which is this,

3. That murmuring is the cause of such Sins, as are the punishment of those
who are guilty of it. Their own tongue, as the Psalmist speaks, falls upon
themselves; they uttering in their anger such discontented speeches, that God
takes them at their Word, as we speak, and brings upon them the Evils they
unadvisedly wished: For anger, you may observe, is the ordinary Companion of
discontented murmuring; which reflects so highly upon God, that it moves his
just displeasure. We may say in this Case as Solomon does, Prove. XIX. 3. The
foolishness of man perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth (or as the
Chaldee has it, murmureth) against the Lord. Men run inconsiderately into many
Sins, and then lay the blame upon their natural weakness, and want of power to
avoid them; which is in effect to lay the fault upon God: And in the same
manner they draw many inconveniences upon themselves, and fall into great
straits; whereupon they fret and fume (though not directly, yet by consequence)
against God: For when they say, Things might have been better ordered; what
necessity was there for this? They forget that nothing comes to pass without
God's Providence (no not those things which are ill done) toward which we
ought to behave our selves with a becoming reverence; and take heed least we
speak unadvisedly with our lips.

The danger of which is so apparent in the example of the murmuring Israelites,
of whom my Text speaks, that we need seek no other proof of it: For you read
how, in a raging fit of Discontent, they were so distracted, that they minded
neither what they did, nor what they said; for they entered into a consultation,
as you have heard, to make them a Captain, and return again into the Egyptian
Slavery, out of which they had been lately redeemed; as if that were more
desirable, than the present Liberty they enjoyed of serving God as he had
appointed in the Wilderness; which they were not permitted to do, while they
stayed in Egypt. And among other angry things, which they said in that
discontented fit, this foolish Word dropped out of their mouth, Would God we had
died in this wilderness, Numb. XIV. 2. Accordingly it came to pass; they had
their wish: God being so provoked with their murmuring, that he pronounced this
heavy Judgment upon them for it, That none of them should see the good Land he
designed for them, but perish in the Wilderness; where they wandered about for
forty years, till all their Carcasses were consumed.

This is a sufficient caution against this Sin; which is then most dangerously
provoking, when it continues long: Which is the only thing I shall further
observe upon this Argument.

The Israelites, I told you in the beginning, had been guilty of murmuring
before the time unto which the Apostle has respect in my Text: But God most
graciously forbear to proceed against them, and did not send the Destroyer to
cut them off. Before they came out of Egypt, you may read in Exodus V. 21. how
reproachfully they treated Moses and Aaron; as they did after their
deliverance, Exodus XIV. 13. XV. 24. and XVI. 2. In the last of which places,
you may observe a great many aggravations of their Sin: Read the Words again,
to make them the more evident: And the whole congregation of the children of
Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness, and said unto them,
Would to God we had died by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we
sat by the fleshpots, and when we did eat bread to the full: for ye have
brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.

1. Behold here, how very gross their Ingratitude was, which extenuated the
Benefits they had received, as inconsiderable; and, looking only upon a present
strait which was soon over, made them quite forget their long Servitude in the
House of Bondage, out of which they had been newly delivered.

2. Nay, behold how they magnify Egypt, where they were no better than vile
Slaves; and prefer carnal Things, before divine Blessings; the fleshpots of
Egypt, before the liberty of their Religion, and the glorious Presence of God,
which appeared among them, and went along with them.

3. More than this, they speak of the very Plagues of Egypt (by which they wish
they had died) with more satisfaction, than of the Mercies they enjoyed under
the Almighty's Protection.

4. And it is observable how extravagantly they commend their Condition in
Egypt, as if they had wanted nothing there, but had had their fill of all good
things; and despise their present happiness, of being the people of the Lord,
whom he had redeemed and purchased, Exodus XV. 13, 16.

5. They unjustly also and ungratefully accuse Moses and Aaron for bringing
them forth out of Egypt, into that Wilderness; when they did nothing of their
own head, but by the direction of God, who went before them, and led them the
way wherein they should go.

6. To conclude this, they miscall their glorious deliverance from the House of
Bondage, into a state of freedom, by the odious Name of Death and Destruction.

So frantic does a discontented Humor make those who are possessed with it:
Notwithstanding which, God, as I said, was so long-suffering toward them, that
he did not at that time visit their Iniquity upon them, but bare with them till
he saw them so settled and fixed in this evil temper of Mind, that they would
not be reformed by his patient Goodness: Then he took a severe Vengeance on
them, and by degrees utterly destroyed them.

Let us admire this Long-suffering and Forbearance of God, and thankfully
acknowledge his Goodness, which, as Isaiah speaks, multiplies to pardon, and
has not yet entered into Judgment with us: But let us take heed how we provoke
him to anger, by continuing in this or any other Sin; especially after much
patience with us, which ought to lead us to a speedy Repentance.

God may be pleased graciously to pass by the first Irruptions of those
Passions which make us murmur; nay, not be so strict in marking what is done
amiss, as not to pardon many fits of discontent, which may come upon us. He
knows our frame, and pities our weakness; and is slow to anger, and far from
being forward to punish our frowardness. But if we indulge our selves in this
humor, and do not labor to correct it; if we set not our selves against it,
but let it grow to such an height, that we forget to be thankful to God for
his Mercies, never reflect upon all the Good he has done us, nor the Evils
from which he has freed us, either by his own hand immediately, or by the
ministry of others; but, quite contrary, we complain in a state of Happiness,
being displeased that every thing is not to our gust; and disordering our
selves with angry discontent, because all things are not ordered according to
our Mind; and perhaps speaking against those, whom God has employed to do us
good (which was the case of the old Israelites in their murmurings against
Moses and Aaron:) Then it is high time, we may fear, for God to chastize us,
both for our Ingratitude, and for our abuse of his long-suffering Goodness to
us.

We have all the reason in the World to believe, That if we walk in the same
way the Israelites did, it will lead us into the same destruction; as the
Apostle here teaches us, in this Discourse to the Corinthians. If we slight, or
do not value the Mercies God has bestowed upon us; or undutifully reflect upon
those who have been instrumental in procuring them to us; if we so dislike our
present Settlement, that we thirst after a Change, we do not know what
punishments we are drawing upon our selves. And let us be assured, we shall be
no more satisfied in that Change, should it come to pass, (which God forbid)
than we are in the present Establishment. The motions of our discontented Minds
cannot be quieted by any thing without them. We shall ever find matter for
Complaint, and far greater in a new Revolution, than we can do in this.

We have not forgotten, sure, the Condition wherein we lately were; how all our
Laws were violated; what endeavors were used to subvert our Religion and our
Government; so that men's hearts (to speak in our Savior's Words, Luke XXI.
26.) failed them for fear, and for looking after those things which were coming
upon us: Which we shall unavoidably draw upon our selves, (and if it be
possible greater Evils,) should we be so unhappy as to see our present
Settlement overturned.

Take heed therefore unto your selves, not only to your Actions, and to your
Tongues, but to your very Minds and Spirits: Do not allow of any risings and
boilings there, but instantly suppress them. Give not way to the very
beginnings of any discontented thoughts and angry Motions: Stay them before
they proceed further, and grow unruly: Ask them what they would have? whither
they would go? what they design, and where they will end? For you know not
whither they will carry you, if you do not put an end to them as soon as they
begin.

They will lead you from one sin to another, till they have drawn one mischief
upon you, after another; and where they will conclude at last, we cannot
certainly tell; but we may make a shrewd guess, by the Example of those, whom
the Apostle here sets before us, to be a warning to us; by which if we judge,
it will be, in utter destruction. For all that evil Generation, who would not
cease their murmuring, notwithstanding all the chidings they had for it, and
the sharp punishments that had been inflicted on them for their Amendment, fell
at last in the Wilderness, short of the promised Land, into which God resolved
they should not enter, because of their perverseness.

And what was the cause of all this? What made them so perverssy murmur, but
only such things as these?

They forgot the late Oppressions under which they had groaned, and the
glorious Deliverance God had wrought for them from that miserable bondage.

They considered not their present ease, and the liberty they had to serve God
according to their Hearts desires.

They had no respect to the Hope which was set before them, of being brought to
perfect rest in the Land of Promise; and there settled in the Happiness, which
God himself expresses in these magnificent Words: If ye will obey my voice
indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me
above all people: for all the earth is mine. And ye shall be unto me a KINGDOM
OF PRIESTS, and an holy Nation, Exodus XIX. 5, 6.

Herein then lies the Cure of this Disease, if we find any spice of it in our
selves.

1. Let us reflect daily upon the Condition wherein we were a few Months ago,
and the extraordinary hand of God in delivering us from our fears.

2. And then lay to heart the freedom we now enjoy, to serve God without fear
of those Dangers, wherewith we were surrounded.

3. Together with the hope we have (if we our selves do not hinder) to see both
our Civil and Religious Rights and Liberties secured to us and to our
Posterity, so as they have not been since we were a Nation.

And then we shall be so far from murmuring, that we shall think we owe the
highest Praises and Thanksgivings to him.

Which if we be careful to pay, and every day upon our bended knees, bless his
holy Name, who has saved our life from destruction, and crowned us with loving
kindness, and tender mercies; we shall never be guilty of murmuring any more,
which is utterly inconsistent with thankfulness to God for all his Benefits.

Of which if we be mindful, who knows but we may fall, by degrees, into such an
angry mood as that of the Israelites; who commended their Egyptian Bondage, and
miscalled their Slavery there, by the Name of, Liberty to enjoy a fullness of
good Things; nay, looked upon their Deliverance from thence, as a betraying
them to perish in the Wilderness; insomuch, that at last they wished themselves
in Egypt again, and conferred about going back into their Chains: This was such
a fearful Provocation, that we should dread any approaches to it; not admitting
so much as a discontented Thought, if we can prevent it; but if it press in
upon us, reject it, or throw it out as soon as it is entered: For if it lie
brooding there, we know not what it may bring forth. If it be no more than
Complaints, where we have reason rather to give Thanks, it is a great deal too
much, and must be speedily amended: For there is no great difference between
approving that which is evil, and disliking that which is good: Nay, Cyril.
Alex. (...), etc. in Johan. VII. 12.
to find fault with that which is well done, is equally culpable, as to commend
that which is bad: The same thing to free that which is base and unworthy, from
just reprehension; and to quarrel with those things which are so far from
deserving our Censure, that they ought to be highly praised.

A SERMON AGAINST CENSURING, PREACHED At St. Paul's Covent Garden, on the Third
SUNDAY in ADVENT, March 17. 1688/9.

By S. Patrick, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell. M DC LXXXIX.

1 Cor. IV. 10. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come --
IN these words there is a double Supposition; and thereupon a weighty
Inference.

The Suppositions are; First, That there will be another Advent, or coming of
our Lord, besides that which we now commemorate; when he appeared in the
likeness of sinful flesh.

Secondly, That the end and intention of his Second coming, is to judge us; as
the foregoing Words tell us, He that judges me is the Lord; therefore let none
of you be so bold as to judge before the time, until the Lord come; whose
proper business it is to judge others.

That Is the Inference he makes from those two known Doctrines: Since the Lord
will come again, on purpose to Judge us all, let not us take upon us to
prejudge one another, but suspend our censures, till he come to Judgment.

The Suppositions are so well understood, and I hope so steadfastly believed,
that I need not go about to prove them. They are among the first principles or
Elements of the Doctrine of Christ; and it is a shame to be continually laying
again, the foundation (as it is called Heb. VI. 2.) of the resurrection of the
dead, and the eternal judgment; the belief of which we own, by professing the
Christian Religion; which in opposition to the Jewish Pedagogy, is thus
described in the same Epistle, Heb. XII. 22, 23. We are not come to mount
Sinai, (such a dispensation, that is, as that of Moses, whose Law was given
upon that Mount) but we are come to mount Sion, to the city of the living God,
and to God the judge of all: As much as to say, When wear made Members of the
Christian Church (figured by Mount Sion and Jerusalem) we acknowledge God to be
the Judge; First, of all things; not only the outward Actions, which the
Mosaical Law chiefly regulated; but even the Thoughts and Counsels of the
Heart: And, Secondly, of all Persons; not only Jews, but the whole Gentile
World, of whatsoever rank or condition they be: Who shall be called to an
account for all things whatsoever, open or secret, known or concealed; and
accordingly receive their doom from the Almighty and Righteous Judge of the
World.

Let me only therefore remember you, that it is necessary to keep these great
confessed Truths, continually in Mind; and carry this sense about with us every
where, That there will be a day when the Lord Jesus who came in the form of a
Servant, to visit us in great Humility, to give us his Laws, and to die for our
Sins, will come again in Glorious Majesty; not as a Servant, but as a
Sovereign, attended with all the Host of Heaven, to call us before him, and
examine how his Laws have been observed by us, and what fruit there has been
of his shedding his precious Blood for us.

This if we thought of daily, with a lively belief, that as he is a most
impartial Juge; so the greatest secrets cannot be concealed from his knowledge:
It would move us to observe all his Laws, with the greatest care and diligence;
because he will certainly and unavoidably sentence those to the heaviest
punishments, who contemn his Authority, by the violation of any of them,
particularly this in my Text, which the Apostle infers from those Principles;
not to judge any thing before the time, but to leave all to the Judgment of the
Lord.

For the understanding of which, it will be necessary to do these three things.

First, to show what it is to Judge. Secondly: how the Apostle is to be
understood, when he says judge nothing. Thirdly, What the Reasons and Grounds
are, upon which this precept stands, in the right sense and meaning of it.
I.
For the first of these, to judge, sometimes signifies no more, than to make
such a difference in our thoughts, between one thing and another, when they are
presented to our understandings; as our reason shows us there is in the things
themselves. To discern, for instance, between truth and falsehood; so as to
approve the one, and to reject the other: In which sense we ought to judge
every thing; and to admit nothing, till we see good reason to entertain it; for
it is a Christian Virtue, to make a discrimination between good and bad, true
and false; and as we find things upon examination, so to determine whether they
are to be received or rejected.

And therefore the Apostle's meaning cannot be to forbid us to judge in this
sense of the Word; for he himself says in this very Epistle, Chap. X. 15. I
speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say, i. e. I desire not to be believed,
if I speak not reason, which you understand; and therefore I leave it to your
selves to determine, upon serious consideration, whether I speak not the Truth.
And again Chap. XI. 13. Judge in your selves, is it comely that a woman pray
unto God uncovered? i. e. I need say no more; for you can resolve what is fit
in this matter, if you please to consult with your own sober thoughts.

We must find then another sense of the Word Judge, which is this;

2. To pass sentence upon other Men's actions or qualities, pronouncing them
either good or bad. And thus the Apostle uses the Word in the two Verses
immediately preceding my Text, v. 3. But with me it is a small matter, that I
should be judged of you, or of man's judgment; that is, I make no great account,
what opinion you or any Body else has of my Fidelity, in the Stewardship
committed to me (mentioned v. 2.) of dispensing the Mysteries of the Gospel of
Christ; for whether you judge well or ill of me, you may be mistaken; and
therefore I am not much concerned about it; Yea, I judge not my own self; that
is, I do not absolutely depend upon my own opinion of my fidelity, though I
cannot but know my self better than any one else can do; because I may overlook
many things, which the Lord sees, and so think better of my self than I
deserve. And therefore (as it follows v. 4.) though I know nothing by my self,
yet I am not thereby justified; for he that judges me is the Lord: It is not
as others judge of us, or as we judge of our selves; but as the Lord, who
cannot be deceived, shall judge. In all which discourse judging is passing a
Sentence, either for, or against another Person; either to acquit and clear
him, or to censure and condemn him. And thus it is frequetly used in other
places; particularly, for passing a sentence of Condemnation upon others,
accusing them as guilty, and censuring them to be worthy of punishment: For
Example, Romans XIV. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and
let not him that eats not, judge him that eats: That is, condemn him of
profaneness, or contempt of God's Laws, in taking his liberty of eating any
thing, without distinction of Meats; and v. 4. Who art thou that judge
another man's servant? That is, condemnest him, over whom thou have no
jurisdiction.

And thus it is to be understood in my Text, for Censuring and Condemning
others; which is an Office that belongs not to us, who seldom have a sufficient
cognizance of their case.

Which may be done either inwardly, in our own thoughts; or outwardly also in
our Words and Speeches, whereby we pronounce the sentence which our Mind has
passed upon them: Between which two (inward and outward censures of others)
there is no small difference; and therefore this is a distinction, which ought
to be carefully observed; because it may be lawful to pass a judgment upon
Men's actions in our own thoughts, when we ought not to signify it to others
by our Words. For first, the Persons upon whom we pass a judgment, may be so
much Superior to us in Dignity and Authority; or they may excel in so many
eminent Virtues, and do so much good to the World, that it may not be fit for
us to speak of every thing we see amiss in them, which we may truly judge in
our Minds to be faults: Or, Secondly, the Company to whom we speak may be such,
as will not make a good use of our judgment, but a bad; which is a just cause,
why we should forbear to declare our judgment, whatsoever we may justly think
in our own breasts: Or, Thirdly, The thing it self, which we cannot but
condemn, may be of such a Nature, and done so secretly, that it will be a
breach of Charity to speak of it unto any, but him that is guilty of it.

Now the Word judge being thus explained, I proceed to the Second thing.

II.
How the Apostle is to be understood, when he says judge nothing: For it may
seem an impossible precept, seeing there are many things which ought to be
condemned, and many Persons who are apparently guilty of them. We must
therefore understand him, with some limitations, that we may make a wise
judgment concerning judging other Men; and not let all things they do pass
without censure, because we are bound, in some cases, not to censure them at
all.

And for our clearer information, I shall show; First, what judgment is not
here forbidden; Secondly, what is.

First, With respect to the former of these, I shall only put you in Mind of
these three things.

1. That public Judgments and judicial Censures, are not here condemned; for
they have the Divine Authority to warrant them, and Humane Societies cannot
subsist without them: Therefore let none imagine there is any thing in these
Words, either forbidding a Christian to be a Magistrate, or forbidding a
Magistrate to judge and condemn evil things, and evildoers. For as Magistracy
is God's Ordinance for the good of Mankind; so it is the Duty of every
Magistrate, to condemn and punish such as do evil; being sent, or commissioned
by God for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do
well, 1 Pet. II. 14. They do ill then that censure and condemn this Office, or
those that execute it; for it is that which all Men do in their own Families;
where having Authority as Parents, or Masters, they correct what is done amiss.

2. And as there is nothing in these Words forbidding Magistrates to exercise
their Office, so they contain no prohibition unto private Persons, either to
form an Opinion concerning others in their Mind, upon the serious observation
of the course of their Actions; or to reprove and rebuke each other for their
sin, according to the Rules of Truth and Charity: For it is necessary to form a
Judgment concerning others in our Minds, that we may avoid the Company of evil
Men, and preserve our selves from the danger of their Contagion: And Charity
being the sum of all our Duty to our Neighbor, prudent and seasonable reproof
is often the greatest Charity we can bestow upon them. Let the righteous smite
me (says David) and it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall
be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head, Psalm. CXLI. 5.

3. And as we may thus judge Men to be worthy of reproof, and take upon us to
tell them of their Faults, so there is nothing in these Words forbidding us to
speak of them unto others in their absence, especially when they are not
amended by private reproof; provided, first, that we sincerely design the good
of those to whom we declare our mind concerning them; and, secondly, that we
say no more than is necessary to forewarn their Neighbors, left they be misled
and infected by them: We must not blacken them more than needs, much less make
them worse than they are; but only give such a just Character of them, as may
serve for a Caution to those, who otherwise may be in danger to be enveigled by
them into their evil Courses. Thus our Lord bids his Disciples beware of the
Scribes, who looked demurely, and behaved themselves gravely, and made a show
of great Piety in their long Prayers, that they might be the less suspected of
bad Designs, and the more securely deceive such as trusted to their Honesty,
Luke XX. 46, 47. And thus St. Paul bids the Ephesians, Chapter V. 11. have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them; that
is, detect them, and declare against them.

II. These things therefore being not forbidden in these Words, let us now
consider what Judgment or Censure is forbidden.

1. And this is certain, That we ought not to judge such things to be sin, nor
censure and condemn others upon the account of such things, as the Law of God
does not condemn: For to censure those things as unlawful, which the Law of God
has not forbidden, is in truth to judge and condemn the Law it self, as an
imperfect and defective Rule of our Actions: Which is the Censure St. James
passes upon this practice, in those known words of his, James IV. 11. He that
speaks evil of his brother, and judges his brother, speaks evil of the
law, and judges the law. Which cannot be meant of any other evil-speaking and
judging, but this: When a Man censures and condemns his Brother, where the Law
does not censure and condemn what he does. Whosoever thus judges his Brother,
does really and truly argue the Law of Christ, to be wanting in something,
which ought to have been prescribed by it. Instead of conforming himself to it,
he takes upon him to be a Corrector of it, and to make supplements to it; as if
it were an insufficient Direction to us, without his Additions. Which is the
meaning of the next Words: But if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of
the law, but a judge. Let such Men consider that there is but one Lawgiver (as
it follows, v. 12.) who is able to save or destroy. Who art thou that judge
another, for such things, that is, as the Law of Christ does not condemn? Who
gave thee Authority to pronounce, first, peremtory Sentences upon thy Brethren,
when thou art not appointed by God to be either a Lawgiver, or a Judge of
others; especially of such as do not break any Law of Christ?

2. As we ought not to judge, that is, condemn Men for such things as the Law
does not condemn; so in matters of Dispute and Controversy, where the Law is
doubtful, or not clear to many good Men, we ought to forbear judging those who
are not of our Mind, or act not as we do, if otherwise they do well. This was a
famous Case in the Apostles days, when there arose a Question, Whether the Law
of Moses should be observed by the Disciples of Christ? The Apostles said, No;
because our Lord had abolished it, and left Men at liberty to eat, for
instance, any Meat whatsoever, if they were but thankful and temperate But the
Jewish Christians generally maintained it was still in force; and therefore
judged all those to be impious, who did not observe his Rites and Ceremonies:
This was a high Charge, for which St. Paul in many places reproves them, as
going about ignorantly to abolish the Law of Christ, whilst they endeavored to
establish that of Moses: Particularly in Romans XIV. 3. he tells them, it became
such as were weak in the faith, to be so humble as not to judge those who made
no difference of Meats, which Christ, they steadfastly believed, had made
common. Though their ignorance made them scrupulous, it ought not to have made
them censorious; especially in such a case, where Men followed Christ rather
than Moses. Which some think is the meaning of St. James (whose Epistle is
written to the Jewish Christians) in the place before-nam'd, Chapter IV. 11, 12. He
that judges his brother (about such matters as I now mentioned) judges the
law, i. e. the Gospel of Christ, called in that Epistle, The Royal Law, the Law
of Liberty, and the perfect Law of Liberty, Chapter II. 8, 12. I. 25.) which
absolved them from such Obligations. And if thou judge the law, thou art not
a doer of the law, but a judge; that is, take upon thee the Office of Christ,
to enact those things again into a Law, which he has abolished. What a
presumption is this! when there is but one Lawgiver, who is able to save and
destroy, who art thou that judge another? That is, whatsoever you may fancy,
there is but one to whose Laws we ought to be subject; and that is not Moses,
but Christ, to whom alone belongs the Power of Lie and Death. You may take this
Authority upon you, if you please, of passing Sentences of Condemnation upon
your Brethren; but they are of no force: It being out of any Man's power to do
those any hurt, whose innocent liberty he condemns; or to do those any good,
who comply never so far with his scrupulosity. And what the Apostles say in
this case, may be applied to all other wherein good Men differ; and both sides
think with a great deal of reason. They that have most reason, must not yield
to the temptation they have, to contemn the others needless scrupulosity; and
they that have least, must not condemn those as they are too prone, who take
the liberty which they dare not use. If both sides think, as they do commonly,
that they have equal reason; then there is no more reason for the one to judge
the other, than for the other to judge him: But they ought mutually to abstain
from all Censures of each others Principles or Actions.

3. As we ought not to condemn one another in matters doubtful; so much less
ought we to pass our Judgment upon Things that are quite out of the compass of
our Knowledge. The Secrets of Men's Hearts do not fall within our cognizance,
but only as they discover themselves by outward Acts; which sometimes may not
be good, and yet not proceed from such ill Intentions, as we may be apt to
imagine. In this therefore we ought to be very scrupulous how we judge others
to be Men of evil Designs, whose ill Actions will admit of a more favorable
Interpretation. But when Men do good things, it is the highest presumption to
judge they are not done with a good Mind. This is to pretend to know the Hearts
of Men, into which none can see, but God alone. And therefore we must not
condemn Men of Hypocrisy, when their Actions do not declare it; but referr
that to the cognizance of our Lord, who, as it follows after my Text, will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness: That is, discover the inward
Intentions and Purposes of Men's Souls, and all the close Wickedness which was
contrived there: And then every man shall have praise of God. That is, if he
did well, with a good Mind, sincerely and heartily, he shall receive
commendation; but otherwise disgrace, and shame, and confusion of face, for
being so wicked, as to imagine our Lord could see only the outside of things,
and be deceived by fair appearances.

4. In things which fall within the compass of our knowledge, we must take care
not to judge either falsely or rashly; or hypocritically. Under these three, are
comprehended most of the common Censures which Men are wont to pass upon others.

1. And then we judge falsely, when we charge another person, with that of which
we know he is not guilty; which is so great a sin, that it can scarce be
committed without the help of other sins, which throw Men into it; such as
secret hatred, envy, wrath, revenge for former Injuries or Offenses. But
whencesoever it proceeds, it is an high piece of injustice; which, as we ought
at all times carefully to avoid, so then especially when we undertake to be
Judges.

2. Rush judgment, is when we charge others with such things as we know to be
but rumors and suspicions; or which we have only some slight reason to
believe. This forward haste to be passing our judgment upon Men, though we be
well informed, is to be corrected; especially when we declare it upon all
occasions, or perhaps without any occasion: But to do this before we be well
informed, or have duly considered, is very vicious; and is one of the bad
dispositions of Mind, which lead us to judge the Actions of Others, to proceed
from worse Principles and Ends than really they do.

Thus Men are sometimes rashly accused of Covetousness, upon the account of
such actions as were the effect of Caution, not to bestow their Charity amiss.
Others are charged with Pride, and neglect of Company; with whom their
discretion taught them not to be too familiar. Ambition, and Courting the
favor of Great Men, is laid to the charge of those, who thought of nothing but
only to please God; in doing that, which proves also pleasing unto them. And on
the contrary crossness and perverseness is charged on those, who cannot comply
with others, for fear of offending God. Nothing is more common than to call
that wilfulness, which perhaps is only weakness; and to condemn that as
wickedness, which was no more than ignorance, or imprudence. And thus whole
Sects and parties condemn one another in the lump, before they know their
circumstances, particularly what advantages they have had or wanted of right
information.

In such things, which are not very evident, we ought to suspend our judgment;
or rather err on the other side, by judging well of others, which is the Virtue
we call Candor, which argues much Wisdom, and no less Charity; at least, a
great deal of good Nature.

3. The last thing of this kind, which I called Hypocritical Judgment, is when
Men charge others truly and justly, with such bad things, as they have really
committed; but neither out of dislike to the Sins which they condemn, nor with
any design to do good, either to the guilty Persons, or any other; but merely
to gratify their own Spleen, or Arrogance, or such like bad affections; to
which our Savior seems to have had some respect, when he said, Matthew. VII. 1.
Judge not, that ye be not judged; for it follows immediately, Why beholdest
thou the mote that is in thy Brother's Eye, but considerest not the beam that
is in thine own Eye? And he calls this, in effect, an Hypocritical judgment,
when he adds, Thou hypocrite; first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and
then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye. If
it be Hypocrisy, to find out smaller faults in others, sooner than greater in
ones self; it is much more so, to discover any fault whatsoever, merely to
please some bad Affections, which delight in speaking Evil of others.

These are dangerous kinds of judging, which the Apostle here requires us to
forbear, false, rash, or hypocritical condemning of others. The first of them
is slander; the second is uncharitable censure; the third is ill designing
self-love, envy, pride, or some such vice, which we harbor in our breasts.

And so I proceed to the third Thing I propounded, The Reasons and Grounds, why
we ought not to judge in this manner.

III.
There is one reason in my Text; and there is another so nearly allied to it,
that they are frequently joined in other places.

That in my Text is, The respect we ought to have to our Lord; whose Office it
is to judge.

That which is nearly linked with this, is, The respect we ought to have unto
our Brethren; over whom we have no Authority, and therefore ought not to take
upon us to be their Judges.

The first of these if it be weighed, will make our judging others appear to be
an insolence toward our Savior. The second will represent it, as an insolence
toward Men.

1. First, I say, it is an insolence toward God our Savior; an usurpation upon
his Right; a bold intrusion into his Office; an arrogating to our selves, that
which truly and properly is his sole Prerogative; especially when Men proceed
so far, as to dare to judge the very Hearts of others; or to censure and
condemn them for that which God's Law does not condemn.

For the judging of the Heart is a thing which God and our Lord assume as
peculiar to themselves. I the Lord search the heart, and try the reins; even to
give every man according to his ways, Jer. XVII. 10. I am he, says our
Savior, which searches the reins and the heart; and I will give unto every
one of you according to your works, Rev. II 23. Upon which account it is a most
bold presumption, a dangerous arrogance in us, to pass a sentence upon the
secret purposes and designs of Men, of which we know nothing; but they are
reserved to the peculiar cognizance of him, who alone searches their Hearts.

And so it is also, in the other case; when we presume to censure that, which
the Law of God it self does not condemn, either in general or in particular, He
that does this, as you heard out of St. James, speaks evil of the Law, and
judges the Law; and he that judges the very Law, casts off the relation of
a Subject, and sets up for a Sovereign; instead of being a doer of the Law, he
takes upon him to be a Judge; that is, he puts himself into the place of God,
who as he is the only Maker of Laws, so is the only Judge of those, who are to
be governed by them. He therefore that Censures and Condemns, where this
Lawgiver does not Condemn, forgets himself; and is so lifted up in his own
opinion, that he usurps the Divine Authority. Whereas, poor Wretch, he can
neither save nor destroy (as it there follows) but merely show his own folly
and arrogance, to the great offense of Almighty God, and the indangering his
own Soul: For God, says the Apostle, v. 6. of the same Chapter) resists the
Proud; he resists him as an Enemy to his Majesty; as one that invades his
Sovereign Right; and intrudes into his sole Office of judging others.

II. And though it be less considerable, yet this is not to be neglected, that
he who judges the Hearts of Men; or Censures and Condemns that in them, which
the Law of God no way Censures, commits an insolence upon his Brethren, over
whom he has no such Authority. He arrogates a jurisdiction over them, which he
has no right to exercise; and is guilty of a breach of all the duties we owe
to our Neighbor, of Justice, of Charity, and of Humility. Who art thou, says
St. Paul, that judge another Man's Servant? to his own Master he stands or
falls, Romans XIV. 4. That is, whom do thou take thy self to be, that thou
presumest thus to cenfure and condemn him, who is none of thy Servant, but the
Servant of the common Lord of us all? By what right do thou meddle with
another's Servant, who has his own Master, the very same that thou have; by
whose judgment, and not by thine, he must either stand or fall? That is, either
be pronounced innocent or guilty.

If his Master have not forbidden this, which thou condemnest in him, it is
presumption in thee to censure him; it is an injury both to the Master and to
his Servant; an usurpation of an Authority over him, unto which we can have no
pretense; and therefore cannot be answered, either to God, or to our Neighbor;
who are both wronged by such judging.

The same may be said of all other sorts of judging beforementioned; by which
we give great offense both to God and unto Man; toward whom if we have any
regard, we shall hearken to the discourse of St. Paul, v. 10. etc. of the same
Chapter (where he puts both these reasons together) But why do thou judge thy
Brother? Or, why do thou set at naught thy Brother? For we shall all stand
before the judgment seat of Christ: For it is written, as I live, says the
Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. So
then every one of us shall give account of himself to God. Let us not therefore
judge one another any more.

We ought, that is, to examine our selves strictly, particularly about the
false, the rash, the causeless Judgments we have passed upon others; for which
we ought to call our selves unto an account, and judge our selves severely; and
passing an upright Sentence upon our Actions, after we have laid them to the
Rule of Christ's Laws, repent sincerely of what we have done amiss: (For that is
the use the Apostle makes of this Doctrine in another place, Acts XVII. 31. Now
God commands all men every where to repent, because he has appointed a day,
wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, etc.) But as for other Men,
we must not be so forward as we are to pass our Censures upon them; but in many
cases leave them to our Lord, who only can pass a certain Judgment upon their
Actions; he seeing their secret Intentions, what was the spring of them, and
the end at which they aimed: All which he will come again to examine, in the
season proper for it, and make an exacter search than we can do, and be more
impartial in his Judgment, than we are apt to be; and likewise render to every
man according to his work; which is not in our power, though we were never so
well inclined to it.

These things are sufficient, if duly pondered, to show the reasonableness of
the Apostle's injunction, To judge nothing before the time: And therefore I
need not enter into the consideration, either of the Causes from which this
censorious humor flows, which are, Arrogance, Envy, Hatred, Ignorance,
Self-interest, and suchlike: Or of the very mischievous Effects of it, both
upon the Censurer himself, and upon those who are loaded with his Censures:
Whose Spirits are hereby irritated, from whence proceed sharp Contentions and
dangerous Disorders; and whose Names are hereby blasted, their Reputation and
Esteem in the World diminished; by which means they are rendered less capable to
do the Service they otherwise might have performed, either in Church or State:
For it gives a Man a great advantage, in whatsoever place he be, to be well
thought of in it, and to have a fair Character: Which whosoever Spoils by his
unjust or uncharitable Censures, is injurious not only to him, but to the rest
of Mankind, who might have been benefited by his Labors. This single
consideration, should make all those that have any sense of God, to be more
sparing of their Censures, than Men generally are, that they are a great
hindrance to Men's doing good in the World; for which we were all born, and is
the thing at which we should all aim, in the several Places where God has
disposed us.

But I have not time to set this Vice forth in all these colors; and therefore
what remains shall be spent in giving a few Advices for the Cure of this
censuring Humor; and some Directions how to behave our selves, when we are
unjustly censured by others.

I.
The Advices for the Cure of this Distemper in those that are prone to it, are
three: The first has respect to God; the second has respect to our selves;
and the third to our Neighbors.

I. First, If we thought more of this single Principle of Christian Religion,
that God will one day judge us, we should be less prone to judge others; For
this very thing will be examined and judged at that day, whether we have judged
others falsely, unjustly, rashly, or hypocritically; and nothing can more
directly move God to judge and condemn us, than such Judgment and Condemnation
as we have sinfully passed upon other Men. My brethren, be not many masters,
says St. James; (that is, be not forward to judge and condemn one another)
knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation, Jam. III. 1. Of which
our blessed Lord himself puts us in mind, Mat. VII. 1. Judge not, that ye be
not judged: Where Grotius his note is, I certainly resolve, that the Judgment
of God is here meant. For it is the custom of our Savior, to transferr things
spoken of Humane Affairs, unto Divine and Spiritual Concernments. And if so,
then the sense of his words is this: Judge not your brethren, lest God judge
you. But if a man be overtaken with a fault, as St. Paul's Advice is, restore
such a one with a spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be
tempted, Gal. VI. 1. Let it be your work to strengthen the Weak, direct the
Ignorant, and restore the Lapsed with tender Admonitions, and gentle Reproofs;
but put no scorn, pass no severe Censures upon them; for this God takes ill, as
well as they. This is not to study to help your Brethren, but to insult over
them: It is to exasperate not to reform them. It is highly offensive to God,
who has made it our Duty to assist, support, and comfort others, but reserved
Judgment to himself; who will judge us the more heavily, for assuming to our
selves his Prerogative, not only because it is an insolence toward him, but a
violation of that great Law of Charity; which is the new Commandment, the
fulfilling of the Law, the perfection of all Virtue. The breach of this, which
is of such excellence, and such great use, must needs be a most hateful, most
hurtful Offense, and be most grievously punished.

Let us have this great Day of Judgment much in our Minds, and it will keep all
our Passions in awe; particularly our Anger and Displeasure, which are too
frequently a biass upon our Judgments, and make them warp aside from Truth and
Charity; and pronounce such Sentences upon others, as we cannot justify our
selves when we are in a calmer temper.

The constant thoughts of the day of Judgment, would always preserve us in such
a temper, by keeping us humble, and maintaining an holy fear in us, of
offending the Divine Majesty, by doing any wrong to others.

II. And it would be a further security to us, if we would let our thoughts
dwell more at home, and there scan our own Intentions and Actions, rather than
those of other Men. Here our proneness to judge and censure, may find
sufficient Employment, without meddling with other Men: Nay, if we would
thoroughly examine and condemn all that we find amiss in our selves, we should
be disposed to excuse or make Apologies for them.

No other Men can be so well known to us, as we may be to our selves;
especially as to the Thoughts and Purposes, the Designs and Ends, which we
propound to our selves in all our Actions: Particularly, in our Judgment which
we pass upon others, we should do well to observe from whence such forward; and
many times severe Censures proceed; which we may be able to know a great deal
more certainly, than we can the faults of those whom we condemn.

And this Self-reflection is never more necessary, than when we are about to
pass our Judgments upon others: If, at that time, we could cast an eye upon our
selves, and consider, whether that very thing which we are going to condemn in
them, we are not, or may not be guilty of our selves; whether if we were in
their circumstances, we might not, it is possible, do the same which we blame
in them: It would lay a mighty restraint upon us, and put a stop to those
forward Motions we find in our hearts to censure others. For it is likely we
shall find the same Inclinations, if not the same Distempers in our own Hearts
and Lives: And perhaps in our own case, we call them by the name of
Infirmities; and therefore why should we give them a worse Character in other
Men?

To conclude this, it is evident this will preserve us from judging others;
both by diverting us another way, and by making us ashamed to do that in
another case, which we would not have done in our own.

While we look at other Men's faults, we are wont to neglect our own; and, in
like manner, it is to be hoped we shall be detained from looking abroad, by
observing how things go at home. For here we shall find enough to do; and, at
last, find it a more comfortable Employment, as well as more easy; being both
nearer at hand, and likely to do us as much good, as censuring others does hurt.

And if we will needs be finding fault with others, we may know the better how
to judge of them, by the observations we have made at home: Where, I believe,
we shall find, that we do not love to pore (as we speak) upon our own Faults or
Imperfections; from which we are apt to turn away our Eyes, and not keep them
long fixed on them. I am sure we are loath others should know them; and I fear
we make Excuses and Apologies for them; nay, if we can with any color deny
them, to be sure, we will not easily nor hastily believe any ill of our selves;
and have very evident reason, before we conclude any thing against our selves:
Which teaches us, how to treat other Men, in our Opinions and Censures of them;
unless we will have one measure for our selves, and another for them; which is
so unjust, that we cannot for shame, if we attend to what we do, be guilty of
it. Especially if in the third place,

III. With respect to our Brethren, we will always endeavor to possess our
Hearts with an unfeigned Love and Charity toward them all. This is, as I said,
the great Virtue of Christianity, the Spirit wherewith our Religion inspires
us, to love one another, because God loved us; and as he loved us with such a
kind of love, which passes by and covers abundance of our failings: So should
we be inclined to do by others. And if we be, this Grace will preserve us from
all rash, as well as false judgment of them; because love works no evil, as
the Apostle speaks: And this is none of the least evils, to condemn our
Brethren, when they are innocent; or before we be well informed about their
fault; or with a design not to do good to them, or to others, but only to
gratify our own bad Affections.

Charity, is a proneness and readiness of Mind, to do good to others; and
therefore much more to speak well of them; that is, all the good we can; and
not to publish all the ill we know of them; unless, as I said, to prevent
others being infected or deceived by them.

Out of this blessed temper of Mind we must not suffer our selves to be beaten,
by any ill behavior of others toward us, or their ill treating of us; but
still retain a sincere Love to their Persons, whatsoever hatred we have to
their Vices. Which will dispose us to wink at many faults; to lessen and abate
our resentment of others; to aggravate none; and to judge as favorably as we
can of all. Except, as I said, where the common Charity we owe to other
Christians obliges to do otherwise; for sometimes it is a duty not only to
reprove those that are faulty, but to rebuke them sharply (Tit. I. 13.) and
with prudent Charity, to let both them and others also know our opinion
concerning them or their actions; which may be a means to amend them, and
prevent the like guilt for the future, both in them and in others.

Thus if we behave our selves, with a just fear of the judgment of God; with an
impartial observance of our own actions; with an universal Charity to all our
Brethren; we shall not easily break this precept of the Apostle, and thereby
provoke and dishonor God, reproach our selves, and injure our Neighbors.

Who will have just cause to complain of us, if we condemn them, for every
little difference there is in their opinions from ours. Of this we ought to
take a special care; because we have seen the lamentable Effects of it among
our selves; which show us it is time to lay aside all our uncharitable thoughts
one of another; and to forbear the heavy censures we have been prone to pass
upon those who differ from us.

We cannot indeed but judge some Doctrines and Practices to be very heinous;
because they are against the express Word of God; as Image Worship, for
instance, we cannot but call Idolatry; because God himself has so judged it.
This is to judge according to God's Law, and not against it, or beside it: But
to say it is Idolatry to pray by a Form, out of a Book; or that it Superstition
to wear a Surplice, or such like things, is certainly a grievous crime; because
it is to condemn that, which God's Law nowhere condemns: And on the other
side, to pronounce all in general to be Schismatics, who cannot conform to
every thing, which we think reasonable, is, at least, rash judging; For perhaps
their scruples arise out of mere weakness of Understanding, prejudice of
Education, or a pious fear of offending God, by doing that, in which they are
not fully satisfied; or such like Causes; which may excuse them before God, of
the guilt of Schism; even when they live in it.

Charitable Persons will consider the natural infirmity of all Mankind, which
God considers much more; the prejudices under which they are bred; the
difficulty of shaking them off; the perplexities wherewith some things are
entangled, by designing Men; the great variety there is in our apprehensions;
the strength of our Passions; the value every one of us sets upon his own
Opinion; our desire to have others of it; with a multitude of such like things:
And upon these accounts bear one with another, in matters that hurt not the
Faith of Christ, nor makes us careless in Christian Practice.

Here to pass peremptory Sentences, is highly presumptuous. For how come one
sort of Men by a right to Judge, Censure, and Condemn all the rest? Why may not
others take the same Authority over them? And then there will be nothing but
Cursing and Damning, throughout the Christian World: For this kind of judging,
you know, is come to such a height among some Men, that they pronounce
Anathema's and pass a Sentence of Damnation, upon all those, who in any thing
believe otherwise than they do.

This is so contrary to the tender Mercies of our Savior; so destructive of
the Communion of Saints; so injurious to the Grace of Charity, which hopes the
best; so cross to the precept of Christ, judge not, that you be not judged;
such an Enemy to the public Peace, which is easily broken with those who are
looked upon as no better than damned Wretches; such a forgetfulness of Humane
weakness; so proud an usurpation of the Divine Prerogative, and arrogant
tyranny over another Servants; and, to say no more, so much against the very
Law of Nature (which has made the Understanding free, and not to be forced to
submit to what it knows to be false) that of all things in the World, it is
most unlike the Christian Spirit; and will be so judged at the day of Christ.

But notwithstanding all our Reasons and Advices, there will be too much
censuring and judging of all sorts; while the World continues as it is: Let us
therefore see how we ought to behave our selves, when we are unjustly censured
by others.

II.
And here I shall give as many Directions, as I gave Advices.

1. First, We must watch our selves that we be not provoked by Men's unjust or
unkind Censures, to return the like Censures upon them. To this we are very
prone; for the most ingenuous Minds have the greatest value for their
Reputation, and deeply resent the Wounds that are given to their good Name. If
any thing will make them think their Tongues are their own, and incense them to
sharpen them like a Sword, and be severe in their recrimination; this is the
Provocation. This whets Men's Invention to find out faults, as well as to
aggravate them; and gives a sting to the Words wherein they represent them:
Which presently turns Censures into Reproaches, and heightens Reproaches into
downright railing. St. Peter's Rule therefore in this case, must be observed in
the very beginning of it, Not rendering evil for evil, (censure for censure) nor
railing for railing, 1 Pet. Chap. III. Verse 9. Which was exemplified in our
blessed Savior, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, Chap. II. 23.

He that returns Censure for Censure, blows the fire already kindled, and
inflames the passion into higher animosities: But he who wisely forbears to
recriminate, in effect extinguishes it. By governing his Tongue and his
Passion, he both evidently proves himself a better Man than his Censurer, and
also discredits all he says: Nay, repels the reproach he cast upon him, so that
it returns upon himself.

This is the very method the Apostle St. Peter prescribes to baffle Reproaches,
not to return them, but to continue in well-doing: For so is the will of God,
that with well-doing ye put to silence the ignorance of foolish Men, 1 Pet. II.
15. And again, v. 16. of the next Chapter, Having a good conscience, that
whereas they speak evil of you as evil doers, they may be ashamed, who falsely
accuse your good conversation in Christ.

II. Secondly, The Censures that are cast upon us, though unrighteous, should
make us watchful over our selves, lest we give any real occasion for them.
There is excellent use to be made even of the Judgment which an Enemy passes
upon us; insomuch, that they who censure or reproach us out of hatred, may
thereby do us a kindness, against their Intentions. Every way of man is right
in his own eyes, says Solomon, Prove. XXI. 22. We are all apt to flatter our
selves; and our Friends are apt to be partial also, or loath to tell us of our
Faults; either because they are afraid to offend us, or they are guilty of the
same themselves. By which means it often comes to pass, that we have the first
notice of our failings, not from them that love us, but from them that hate us:
Which, though meant ill by them, may prove very serviceable to us: For open
rebuke, is better than secret love, Prove. XXVII. 5. We may profit more by the
bold Censure of our Enemies, than by the caution and reservedness of our
Friends. For whosoever is faithful to himself, will so far mind the Judgment of
his Adversaries, as thence to take occasion to reflect upon himself; to examine
his Heart and his Ways, and calling himself to a strict account, labor to
amend what he finds amiss.

Have I not given some ground to this Censure? Is not the Reproach too true? Or
if he that passes it be mistaken in this particular, Might he not have found
something else to censure, wherein I am truly guilty? Have I not been faulty in
this very kind, of censuring others; if not falsely, yet rashly a Such Questions
as these, we should do well to ask our selves, on such occasions; which
naturally awaken us to self-reflection, and bid us stand upon our guard, lest
by our negligence and remissness, we not only incurr the just censure of Men,
but even the Judgment of God Himself.

Which leads me to the last Direction in this case, when we fall under
unchristian Censures.

III. Which is, to use special care to preserve our Souls in peace with God.
This is the remedy St. Peter prescribes, in a place much like to the
forenamed, 1 Pet. II. 12. Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles:
that whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your good works
which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.

It is impossible for the best of Men, in the midst of so many follies and
enmities, as reign among us in this World, wholly to escape all censure. John
the Baptist was said to have a devil; Christ himself was deemed a glutton, a
wine-bibber, and a friend of publicans and sinners; the Apostles were made as
the filth of the world, and the off scouring of all things, as St. Paul tells
us, v. 13. below my Text. Now if such Men as these could not escape the
Censures, nor avoid the Reproaches of a wicked and mistaken World; By what
reason does any one of us expect to be free from either? And if it be folly in
us to expect to escape them, What must we make our support and comfort under
them, but the very same that they rested in, as their satisfaction? Peace with
God, and our Minds; a spotless Conscience toward God and toward Men. This we
ought to study, to the utmost of our power; and in this rest contented, or
rather take full satisfaction. For this was the support in which the Apostles
found such consolation, that St. Paul says, (2 Cor. I. 12.) This is our
rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world. The very same will also support and comfort us, in
every thing that befalls us.

If all be clear and bright within, nothing without can cloud and darken us. If
we put on that Armor of God, the Breast Plate of Righteousness; it will secure
us from all the Arrows that are shot against us. If they scratch the skin, or
perhaps leave a scarr without, they shall make no wound within; their poison
shall not reach the heart. Nay, they shall not set a lasting mark upon our
Name; but recoil, and fly back at last, in the faces of them that shot them.

Peace with God, is peace with the Sovereign of the World. Peace with him who
is our Judge, the only Judge and Lawgiver, that is able to save and to
destroy. And what is it to be judged and condemned of Men, whilst we are
absolved by the Great Judge of Heaven and Earth? Who will call our very Judges
to an account, and reverse their unrighteous Sentences which they have passed;
to their eternal Shame and Confusion: And to the eternal Honor of those, who
have been abused by them.

Who, in the mean time, ought to suffer patiently; and have inward peace and
quiet, comfort and satisfaction in their Minds, in the midst of the clamor,
the noise, the tumult, the dust, and the clouds, which the folly and passion of
Men, may raise about them: If their Consciences, all the time of this bustle,
do acquit them, and give them the Testimony, which St. Paul gave of himself,
Acts XXIV. 16. Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void
of offense, toward God and toward Men.

Let this be our constant exercise, and it will reward the pains we take in it,
with ease and rest: For a Conscience void of offense, will not be so much as
disgusted at that, which galls and sorely grieves those who are conscious of
guilt. Great peace, says the Psalmist, have they that love thy Law; and
nothing shall offend them. For besides the Feast which a good Conscience
continually makes them, they have the Joys of hope, that God will one day, not
only clear them from all base Imputations, but crown their Innocence with
eternal Glory.

Which hope, as it ought to inspire us unto all worthy Undertakings; so it
ought to bear us up with Courage and Resolution in the pursuit of them; though
they meet with ill Interpretations, unkind Censures, and vile Requitals. That
joyful Day of the Lord will make an amends for all that we may suffer, by the
uncharitableness or ill will of some; and by the folly or ignorant Zeal of
others: When he, that knows the Heart, will say, Well done, good and faithful
servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2. l. 5. read deter. 7. -- 9. r. for when. 13. -- 9. r. who they. 16. --
29. r. detractions. 28. -- 13. r. unmindful. 43. -- 4. r. Life.
Books lately printed for Richard Chiswell.
Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Historia Literaria a Christo nato usque ad
Saeculum XIV. Facili Methodo digesta. Qua de Vita illorum ac Rebus gestis, de
Secta, Dogmatibus, Elogio, Stylo; de Scriptis genuinis, dubiis, supposititiis,
ineditis, deperditis, Fragmentis; deque variis Operum Editionibus perspicue
agitur. Accedunt Scriptores Gentiles, Christianae Religionis Oppugnatores; and
cujusvis Saeculi Breviarium. Inseruntur suis locis Veterum aliquot Opuscula and
Fragmenta, tum Graeca, tuin Latina hactenus inedita. Praemissa denique
Prolegomena, quibus plurima ad Antiquitatis Ecclesiasticae studium spectantia
traduntur. Opus Indicibus necessariis instructum. Autore GVILIELMO CAVE, SS.
Theol. Profes, Canonico Windesoriensi. Accedit ab Alia Manu Appendix ab ineunte
Saeculo XIV. ad Annum usque MDXVII. Fol. 1689.

Dr. BVRNET [now Bishop of Salisbury] his Life of Dr. William Bedell Bishop of
Kilmore in Ireland; to which are annexed the Letters betwixt Him and Wadsworth,
about Religion.

-- Two Letters written upon the Discovery of the Popish Plot; together with a
Collection of several other Tracts and Discourses: Written by Him betwixt the
years 1678, and 1685. To which is added, a Letter written to Him, giving an
Account of Cardinal Pool's Secret Powers. The History of the Powder Treason,
with a Vindication of the Proceedings thereupon. An Impartial Consideration of
the Five Jesuits dying Speeches, who were Executed for the Popish Plot, 1679.

-- A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England: In which is
demonstrated, That all the Essentials of Ordination, according to the Practice
of the Primitive and Greek Churches are still retained in Our Church.

-- Reflections on the Relation of the English Reformation lately printed at
Oxford In two Parts. 4 to.

-- Animadversions on the Reflections upon Dr. BVRNET's Travels. 8 vo.

-- Reflections on a Paper entitled, His Majesty's Reasons for withdrawing
himself from Rochester.

-- Enquiry into the present State of Affairs, and in particular, Whether we
owe Allegiance to the King in these Circumstances? And, whether we are bound to
Treat with Him, and call Him back, or no?

-- Sermon preached before the Prince of Orange, 23 d. December. 1688.

-- Thanksgiving Sermon before the House of Commons, 31. Jan. 1688.

-- Eighteen Papers relating to the Affairs of Church and State, during the
Reign of King James II. Seventeen whereof were written in Holland, and first
printed there; the other at Exeter, soon after the Prince of Orange's Landing
in England.

-- Letter to Mr. Thevenot; containing a Censure of Mr. Le Grand's History of
King Henry the Eighth's Divorce. To which is added, A Censure of Mr. De Meaux's
History of the Variations of the Protestant Churches. Together with some
further Reflections on Mr. Le Grand. 1689.

-- Pastoral Letter to the Clergy of the Diocese of Sarum, concerning the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy to K. William and Q Mary.

Dr. PATRICK's Parable of the Pilgrim; the sixth Edition.

-- A private Prayer to be used in difficult Times; 80.

-- Exposition of the Ten Commandments; 80.

-- Sermon before the Prince of Orange, 20. Jan. 1688.

-- Sermon before the Queen at Whitehal, March ^. 1688.

-- Sermon at St. Paul's Covent Garden, on the first Sunday in Lent, being a
Second part of a Sermon preached before the Prince of Orange.

A Letter written by the Emperor to the late King James setting forth the True
Occasion of His Fall, and the Treachery and Cruelty of the French.

K. William or K. Lewis, wherein is set forth the inevitable necessity these
Nations lie under, of submitting wholly to One or Other of these Kings, and
that the matter in Controversy is not now between K. William and K. James, but
between K. William and K. Lewis of France for the Government of these Nations.

A Letter from a Clergyman to his Neighbor, concerning the present
circumstances of the Kingdom, and the Allegiance that is due to the King and
Queen.

The Case of Allegiance in our present circumstances considered, in a Letter
from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country. 4o.

A Sermon preached at Fulham, in the Chapel of the Palace, upon Easter Day,
1689. at the Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in God Gilbert Lord
Bishop of Sarum: By Anthony Horneck, D. D. 4o.

The Judgments of God upon the Roman Catholic Church, from its first Rigid
Laws for Universal Conformity to it, unto its last End. With a prospect of
these near approaching Revolutions, viz. The Revival of the Protestant
profession in an Eminent Kingdom where it was totally suppressed. The last End
of all Turkish Hostilities. The general Mortification of the power of the Roman
Church in all parts of its Dominions. By Drue Cressener, D. D. 4o.

A Breviate of the State of Scotland in its Government, Supreme Courts,
Officers of State, Inferior Officers, Offices and Inferior Courts, Districts,
Jurisdictions, Buroughs Royal, and Free Corporations. Fol.

An Account of the Proceedings of the Convention of the Estates of Scotland,
from their first sitting down to this Time; which will be continued weekly.

An Account of the Reasons which induced Charles II, King of England to declare
War against the States General of the United Provinces in 1672. And of the
Private League which he entered into at the same Time with the French King to
carry it on. And to Establish Popery in England, Scotland, and Ireland. As they
are set down in the History of the Dutch War; Printed in French at Paris, with
the Privilege of the French King in 1682. [Which Book He caused to be
immediately Suppressed at the Instance of the English Ambassador.] Fol.

An Account of the Private League betwixt the late King James II. and the
French King. Fol.

A Discourse concerning the Worship of Images, Preached before the University
of Oxford the 24th of May, 1686. by George Tullie Sub-Dean of York; [For which
he was suspended.] 4o.

Some Considerations touching Succession and Allegiance. 4o.

Reflections upon the late Great Revolution: Written by a Lay-Hand in the
Country, for the satisfaction of some Neighbors. 4o.

The History of the Dissertion; or an Account of all the public Affairs in
England, from the beginning of September 1688. to the Twelfth of February
following. With an Answer to a Piece called The Dissertion Discussed, in a
Letter to a Country Gentleman. By a Person of Quality. 4so.


