A Practical Discourse OF Repentance, Rectifying the Mistakes about it,
especially such as lead either to Despair or Presumption. Persuading and
Directing to the True Practice of it, AND Demonstrating the Invalidity OF A
Deathbed Repentance.

By WILLIAM PAIN, D. D. Rector of St. Mary White-Chappel, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Smith at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1693.

THE PREFACE.
To His Loving Friends and Parishioners the Inhabitants of St. Mary
White-Chappel.
IT was for your sakes and for your use chiefly I composed this Discourse, and
now offer it to your serious thoughts and most lasting consideration, that it
may teach you the Right Knowledge and persuade you to the True Practice of that
Great Duty it treats of, I have endeavored to set it in such a Light as might
remove the unreasonable Fears and Despairs of some Few and the Presumptuous and
false hopes of the far greater number of Sinners. I hope if you carefully
peruse it with due thoughtfulness and application of mind it may give you both
a Right notion and understanding of it so as to free you from all dangerous and
mischievous Mistakes about it, and that it will convey so much Warmth as well
as Light to your thoughts as may by the Grace of God very much help to quicken
and excite you to a speedy and thorough Repentance and to a Holy and Good life.

As it will in some measure give you clear thoughts of Religion in all the
parts of it, which some who have a strong sense yet have dark and confused
apprehensions about, and will enable you to make a right Judgment of your
selves and spiritual state by evident and obvious and certain marks, so I dare
say that no Man who takes the whole force of it into his mind and duly
considers and seriously attends to all the thoughts that it will suggest to him
will ever live in his sins or continue to be a wicked Man.

One of the great Reasons that makes Men so even beyond Atheism and Infidelity
it self (for they being contrary to the natural sense of our minds prevail not
upon so many as Superstition, False and corrupt Religion) is the perverting
Christianity and corrupting the Gospel by Doctrines of Looseness and
Licentiousness, that give false hopes of Pardon and Salvation without Obedience
and a good life, and by some imaginary Schemes and some comfortable but
erroneous and even damnable Doctrines reconcile Religion to Men's Lusts and the
hopes of pardon and happiness to a careless and wicked life.

How this is done in the Church of Rome by their doctrines of Penance,
Confession and Absolution, Contrition and Attrition and the like has been shown
and made out by the Protestant Writers against them; and indeed I take those
Principles to be the very Rotten Core of Popery, the Poison and Philter by
which it bewitches so many wretched Souls into its Communion, and the
Antichristian cup of Fornication that it gives the Kings and People of the
Earth to drink.

The Loose Notions of Repentance which came at first from them, but have been
taken up by many others since, put me upon this Design of Examining and
Rectifying them, for I am persuaded there never was any Error or any Delusion
of the Devil which has destroyed more Souls then the fatal mistakes about this
Duty, especially about a Dying Repentanc; which has been the wretched Reserve
of most wicked Men all their lives, and the broken Reed they have trusted to at
their deaths, whereby they have been encouraged in their Sins and had a kind of
Protection, as they thought, against all the dangers of them by this privilege
of Repenting at the last, and by having that allowed to be valid and sufficient
by the terms of the Gospel.

By this they have all along had the reserved hopes of saving their Souls
however wickedly they lived, and so have excused themselves from and shifted
off the necessity of a Good life by this more easy and compendious way; which
though it were liable to some more accidental hazards yet might as effectually
do the Business by the standing principles of Religion and by having, as was
supposed, an ordinary Title to Pardon and Salvation.

This has greatly comforted Sinners and greatly encouraged them in their sins,
when as s commonly said of a great many, they might hope though they lived very
ill yet to dye well and make a good end, and by being penitent at the last like
the Thief upon the Cross to be surely pardoned and go to heaven; and so this
Comfortable Disjunctive has been set up or twofold way of going to Heaven,
either by living well and being good Men before we come to dye, or else by
Repenting and being sorry at that time that we were not so.

The Consequences to Religion and a good life are so plain and fatal from
hence, and I have known so many sad Instances of its dreadful mischief in my
frequent attending the Sick (whereby my experience in this case, if not my
skill, has made me a good Phisician) that I thought I could not do more service
to God and Religion, and the Souls of Men then to reseue them from such false
Notions and pernicious mistakes about a matter of so great consequence, and do
all I could effectually to persuade them to the Practice of such a true
Repentance as is not to be Repented of.

The serving such an excellent Design makes me venture this Discourse into the
World without being concerned for the many Defects and Imperfections in the
Style Phrase and Words which a nice Critic may find in it, but I am sure the
pious and well-disposed Reader will excuse and overloook those when he is
affected with the thought and matter which is of so great moment and
importance; and when he is satisfied with the virtue and wholsomness of the
Physic he will not I hope be so delicate as to find fault with its being
either too much or too little gilded.

I confess some part of it has layn by me many Years (even beyond Horace's
ninth) and has many youthful strokes in it, to show it was drawn before the
rest, and to excuse its Dress and Colors; but the thought and Notion is all of
a piece, and I have had it so long, and consideered it so fully, that if any
shall differ from me after reading it thorough, for the strength of it lies in
the Frame and Contexture of the whole and not in any single part, I should very
much wonder and be glad to know his Reasons.

I have chosen sometimes to repeat the same Notion as there was occasion rather
then to refer the Reader back again to another place, where there would not be
such an immediate connection with what he was just reading, so that he would
lose the sight of what went before with looking after it, and would not see the
thing so well in one view.

I have often thought that we wanted a Just and entire Discourse of Repentance
and all that relates to it, and have wondered that among all our Excellent
Practical Treatises we should hardly have one such sitted for common use; among
other Reasons of which I believe this may not be the least, That it is one of
the most difficult things to write on an easy Subject, as it is the hardest to
paint Light.

When I drew the Model of this and had some of the Materials lying by me and
ready framed, I thought the perfecting and finishing it would not have cost me
half the charge and pains and expense that I found it has, and most Writers I
believe like Builders find this, and even afterward when they have done they
see many things they could mend and alter, though they care not for being at
the cost of pulling down again and building up anew: It was only the Strength
and Usefulness and Convenience I had regard to, and it may have those, though
like a House built by parts and not altogether, it want all that regular Order
and Beauty that should set it off. It is to be looked on only as a Popular
Discourse to teach an useful Truth in Religion and raise the Affections and
Imaginations up to it, without that care and exactness that is to be served in
closer Writings: It will fully answer its end if it can but corvey a clear and
lively an understanding and warm sense of Religion into Men's Minds and free
their Thoughts from such Mistakes and their Lives from such Sins as are too
prevailing in the World, and which like the Sea and its Rivers proceed from and
maintain and run into one another; For Men's Lusts and Pices make them willing
to take up with false and loose Principles in Religion and those Principles
feed and promote their Vice and Looseness.

The Sincerity and Zeal of serving so good an end, as I have had my Eye all
along upon, or at least of endeavoring heartily to do it, has sufficiently
armed me against all manner of Censures whatsoever, and has given me more
satisfaction then if I had either had the ability, or could have vainly
promised my self the Applause of writing the Wittiest or Learnedest Book in the
World. This however mean and imperfect it is, as I here put into your Hands, So
I presume to Dedicate to the Great God and my Blessed Redeemer, the best
Patrons who will certainly reward those that serve them, heartily praying that
it it may be Serviceable to their Honor and Glory, to the promoting Virtue and
Religion, the bringing Men off from Sin and Wickedness, the Conversion and
Salvation of Souls, and the Turning of Sinners from the Errors of their ways
unto Righteousness, that so both they and I may have the Rewards promised to
all such.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction, wherein the Mistakes about Repentance are Noted, and a
Distribution made of the whole Discourse Page 1 to 11.

CHAP. I. Giving a full Account of the Nature of Repentance. Sect. 1. Scripture
Words for Repentance p. 12. Sect. 2. Kinds and Degrees of Repentance p. 15.
Sect. 3. True Notion of Repentance, p. 21. Sect. 4. Mental epentance imperfect
without Actual. p. 34.

CHAP. II. The Motives to Repentance. Sect. 1. Of the Enticements to Sin, p.
48. Sect. 2. Motives to Repentance from Reason and the Nature of the thing, p.
62. Sect. 3. Motives to Repentance from the Gospel, or pecaliar to
Christranity, p. 80. Sect. 4. Motives to Repentance from the Consideration of
Hell. p. 103. Sect. 5. Other Gospel Motives to Repentance p. 122. Sect. 6.
Exhortation to Repentance in order to fit and prepare us to dye, p. 145. Sect.
7. Of the Fear of Death and how we are delivered from it by Repentance and
Religion p. 172.

CHAP. III. Whether all Sins are Pardonable, and may have the benefit of
Repentance, p. 193. Sect. 1. Of Apostasy. Sins after Baptism. Upon Relapse p.
199. Sect. 2. Of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, its Nature, and whether
Fardonable or no p. 212. Sect. 3. Of Concupiscence, the Lustings of the Flesh,
or struggle between that and the Spirit p. 255. Sect. 4. Of Trouble of Mind or
a Wounded Spirit p. 277.

CHAP. IV. The ill Consequences drawn from the Privilege of Repentance
Obviated and Prevented p. 294.
CHAP. V. Of a Deathbed Repentance. Sect. 1. The Case of the Thief upon the
Cross Examined p. 315. Sect. 2. The Pleas and Pretenses on behalf of a
Deathbed Repentance Answered p. 336. Sect. 3. The Invalidity of a Deathbed
Repentance shown from the Parable of the wise and foolish Virgins p. 358. Sect.
4. More Positive Proofs against the validity and sufficiency of a Deathbed
Repentance p. 392.

CHAP. VI. Rules and Directions concerning the Particular Exercise of this Duty
of Repentance p. 442.
CHAP. VII. How we may know we have repented and are in a Pardoned State p.
471. Sect. 1. Not committing Sin the only sure Mark of a good State p. 478.
Sect. 2. The Differences of Sins, what are and what are not consistent with a
good State p. 508. Sect. 3. The Benefits of Repentance, or the happiness of
being in such a good State p. 535.

The Conclusion p. 553.
A Practical Discourse OF Repentance.
INTRODUCTION.
REpentance is the great Gospel duty which John the Baptist came Preaching, as
a Preparation to Christianity; Matthew. 3.2. Our Savior also himself began with
the same; Matthew. 4.17. The Disciples chose the same subject to preach on, Mark
6.12. They went out and preached that men should repent. St. Peter in his Sermon
to the Jews, whereby he converted three thousand Souls, preaches to them this
Duty, Acts 2.38. And this was what St. Paul testified to the Jews, and to the
Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts
20.21. as if the whole sum of the Gospel lay in those two: Nay, our Savior
himself makes this the very end and design both of his Sufferings, and of his
Resurrection, that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his
name, Luke 24.46, 47.

It is a Duty therefore of the greatest moment and importance in Christianity,
and ought above all to be considered, practiced and understood.

The only Question is, Whether it be so proper and necessary to preach it to
Christians now, as it was at first to Jews and Gentiles? The whole World then
lay in wickedness, and God had concluded all under sin, and in a state of great
corruption, both as to Manners and Worship; so that Christ came then as a
Physician to cure the sick, and prescribed this Medicine of Repentance as
proper to their case and condition at that time, and tells us himself, that he
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Matthew. 9.13. But
it is to be hoped that the World is well amended under Christianity, that they
who have been brought up in the knowledge of that excellent Religion, and been
devoted to it all their lives, and had all the opportunities and advantages, as
well as obligations of being virtuous, who have in their Baptism put on Christ,
and dyed to sin, and by the most solemn Vows and Professions been engaged to a
holy life all their days, it is not to be thought that they stand in need of
such a Repentance, or of having it so preached to them, or that they shall have
the same benefit of it as the ignorant and unhappy World before the coming of
Christ into it.

I Answer, Repentance was not a Temporary Duty in the beginning only of
Christianity, and fitted to the Jews and Gentiles, who were first brought over
to it, as the Socinians would have Baptism, but it was a perpetual and lasting
Duty, such as the weakness and infirmity of Humane Nature, and its aptness to
fall into Sin, would make always necessary; and sad would it be for Christians
if they were not to have the benefit of it after baptism as well as before,
which would put them into a worse state than Mankind were in before without
Christianity; but though Repentance I own was preached to them then upon some
peculiar accounts, and employed a total change of their Religion and their way
of Life, which belongs not to Christians, and was a Duty previous to
Christianity, and what was to go before their Baptism, and was hardly allowed
to those who should afterward Apostatize from it; yet it still remains a Duty
to us after we are become Christians, so far as we are guilty of any Sin after
we are washed in the laver of Regeneration: the virtue and benefit of it is not
transient and confined only to that time, but permanent and in force afterward
all our lives, if we truly perform it: And according to the different nature
and degree of our Sins such is our Repentance, as Physic, differently fitted
to the nature of the disease, (so the best Authors represent it (...) Socrates
apud Xenophon, l. 4. de dict. and fact. Socrat. (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 78. Tom.
6.


) to repair the several decays and weaknesses of Humane Nature, to cure it of
them any maladies it is incident to, and to bring it to such health, strength
and soundness, (...). Chr. Hom. 113. (...). Ibid.


as belongs to the Spiritual, and Christian, and Divine Life of the Soul, which
is the aim, and end, and business of Repentance, the great Panacaea of the
Gospel, which supposes us apt to be ill, and recovers us as often as we are so.

It was not a duty so properly of natural Religion, because it depended on, and
is mainly encouraged by the Promise of Gods free Grace and forgiveness of Sin,
which could not be known by natural light; but by that it was evident, that
they who had done any thing foolishly and wickedly, should become wiser and
better, and the reflection upon any bad actions was attended with sorrow from
the Principles of Natural conscience, as Plutarch excellently describes it,
(...). Plutarch. de Animi tranquil.
The Soul throbbing and beating like a painful Ulcer, exercising a Repentance
with great shame, that is biting and tormenting to it self: But this was rather
the Disease than the Remedy, and they felt only the smart which was Natural,
but knew not the cure which was Christian and Evangelical.

The Prophets in the Old Testament preached Repentance to the Jews, and Pardon
upon it, as fully and clearly as Christ and his Apostles in the New; but it was
by virtue not of the Old, but the New Covenant which was in force before the
Law, as St. Paul assures us, Gal. 3.17. and to this they owed all their
Spiritual Blessings, such as Grace, Pardon of Sin, and Eternal Life, as they
did their Temporal, and the Land of Canaan to the other.

Many of the Jews did not think such a Repentance necessary to the partaking
the benefits of the Messiahs Kingdom, as was preached by John the Baptist, and
afterward by Christ and his Apostles, but they thought it was sufficient to be
true Israelites, or the Children of Abraham, and that this would entitle them
to the Kingdom of the Messiah here, and Heaven hereafter.

The Talmudists have this comfortable Legend among them, That Abraham stands at
the Gates of Hell, that if the Soul of a wicked Jew come thither, he may keep
it out, like to which some ignorant Christians think now of Christ. John the
Baptist corrected this mistake, when he bad them bring forth fruits meet for
repentance; and think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our
father, Matthew. 3.8, 9. And so does our Savior particularly in his Discourse
with Nicodemus about the necessity of Regeneration, John 3. and this was
probably one great reason why they all began with, and so earnestly pressed and
recommended this Duty of Repentance, as necessary in the first place to those
who would be Disciples of Christ.

All Christians generally do acknowledge the necessity of it, and, since we
cannot live perfectly innocent so as to be free wholly from all manner of Sin,
that we must instead of this entire Obedience, perform true and sincere
Repentance, which next to it is the most acceptable to Heaven.

But there are grievous and fatal mistakes about this Duty of repentance, which
being made up of several parts, many are willing to take some of them for the
whole, and to make the essence of it lie in those things which are only
preparatory or instrumental to it; this being a Panacaea, the universal
Medicine of the Gospel against all our Sins, they would compound it of such
pitiful and weak ingredients as will not work upon the disease, and drive out
the corrupt matter, and have its due effect upon their Minds and Lives, but if
it a little gripe and disorder them, and they feel some remorse and compunction
upon their Minds, and some transient Passions of Grief and Sorrow upon their
Souls, they think this is Repentance, though it have no further influence to
better and reform their Hearts and Lives. They look upon Repentance as a kind
of bitter draught that must be taken, cum regimine, like Spiritual Physic
spring and fall perhaps, or at some set times, or after a debauch, or some
great Sin, and this shall serve them for the whole year after, and they may
then return to their sins and looseness again with more freedom and greater
appetite, when that penitential course and discipline is over; and thus they
Sin and Repent, Repent and Sin, and never get out of that fatal circle: Or they
may not put themselves perhaps to all this trouble, but leave it all to the
last, and then resolve to Repent at once for all the Sins of their whole lives,
and so do the business more concisely, and yet as effectually all together.

This all proceeds from a wrong and wretched notion of Repentance, as if it
consisted only in some sudden passions of the Mind, and inward workings of the
Thoughts, and not in the lasting change both of Heart and Life, and in the
universal amendment of both. Those who do not truly understand it, account it
so easy and slight, and gentle a remedy, that will perform its work so easily
and suddenly, that they are hereby greatly encouraged in their Sins, because
there is so present, and ready, and cheap a cure for them.

Others who are of a different temper, made up of melancholy and timorousness,
they are apt to fall into the other extreme, and to think their Sins, though
none of the greatest, yet may be of such a nature as shall never be forgiven;
and they are extremely fearful and scrupulous, that they are of that sort which
the Scripture has declared unpardonable; and since some seem to be so, they can
never be persuaded but theirs may be of that number or quality, and so they run
into a thousand doubts and fears, if not into absolute despair of the truth and
validity of their Repentance. All the failings and imperfections which are
unavoidable to our Nature, and our present state, these they magnify into
heinous and mortal Sins, as others are apt to lessen those into weaknesses and
infirmities.

I shall therefore as carefully as I can, consider this great Subject, with all
the parts belonging to it, in this following Method.

I. I shall give a full account of the Nature of Repentance, with its Kinds and
Degrees, that so we may have a true Notion and Understanding of it, and avoid
the common Mistakes about it. II. I shall propose the great Motives to it,
especially those of the Gospel, and such as are peculiar to Christianity. III.
I shall enquire whether all Sins are pardonable, and may have the benefit of
Repentance; those after Baptism, after Relapse: And under this Head I shall
particularly consider the Sin against the Holy Ghost, the Nature of it, and why
or whether unpardonable; and take notice also of other things of this kind but
of a lesser nature, such as Lusting of the Flesh, and Trouble of Mind. IV. I
shall consider a Deathbed Repentance, and enquire into the validity of it, and
consider the case of the Thief upon the Cross. V. I shall endeavor to obviate
the mischievous Mistakes, and prevent the bad Consequences that too many are
apt to draw from this Gospel Privilege of Repentance. VI. I shall give some
Practical Rules about the particular Exercise of this Duty. VII. I shall lay
down a certain Mark or Criterion by which we may know we have Repented, and are
in a pardoned and good state.
CHAP. I. Giving a full Account of the Nature of Repentance.
SECT. I. Scripture Words for Repentance.
AS to a true Notion of Repentance there are several words in Scripture by
which it is expressed, the chief and most remarkable are these three, (...), or
(...). The two first we translate by Repentance, and have no other word for
them, the last is turning away from our Sins, and turning to God and Goodness.
The 1. (...), is an after concern or trouble arising from our Sins, when our
Mind and Conscience smite us when we have done amiss, and we feel inward
trouble and horror arising in our Souls upon the reflection of our past folly
and wickedness. This is attributed to Judas, Matthew. 27.3. Then Judas which had
betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented, (...). So that this
is but a low part of Repentance, though if it be duly qualified, it may be that
Godly sorrow which works Repentance not to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. If
the bitterness we taste in Sin turn our appetite from it, and our grief quite
remove our love for it; if our tears help to wash away our Sins, and to cleanse
our guilty and polluted Souls, then however sharp or brackish they are, they
are sanative and medicinal, and so have a true virtue and efficacy in them,
without which they are useless and insignificant. 2. (...) is an after
thinking, or an after-Wisdom and Understanding, when the Sin we thought before
so charming and inviting, so that it tempted us with its seeming Pleasure or
Profit, or some appearance of good, which was the reason we chose and embraced
it, we now see and understand to be foolish and unreasonable, mischievous and
pernicious, and are under full convictions of the sad consequences and effects
of it, and therefore have both wishes and desires that we had never committed
it, and purposes and resolutions not to be guilty of it again: Now this goes a
great deal further than the other, but still it goes no further than the mind,
and the inward thoughts, passions and affections there, which may be if not
insincere yet ineffective. There must be something further to make up and
perfect Repentance; which is 3. (...) and (...), turning from Sin, and turning
to God and Goodness. Thus the Scripture speaks most clearly of Repentance,
Ezekiel. 18.21. If the wicked turn from all his sins that he has committed, and
does that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not dye.
Again at ver. 27. When the wicked turns away from his wickedness, and does
that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive. And at ver. 28.
Because he considers and turns from all his transgressions that he has
committed, he shall surely live, he shall not dye. So Acts 26.20. That they
should repent and turn to God, which are homonymous, and turn from darkness to
light, and from the power of satan unto God, ver. 18. This is leaving a wrong
path or course of actions we have been engageds in, and entering upon a better.
And this more fully declares the nature of Repentance, that it is an actual
amendment and reformation of our Lives, a ceasing to do evil, and learning to
do well, as the Prophet expresses it, Isa. 1.16, 17. When they do good that are
accustomed to do evil; as another Prophet, Jer. 13.23. when they who have been
bad in any instance become good; this is the very essence of Repentance, as I
shall further show you, it is Obedience after Disobedience, Virtue after Vice,
Good after Evil, and these three together make up true Repentance, which is
indeed the whole practical condition of the Gospel, as St. Paul sums it up.

SECT. II. Kinds and Degrees of Repentance.
BUT before I come to discourse fully of that, I must premise some Limits and
Cautions about this Duty, or else we shall talk very confusedly about it in
general, as belonging alike to all Persons. Now there are several sorts and
kinds of Repentance, according to the several kinds and degrees of Sinners.

There are some Sinners whose Lives are like a leprous Body spread all over
with corruption and filthiness, as the Prophet describes the wickedness of the
Jews, Isa. 1.6. From the sole of the foot even to the head there is no
soundness in it, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores; i. e. They have
been wicked in the general tenor and habit of their Lives; and these must be
wholly changed, the whole mass being corrupted it must be quite altered: The
whole frame of their Minds, and whole course of their Actions must be made
quite otherwise; like a defiled Body they must be washed all over; or rather,
like a dead Carcass they must be raised to life again, and restored wholly from
their state of Death and Corruption which they were in before.

There are others who are not so diseased all over, but yet have some mortal
illness growing in some part upon them, who are guilty of some particular Sins,
some known and wilful Faults that destroy their good state, and put them into
the rank, though not of the greatest Sinners, yet of such Sinners as shall not
enter into Heaven, nor escape Eternal Wrath and Vengeance, unless they
particularly repent of them, and wholly forsake and leave them: And thus every
one who is conscious to himself that he is, or has been ever guilty of any
known and great Sin, whatever it be, though it should be but one such Sin, must
amend that, and must get off that particular illness, or else it will prove
deadly and mortal if it continue upon him; for one such disease, or one such
wound, whilst it is uncured upon the Soul, will kill and destroy it as well as
more. Though a Man may not be universally depraved, nor be wholly prostituted
to debauchery and irreligion, yet if he will indulge himself in any known Sin,
or in any particular Lust and Wickedness, he is in a lost and undone state,
till he repents and wholly leaves that Sin: And if a Man is in a good state,
and fall into a wilful and great Sin, as we know David did, that surely cuts
him off for a time from his good state, and renders him liable to Gods Anger
here, and to Misery hereafter till by a serious and hearty Repentance he
recovers himself, and is so perfectly recovered from the Sin that he will never
commit it again, whatever Temptation is offered to him.

There are other Sins which are of a lower and less heinous Nature, which do
not destroy our good state, nor put us out of the Favor of God, nor exclude us
out of Heaven; and these are such as very good Men are subject to, and may not
be free from whist they are in this body of Sin and Corruption. As the most
healthful and best Constitutions may be subject to some smaller illnesses and
indispositions of Body, though not to great and mortal diseases, so some
frailties, failures and imperfections, will stick to the best of Men, though
not any mortal and wilful Sins; and these frailties and infirmities are Sins in
a strict sense, as coming short of perfect Obedience to the Divine Law; and
these are in some sense also to be repented of, i. e. we are to be sensible of
them, and sorry for them, and we are every day to pray to God to forgive us
these our Trespasses, and we are to endeavor to overcome them as much as is
possible, and never let them grow, as they may by neglect, into wilful Sins;
but these are all pardonable by the Mercy of God, and by virtue of the gracious
Covenant which he has made with us in Christ Jesus, upon a general Repentance,
without a perfect and particular amendment of all of them, which is utterly
impossible and inconsistent with Humane frailty and infirmity.

There is therefore a great difference to be made, in respect of several kinds
of Sins, and several sorts of Sinners, of this great Duty of Repentance.

There are some of whom the Scripture says, that they need no repentance, Luke
15.7. i. e. who need not such a Repentance as shall change and alter their
Spiritual state, who never were in a bad state, being early Baptized, nor never
were guilty in their whole lives of any one such great and wilful, and heinous
Sin, as put them into a damnable state: I hope there are not a few who are in
this blessed condition, and therefore who need not this greater Repentance, as
I think I may call it, who by the blessing of God, and by means of a very
Virtuous and Religious Education, have been early trained up in the ways of
goodness, and never departed from them; who were set right at first, and never
wandered or strayed out of the paths of Virtue; whose Feet never slipped so far
as to take hold of the paths of Death, or be caught in the snares of the Devil;
who never defiled themselves with any great Sin, but have preserved their
virgin-purity, and have had no foul spot to sully the whiteness and beauty of
their whole unblemisht Conversation, but were always innocent and always
safe, like Zacharias and Elizabeth were always righteous before God, walking
in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1.6.

I cannot say these are wholly sinless, and altogether perfect, for so none of
the Race of Adam, or the Children of Men are, except our Blessed Savior; for
there are some infirmities, and weaknesses, and imperfections, that belong to
these, and so they stand in need of that lesser Repentance I before spoke of,
but they never were guilty of the great offense, and so need not that greater
Repentance which others do.

And it is of that I now speak, a repentance from dead works, as the Apostle
calls it, Heb. 6.1. A Repentance from wilful and mortal Sins, such as put us
into an ill state, and such as we shall certainly perish except we repent of
them, Luke 13.3.

SECT. III. True Notion of Repentance.
NOw this Repentance I would thus describe, answerable to those three words by
which it is expressed in Scripture, A sorrow for our Sins, joined with change and
alteration of Mind, and amendment or reformation of Life; or such a sense of
Mind as makes us leave and forsake, or turn away from every Sin, or all the
Sins we have been guilty of, and practice the contrary Virtues, or perform
those other Duties we have broken or been wanting in. Thus, where we have been
bad Men in any instance, and violated our Duty, and offended God, and broken or
transgrest his Laws, it will make us become good Men afterward, and perform
our Duty, and return to God, and keep or obey his Commandments in all those
cases wherein we have done otherwise before. This, this alone is such a
Repentance as avails to Pardon and Salvation; as it takes away every Sin which
would damn us, and brings us to that Obedience, and practice of all Virtue and
Holiness, without which no man can see God, or be saved.

Repentance, I own, is a word of an equivocal meaning, that signifies several
things, and has several senses belonging to it; as sorrow and trouble of Mind,
change of Thoughts, and the like; which are meant by the Latin Paenitentia and
Resipiscentia, and by the Greek (...) and (...); and it is commonly taken for
something that goes no further than a Man's own Mind, for the inward working and
change of its own Thoughts, and the sorrow and trouble it conceives upon the
reflection of its past Sins, and the consideration of its bad state. And here
it is Repentance must first begin, in the Mind, the principle of all Moral
actions, its being sensible of its evil ways, and truly sorrowful and
afflicted for them; when its Heart is smitten within, and bleeds as it were
from those inward wounds it feels in its own Conscience, and when it vents it
self in all the sorrowful expressions of inward trouble, when it weeps
bitterly, like St. Peter, Matthew. 26.75. and rivers of tears run down its eyes
because it has not kept the Law of its God; when it is pricked to the heart,
Acts 2.37. and is under very deep compunction and contrition of Soul, and
mourns and laments for its grievous wickedness; when it is afraid of the anger
and indignation of that God whom it has offended, and has a just dread of those
Punishments it knows it has deserved; when it is under great convictions of the
folly and evil of its Sins, and is very sensible of the sad fruits and
consequences of those things whereof it is now ashamed; when it considers how
little benefit and advantage it ever got by them when it committed them, and to
what a sad account they now turn, and how that the end of them is like to be
death and damnation. This inward sense and godly sorrow, if it continue upon
the Mind, and go not off like a morning dew, or an hasty cloud or sudden storm,
will surely work repentance not to be repented of, will bring it to perfect and
true Repentance, not only to Confession and Humiliation, and afflicting its
Soul by Fasting, and putting on Sackcloth and Ashes, which may be signs and
attendants sometimes, but no proper parts or acts of true Repentance; but this
will beget in it good purposes and resolutions of becoming better, and
forsaking its Sins, hearty wishes that it had never committed them, and sincere
vows and intentions to forsake them; for whilst it has that sense upon its Mind
it cannot well do otherwise. Now this is a very good beginning, and a very good
part of Repentance; and it wants nothing to make it true, perfect and complete,
but bringing forth fruits meet for repentance, Matthew. 3.8. Acts 26.20. that is,
all this having an effect upon the life and actions, mending and reforming
those, and making them suitable and agreeable to those inward thoughts and
passions of Mind, that we may be not only renewed in our minds, but become new
men, and new creatures, and walk in newness of life, Romans 6.4. That we may put
off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according
to the deceitful lusts, and may put on the new man, which after God is created
in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 24. That we put off the body of
the sins of the flesh, Coloss. 2.11. That if we have yielded our members
servants to uncleanness and to iniquity, unto iniquity, so now that we yield
our members servants of righteousness unto holiness, Romans 6.19. That we be
washed, that we be cleansed, 1 Cor. 6.11. That we sin no more, John 5.14. That
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we live soberly, righteously and godly
in this present world, Tit. 2.12. For Repentance is the whole practical
condition of Christianity, and together with Faith, makes up the entire duty of
a Christian, as St. Paul sums it up, Acts 20.21. Testifying both to the Jews
and to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ. That we who were enemies to God by our wicked works, may be reconciled
to him, by Conversion and Obedience, and may become holy and unblamable, and
unreprovable in his sight, Coloss. 1.21, 22. That we being made free from sin,
and become servants to God, may have our fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life, Romans 6.22. Which are the full and excellent descriptions
which are given us in the New Testament of this Duty of Repentance, which make
actual Reformation and Obedience essential to it, and which make it consist
plainly in these two things;

I. (...). Quaest. Athanas. ascript. Q. 133. de Parab 72. p. 435. (...), etc.
Chrvs. Hom. 10. in Math.

(...). Aret. in 3. c. Apoc.


In a relinquishing and forsaking every Sin, or all the Sins we have been
guilty of.

II. In performing and practicing the Virtues contrary to those Sins.

In St. Peter's Phrase, Eschewing evil and doing good, 1 Pet. 3.11. i. e. The
good that is contrary to the former evil.

I. A reliquishing and forsaking every Sin, or all the Sins we have been guilty
of. We must first break off the practice of those, and cease from any one act
of them, and so we shall by degrees break the strength and force of them upon
our Minds: For as all habits grow upon us by many repeated acts, which are like
so many strokes, as it were beating upon the Mind, that do form and fashion it
into such a habit and disposition; so when this force and impression is taken
off, the habit will grow more weak and languid, and the Mind will be able to
recover and unbend it self from it: Let us then resolutely cease from acting,
and certainly if any thing be in our power our outward actions are, and we
shall find that the most habitual Sin will fade and wither, as being without
that recruit which should feed and nourish it; for all Habits grow by new and
repeated acts, as a Tree by the accession of new sap into its branches; and if
they be not supplied with these, they will decay and dye of themselves. If we
can but put a little stop to our Lusts in their violent career, and check but a
few acts of them, this will keep them from being so unruly and ungovernable,
till in time we may wholly master and conquer them. The Sinner must first keep
himself from the outward act, from touching the unclean thing wherewith he was
defiled; he must refrain his feet from every evil way, and go on no further in
a wrong path, that so he may return into the ways of Virtue. If his Repentance
does not make him break off every Transgression, and keep him back from every
Sin, and restrain him from the commission of what he was formerly guilty of,
though it makes him never so much troubled and dissatisfied with what he does,
though he commits it with never so much reluctance, and is never so sorrowful
for it after he has done it, yet if he still commits it, and repeats it when a
Temptation is offered to him, he is very far from true Repentance; and let him
be never so unwillingly dragged to it, so that the evil which he does he would
not, let him not comfort himself with that, for so long as he does it he is a
slave to it, and he is led captive by it so strongly, that it over powers even
his Conscience and his Reason, and till he can break loose from it, so as not
to commit it again, he is a servant of sin, and under the greatest bondage and
servitude. Let a Man have never so much dislike of his Sins, and pretend never
so much to abominate and abhor them in his thoughts, yet if he commits them in
his practice, it is but protestatio, as we say, contra factum, but a fruitless
Repentance that still brings forth the unfruitful works of darkness, for it is
not what Men think of their Sins, but their not doing of them, that is the true
fruit of Repentance.

II. As we must leave the Sin, so we must practice the contrary Virtue. And
this will be more easily and readily done; for if the Habit of Vice and
Wickedness be destroyed, that of Virtue will follow of course; as if the
Disease be removed Health is restored. Virtus est Vitium fugere, The very
leaving of Vice is the coming to Virtue. For the Mind cannot stand still, but
is a moving and an active Principle, and if it be not Vicious it will be
Virtuous, it cannot stand neuter and indifferent to those two, but will
necessarily take either one side or the other. He that leaves off Drunkenness,
by so doing becomes sober. He that will no longer defraud must necessarily
become just. The contrary Virtue does in most cases succeed the forsaken Vice,
as Light does succeed Darkness, and Day Night. It does not I confess do it
always; for it does not necessarily follow that he who does not swear should
be devout, nor that he who does not cheat should be charitable, nor that he who
will not blaspheme God should worship him, and yet those are very meet and
worthy fruits of Repentance, that he who has profaned the Sacred Name of God
by customary Swearing, should not only leave off that upon his Repentance, but
with a Religious dread and awful veneration should ever after adore and worship
him; and he that has been unjust and unrighteous should not only break off his
sin by righteousness, but by showing mercy to the poor, Dan. 4.27. That as sin
did before abound, so now the contrary Grace and Virtue may much more abound,
as the Apostle speaks in another case, and as he says in the like case to the
Roman Christians who were once impure Gentiles, As ye have yielded your members
servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield your
members servants to righteousness unto holiness, Romans 6.19. That now being made
free from sin, and become servants to God, ye may have your fruit unto
holiness, ver. 22. and that this fruit may be the greater because of the former
barrenness and unfruitfulness which we were guilty of. He that has neglected
any necessary Duty, and so is guilty of a Sin of Omission, is bound to amend
and repent of that as much as of any other Sin, and so Repentance will oblige
him to the practice of all manner of Virtue, as well as the quitting and
abandoning of all manner of Sin. The true Penitent must not only pluck up all
the Habits of Sin in his Soul, and weed out all those venomous seeds of
Wickedness that have grown up into sinful practices, but he must have all
manner of Virtue planted in his Heart, and he must bring forth the fruits of
his Repentance in an universal Goodness and Holiness of Life; and unless it
does so, it is not as I shall show you, true and perfect Repentance, because
nothing else can restore the Mind to a soundness and a good state. And
Repentance is like a recovery of Health after Sickness. The disease must be
thoroughly got off, the sickly matter must be discharged, the illness must be
cured and removed, and when that is done, the Patient must get his former
strength, and be able to perform all the proper and vital operations, and till
he does this we cannot say he is well: So till a Sinner has wholly got rid of
his past Sins, and has utterly relinquished and forsaken them, till he has
purged them all out by Repentance, and has brought himself, by the Grace of
God, to such a Spiritual strength and soundness, as to perform the proper
duties and operations of the new life, and to practice those Virtues which were
contrary to his former Vices, he cannot be said to be recovered to a state of
Health and Soundness, and true Repentance. He may be under a method of Cure
indeed, as a sick Man is under a course of Physic, and in some fair hopes and
a likely way of recovery before this, and this is often called Repentance, and
it is a part of it but not the whole: But the great work is not done, nor is his
Repentance finished and perfected till he is come to this, to forsake every
former Sin, and practice the contrary Virtue. How long he is to do this, I
shall not determine, as I cannot tell how long a Man must be free from a
Disease before he is well, and how much time exactly there must be between a
state of Sickness and that of Health. It Is hard to fix the indivisible point
between those two states, and so it is between a state of Sin and a perfect
Repentance of it; but all Men can still know pretty easily when they are well,
and so they may by this sure mark when they have truly and fully Repented,
namely, when they have thus brought forth the fruits of repentance, Matthew. 3.8.
Repentance is not to be known, neither is it to be counted true, or at least
perfect without those: Those Fruits of it indeed are not different from the
thing it self, they are not only signs, and outward marks and indications of
it, as the Fruit of a Tree is a sign that the Tree is alive, for here the Tree
would not be alive at all, if it were without that Fruit. These are not then
only a sign that his Repentance is true; but they are like our Breath, which is
not only a sign that we are alive, but that very thing by which we live. True
and perfect Repentance consists in those, and is never without them; as I shall
show by considering what an imperfect thing all the Repentance is which is done
in a Man's Mind, without any effect upon his Life and Actions.

SECT. IV. Mental Repentance imperfect without Actual.
ALL that Sorrow and Trouble for Sin which a Sinner feels in his own Soul, all
that Conviction and Condemnation of his ill state and sad condition, by reason
of his past Sins when he reflects upon them, and all those Vows, and Purposes
and Resolutions of leaving his Sins, and living better hereafter, though they
are good symptoms and good beginnings of Repentance, yet if they go no further,
and do not bring forth the meet fruits of Repentance, they are far from being
perfect or indeed true Repentance (...). Theod. in Isa. c. 30.
: For all these may be in most Sinners, and yet they continue still in their
Sins, and be never the better for them in their lives: And there are very few
Sinners, I believe, that have not these now and then in their Minds, and do not
sometimes repent after this fashion; they are often convinced of their evil
courses, and their Consciences accuse them for their Sins, and they find a
great deal of trouble and disquiet in themselves upon the account of them, and
they cannot but look back upon what they have done with sorrow and trouble, and
with some kind of dread and fear; and when they bethink themselves they know
they are in a bad state, and they cannot but be melancholy and dissatisfied
with themselves, and have some faint wishes that they had done otherwise, and
some short and ineffectual purposes and resolutions to live otherwise sometime
hereafter, and to become better at some convenient season, but before that
comes, the Temptation is again offered, the Sin and the Company invites, the
melancholy and the thoughtful mood is gone off, the dark and gloomy, and
cloudy weather, that hung over his Soul is cleared up and dispersed, and the
Man falls to his Sins as fresh and as briskly as ever, and he is never the
better for that short fit of Repentance that came upon him: It is quickly gone
off, and he is rid of his Sorrow, and his good Purposes, but not at all of his
Sins. And though it should happen again to return upon him, as it will indeed,
and he cannot well prevent it, yet he can put it off again by the same means,
and can be wicked still for all these fits and qualms of Conscience that are
apt now and then to come over his Mind; the Man is not made much better by all
these, but his Sins still prevail upon him, and he still commits them, and is
by no means brought off from them. As long as he is not, how little he can be
said to Repent, I shall now show by examining all those parts of Repentance,
without this.

1. Let Us consider the Sinner in sorrow and tears for his Sins, and in some
trouble and contrition of Mind for them. This the Apostle assures us is not
perfect Repentance; it is not the thing it self, but it is that which is only a
likely and a good means to produce it, Godly sorrow works repentance not to
be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. but if it do not work that, if it do not bring a
Man to repent and leave his Sins, though he lament and weep over them; and when
he is fallen into any foul Sin, do only childishly cry over it, and not wash
and make himself clean, as the Prophet expresses it, Isa. 1.16. and put away
the evil of his doings, when he is thus troubled for them, he is but little the
better for all his sorrow, and all his tears are but feigned and hypocritical
without that. Though he is sorry for his Sins, yet he will not part with them,
but he still retains so much love for them, that through his very tears, he
still looks kindly upon them and will by no means leave them; He is rather
sorry that he cannot keep them with more content and satisfaction to himself,
but yet keep them he will, however troublesome and uneasy they may be now and
then to him. Like Herod who was exceeding sorry that he must gratify his
Herodias in what she required of him, Mark 6.26. but yet he did it for all his
sorrow. Men may see reason upon some account to be sorry for their Sins; there
are some considerations that will always trouble their Minds in the commission
of them; there are some evils and inconveniences that do unavoidably attend
them, but yet there are other considerations of pleasure or profit, or the
like, that do still prevail over those, and so make them commit them: And
though they are sorry after they have done them, as it is very hard to suppose
they should not, yet there are other things that still overcome them, and the
Temptation of something else, notwithstanding this, is too hard and powerful
for them. Sin cannot be brought forth without some pangs and uneasiness after
it, but yet the fancied pleasure inclines the Sinner to return again to it; and
though he finds and experiences some bitterness in it after he has swallowed
it, yet the sweet morsel is so pleasant to him, that he will not refuse or
abstain from it for all that. And thus, what is a Man the better for all his
sorrow, who is only sorry that he cannot sin without some trouble, but yet is
still resolved to sin with it, and after all his pretended sorrow for his Sins,
is so well pleased with them, that he yet lives in them. Repentance is not the
mere dropping a few brackish tears over our Sins, or venting a few hollow and
empty sighs upon the remembrance of them, but it is an actual leaving and
forsaking of them, which is the only sign that we are sorry for them in good
earnest.

2. A Man may be under great conviction of Mind of the evil of Sin, and of the
ill state he is in, as well as great remorse and compunction of Heart for it,
and yet not have true and perfect Repentance: For most Sinners have that some
time or other, unless they are perfectly hardened and brought to a senselesness
of Mind, and a stupidity of Conscience. They cannot but sin with some remorse,
and have some twitches and vellications of Conscience, and condemn that in
their Minds, which yet they may practice in their Lives. Few Men can go on so
easily and comfortably in their Sins, but their Consciences will sometimes fly
in their faces, and rise up against them: And this is so far from lessening or
abating them, that it is one of the greatest aggravations of the guilt of them,
if they still continue thus to commit them against their Consciences, and
against the inward sense of their own Minds.

No Man that does in the least consider, but must know what a sad and desperate
state he is in whilst he is wicked and impenitent, but it is not the mere
knowing and being sensible of this will bring him out of it, no more than a Man
that is sick, and finds an inward weakness within him, or that feels himself
mortally wounded, must by so doing become well, and be immediately cured. This
in all reason should make him presently use all means he can to be so: But it is
not the mere sense of his danger that makes him safe, it should awaken him to
do all he can to avoid it, and when he sees it so plainly before him, not to
venture into it with his eyes open: But it is plain that most Sinners do this;
they know their Sins lead to the paths of Death, and that their ways tend to
Misery and Destruction, and yet they are still so mad as to walk in them, and
therefore they are said in Scripture to love death, and to choose destruction,
because they love and choose that which they know and are sensible will bring
those. The charms of Vice do so fascinate and bewitch them, that they take down
the pleasant Poison, and eat of the forbidden Fruit, though they know they are
both deadly; and there Lusts have such power over them that they will still
cleave to them, though they know they shall perish in their embraces. So that if
Men be never so sensible of their danger, and never so much convicted of their
ill state, by reason of their Sins, yet if this does not make them leave them,
it is a sign they love them so well, that they will boldly venture all for them,
and never be brought to part with them whatever shall come of it. But,

3. A Sinner may sometimes resolve and purpose to leave his Sins, and that very
sincerely too, and yet his Repentance may not be perfect; for the thing is not
done by a Man's mere resolving to do it, though never so sincerely. And
Repentance is a different thing from a Man's resolving to repent. A Man may be
very Poor, who resolves to be Rich, and very Ignorant, who resolves to be a
Scholar, and though the thing be never so much in his power, yet till he does
that which he resolves, he may be in the same condition he was in before. His
resolution indeed may put him upon doing the thing he resolves, but till he
does it, he is where he was. As a Man that is out of his way, and resolves,
upon finding he is so, to turn back, and to betake himself to the right path:
This his resolution does but at the most stop him in his wrong course, and till
he does really turn, and go back, and get into the right way, according as he
resolved, he is in the wrong way still. Resolution is a good principle of
acting, and necessary to put a Man upon it, but till we really act upon it,
it is not our resolution to do the thing is doing it; and God, I am sure,
requires us to Repent, and not only to resolve to do it. It would be very happy
if a Sinner could be brought thus far, to resolve in good earnest to Repent,
there would be then great hopes of him, but he must do more than resolve, or
else he is not much the better. There are many idle, and hasty, and ungrounded
Resolvers, who do very heartily and sincerely, as they think, purpose and
intend to leave their Sins, especially upon their Beds of Sickness, and when
they are under some present Judgment, or the fear of Death, but when these are
over, their resolutions are so too; so that there is but little regard to be
made of Men's resolutions, unless they are put into act, and made good by a
subsequent course of actions; without this no Man can tell whether the temper
and habit of his Mind be altered, and whether it be not a sudden thought newly
started in his Mind, which his awakened Reason for the present suggests to him,
and so he yields to it, rather than a lasting Principle that will dwell upon
his Soul, and make a lasting impression upon his Will and Affections: For Men's
Reason may be persuaded for a little time, when they only consult with that,
but they will be quickly drawn off from that when their Lusts and Affections
are again taken in, and the stubborn Will will be quickly too hard for the weak
Understanding. Hence it is that a Sinner so often changes his Mind, and he
resolves sometimes to be good from the short conviction of his Reason, but is
quickly bad again from the prevalency of his Lusts and Affections. So that it
requires some time, and several acts, to fix and settle a Man's own Mind, and it
is impossible it can be changed and altered by a sudden resolution, without
some trial and many repeated acts, that shall keep it to what it resolves; it
must stand bent, as it were, that way some time till its resolution become
habitual, or else it will be apt to restore it self again by a kind of
Elasticity, and a motion of restitution to its former temper and inclinations.
When the Will has grown crooked by a long custom and habit of Sin, it will not
be set straight again by a sudden resolution; that may a little bend it the
other way for a time, but it will return again to its former position, unless
it be kept right by many new acts that bring it by degrees to a new habit. If a
Man's Mind indeed were fully changed, and he that had a bad Mind before had now
a good one, this I should not doubt but would make him happy, and be true
Repentance. But there goes more to do this than a sudden resolution. The old
habits of Sin must be driven out, and they must be driven out the same way that
they came in, that is, by contrary acts, and by a long course of other
practices; they must be unwound or unravelled as it were by degrees, and the
Mind cannot get loose from them but by this course; and therefore it must not
only resolve within it self, but it must make good, and confirm, and strengthen
its resolution by frequent practices. or else it can neither attain to any
habit of goodness, nor break off from a habit of wickedness. The ways of
Virtue and Vice are not so near to one another that a Man may take a sudden
jump out of the one into the other by a sudden resolution, but they are like
two contrary ways, that a Man who is got into one, must go back again, and
take over a great many steps, before he gets into the other. And as I said
before, it is not his resolving that he will do this which sets him in the other
way, but he must walk back as well as resolve, and he must move and keep on
till he comes right. Mere resolving is at most no more than turning his face
the other way; but if he only does so, and stands idly resolving, he will be but
little the nearer to his journeys end: And to be sure if he goes back again,
and breaks his resolutions, and sometimes walks one way, and sometimes the
other, as many a Sinner does, who is uncertainly divided between his good and
his bad resolutions, and sometimes follows one, and sometimes the other, he is
very far from true Repentance, to make which there must be nothing less than an
actual forsaking of every Sin, and an amendment of every evil way, which are
fruits meet for repentance, or the worthy fruits of Repentance, which both John
the Baptist and St. Paul speak of.

CHAP. II. The Motives to Repentance.
HAving described the Nature, and fixed the true Notion of Repentance, which is
laying the foundation of Repentance, in St. Paul's Phrase, Heb. 6.1. on which,
after the old Rubbish is taken away, a good Life should be built, and all the
goodly structure of Christian Virtues should be erected. I come now to propose
the Motives and Encouragements to persuade us to this great Duty, and they are
as many, and as great, as there are obligations to Virtue and Religion, and
disswasives from Vice and Wickedness. For Repentance is but a Return to Virtue,
and Leaving Sin, and though the passage from one to the other may not be so
pleasant and delightful, but like the Israelites, we must pass through a
Wilderness, through a vale of Sorrow, and a course of Contrition and
Humiliation, yet Virtue is the happy Land flowing with delights, and all manner
of good things, and Vice is a more than Egyptian Servitude and Slavery, which
he is mad that will not get out of, or that any way hankers again after it, or
after the Garlic and Onions, the sordid pleasures and enjoyments of it. I
shall first examine the Temptations and Enticements to Sin, and expose the
false Reasonings and Arguments by which Men are drawn into that; then offer the
Motives and greater Arguments to Repentance, both from the Nature and Reason of
the thing, and from the Gospel or Christianity.

SECT. I. Of the Enticements to Sin.
THe Enticements and temptations to Sin and Wickedness are so great and many,
that if we should judge of them by the effect and power which they have upon
Mankind, they are much stronger than the Motives and Arguments to Virtue and a
good Life; for we see they prevail upon more than the other do. Whole crowds
follow the one, and are drawn by them into the broad way of Vice, whilst Virtue
has but a small party who walk in her narrow path, and are persuaded to keep
closely to it. Now surely there must be some mighty and powerful charms in Vice
that make it so generally take with most Men; there must be some secret and
prevailing Reasons that bring them over, and engage them so firmly on that
side, and make Virtue so generally forsaken and deserted. Men are Rational
Creatures and free Agents, that have a power to consider and choose what is
best for them, what tends most to please and delight, and make them happy, and
they must be greatly imposed upon if they choose that which tends only to make
them miserable. God sets Life and Death before them, as Moses before the Jews,
Deuteronomy. 30.15. and it must be great madness to choose the worser part, and what
one would think it impossible for any man to do, if his Reason were not cheated
and deceived with false appearances of good in it, and it were not represented
to him in such a false light, and such false colors, as made it seem quite
otherwise then it is in its own Nature: For no Man can choose Evil as Evil,
naked in it self, and with its own ugliness and deformity about it, but it must
be dressed up under the show of Good, and painted and decked up in a meretricious
dress, to hide its Native and abominable Filthiness. Men's Imaginations must be
deluded, and so their Reason deceived and imposed upon by the Temptations to
Sin; and there must be a great many false reasonings used to entice them to it,
or else so many who have thoughts about them, and who cannot do any thing
without thinking some way or other, could never be drawn over to consent to it,
and to commit it.

Now the chief Delusions, and false Reasonings and Persuasions by which Men are
drawn into Sin, for there must be some such process in their Minds, are such as
these following.

1. They see and feel the present Good of their Sins, and the after Evil is so
uncertain or so remote that they know not what to think of it, and so are not
much influenced by it, for they think it unreasonable to part with the present
Pleasure, and the certain Profit which their Sins afford them, for an unknown,
and unseen, and unconceived Pleasure and Happiness, they know not when or
where; they find and feel most Vices very grateful to their Natural Appetites,
and outward Senses, and they are not such fools as to be persuaded out of
those, nor to put a force and restraint upon Nature and its proper enjoyments.
Virtue ties them up to such severe, and hard, and unnatural restraints, as they
cannot endure; its Mortifications and Self-denyals are very uneasy to Flesh
and Blood, and they look upon its Rules and Precepts as the morose dictates of
peevish and melancholy Men, who cannot so well enjoy what others do, and
therefore talk against the liberties and freedoms of Humane Nature, and fright
Men from the pleasures and enjoyments of Sin here, with the terrors of another
World, and imaginary dangers hereafter.

Is it then so very certain that Vice is so pleasant here? So desirable and
comfortable upon the account of present enjoyment, and that its punishment
hereafter is so unknown and uncertain? That it is not to be taken into
consideration, nor worth being more minded than it is by these Sinners; do they
never think of dying? or are they possessed with such a frenzy as to hope they
shall live always, or that three or fourscore years will never be run out,
though few live so long, and they perhaps have lived above half that time, and
see how quickly it is gone, and then will any Man in his wits venture to be
miserable for ever, for the Pleasures or Profits of Sin which are but for a
season, were they never so great? If there were a much greater uncertainty
about another World then there is, yet who would run so dreadful a hazard, who
would put so great a matter to such a dangerous venture? Were not the evidence
we have of a future state from Nature, from Revelation, from the Resurrection
of Christ, nay from the belief of all Mankind so strong as it is, so that not
only whatever the Jews or the Christians have believed and witnessed down
through all Ages must pass for a fable, if it be not true, but what all Wise
Men have ever believed about a God and Religion, must be a mere dream and
chimaera: Yet however no Man can ever be sure but that there is another World,
he can have no positive proof or demonstration that there is not, and were
there no more in it but that there may be such a thing, which the greatest
Atheist or Skeptical Infidel cannot pretend to deny, yet this might be enough
to keep him from running upon so dreadful, though merely possible danger, and
exposing himself to such extreme but irrecoverable mischief, especially for the
poor and pitiful temptations of Sin at present. For alas however pleasant and
delightful they may imagine them, yet they are generally mistaken, and there is
more true pleasure and comfort, a thousand times, to be found in a Life of
Virtue and Religion than in the most tempting Wickedness, and the most gustful
Sensuality: For which yields most present pleasure and comfort of Life, a sound
and healthful Body, a fair and good Reputation, a quiet and easy Mind, or a
shattered and rotten Carcass, a scandalous and infamous Life, a guilty, and
disordered, and distracted Conscience? Are not most of the pleasures of Sin not
only short but sickly? That have a sharp and poisonous sting hid under all
their sweetness, so that however they go off to the Palate, yet they are very
bitter after they are gone down; whereas the pleasures of Virtue are clear, and
pure, and lasting, not mixed with any of those dregs which foul and embitter
Sin, but purified from all the sediment and the lees that are at the bottom of
Sensuality and Wickedness. Religion does not deny us any truly Natural and
proper Pleasure and Enjoyment, but only keeps us within the bounds of Innocence
and Virtue, within which compass a Man may enjoy all the Pleasure that he can
wish, or was made for. It does not by its Rules of Mortification and
Self-denial destroy or cut off any Natural Appetite, or true part of us; that
is not the meaning of cutting off a right Hand, or plucking out a right Eye,
Matthew. 5.29, 30. but only to destroy the unnatural Excesses, to cut off the
vicious Corruptions, to take away the depraved and inordinate Affections and
Lusts, that will grow too strong and unruly, without a wife conduct and
government of our selves by the rules of Virtue and the restraints of Reason
and Religion; and would any Man think fit to have those let loose, and have the
reins thrown upon their neck without any check or control? Will he complain of
the severity of Religion, and the loss of his Natural Freedom by the restraints
of morose and peevish Virtue, as he calls it, if he be not allowed the full
swinge of his Lusts, and the gratifying of his immoderate Passions and Desires
in all manner of instances? Then adieu not only to the government of Virtue and
Religion, but the government of all Humane Laws and Worldly Wisdom, which for
the convenience of this World, and the Peace, Quiet and Comfort of this present
Life, has thought fit to keep Men's Lusts and Passions within such bounds under
the severest penalties, and to prohibit the same Sins under the punishments of
this World, that God has done under the far greater punishments of another; for
nothing is more pernicious and destructive to the welfare of a Kingdom, as well
as of particular Men, then Licentiousness and Debauchery, which besides the
immediate Judgments of God upon it, does by its own Nature bring a thousand
present Miseries and known Evils along with it, besides the unknown and
unspeakable Miseries that attend it in another World.

Can any Sinner deny this, when he seriously thinks and considers of it? Does
not his own observation, and his own experience, by which I hope he will be
instructed if by nothing else, teach him that this is the Nature of Sin? That
as it is a common pest and plague to the World, and to Mankind in general, so
it is generally a disease to his Body, a moth and canker to his Estate, and a
worm to his Conscience: Whereas Virtue is health and soundness to his Body,
life to his Soul, and grace to his Neck, as the Wise Man observes, That length
of days are in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor. That
she is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every one
that retains her, Prove. 3.16, 17, 18, 22. This true Notion of Virtue, which
is not an empty Panegyric, but a strict Truth founded in Nature, that will
always be true of it, and that all Wise Men will find to be so, this will
sufficiently answer the first and greatest Temptation by which Sin entices and
allures unthinking Men with the bait of present Pleasures and Enjoyments. But,

2. The next greatest Temptation to Sin is that of Example, which is so strong
and powerful that few can resist it, who love to be modish and in the fashion,
as too many Vices generally are, and therefore are more taking upon that
account, and lose their reproach and shame due to them, by the great party and
number they have on their side, which otherwise would sneak and be confounded
if they stood alone; but when so many are brought over to them, others follow
if it be only for company; and many Men are drawn in even contrary to their
inclinations, by the Example of others, because they do not care to be
singular, nor to be reproached for being so, but are willing to do what they
see so many others do, and hope they shall fare as well as they, and escape all
the seeming dangers of their Sins, both here and hereafter, as well as the rest
of their Neighbors, or the great number of their fellow Sinners. Now this,
however common and powerful it be, yet is the most unreasonable thing in the
World; for is any Man in another case willing to be sick, or to dye, for
company? Is any so easy or so complaisant as to pledge another in a cup of
Poison? Or would he not stop the mad Frolic when he saw the rest of the
company drop down dead before him? Is any Man unwilling to avoid the Plague if
he can, because there is a general infection, and because so many of his
Neighbors or his Acquaintance have dyed of it? Would any refuse the saving his
Life, and escaping if he could upon a plank, because the rest of his company
are sinking and drowning? Did Men think it as much worth their while to save
their Souls as their Lives, how many others soever lost them, had they as just
and terrible apprehensions of their own Damnation as they have of their dying,
this Temptation of Example and Company would be quickly taken off, and signify
nothing: For alas, what comfort will it be in the flames of Hell to hear so
many others roaring and howling in them? To hear their hideous cries, and
tortures, and lamentations, will not abate their own, but rather increase them;
therefore the Rich Man in the Parable, Luke 16.28. did not desire the company
of his Brethren there, but rather sought to prevent their coming into that
place of torment. The Devils indeed, from the unaccountable malice of their
Nature, tempt others to be as wicked and as miserable as themselves, and every
one does their work who entices another to any Sin, but this will not ease
their pains but augment them, by adding more mischief, and so more guilt to
them.

No Man who knows what it is to be happy, but must wish to be so, though he were
alone, and no Man who knows that Virtue alone is the way to be happy, but must
choose to be Virtuous though he saw never so many others Wicked; let them
reproach and laugh at him as long as they please for a Man singular and by
himself, let them count his Life folly for being so strict and so precise, if
it be, in the great matters of Virtue, for not Drinking to the utmost pitch,
not daring to Swear the least Oath as other Gentlemen do, not running into any
the same excess of Riot, or customary Wickedness, but living up strictly to the
Rules of the Gospel, and the Terms of Salvation there laid down, without any
such abatements as the loose Opinions or the loose Practices of others are
willing to put upon them, since God will not alter his Methods or Judgments by
any of those, let them, I say, condemn or deride him never so much for this,
and call him precise Fool, or formal Saint, or the like, yet no Man that knows
the good of Virtue will be laughed out of it by a nickname, or be ashamed of
being singular in that any more than in any other excellency of Learning or
Knowledge above others; and I suppose none of those who are so much against
singularity, but would be willing to be Rich though never so many others were
Poor, and why not then to be Virtuous, which is ten times more valuable, though
never so many others were Vicious. Example indeed is very prevailing, and like
a Contagion spreads and diffuseth it self very secretly and insensibly, and
infects all about it, because it begets the same thoughts, the same faise
principles, and so makes Men have less sense of the evil of Sin, and of the
danger of it, but where a Man has fixed and steady thoughts of those, there the
power of Example and the Temptation of it to unwary and unsettled Minds, is
taken off and removed.

Having examined those Enticements and Temptations by which Men are generally
deluded into the deceitfulness of Sin, and exposed the false Reasonings and
Sophistry, which impose upon them, and persuade them to commit it, I shall now
offer the many Motives and Encouragements, and greater Arguments, to make Men
leave their Sins, and persuade them to Repentance. And here I shall, I.
Consider the Motives to Repentance from the Reason and Nature of the thing. II.
Those which are peculiar to Revelation and proper to Christianity, of which
this is the great Duty.


SECT. II. Motives to Repentance from Reason.
THE Motives to Repentance from the Reason and Nature of the thing, such as
would persuade a Wise Heathen, or any Man of Sense and Understanding, to
Repent, after he had been foolish and wicked, These must be taken from the
manifold evil and mischief of his Sins and Vices, which though they invited him
at first with the appearing charms of Pleasure, or some other seeming good, yet
now he finds upon a better Consideration, and a serious Reflection upon them,
that they are poisonous and bitter, painful and irksome, and have a thousand
ill consequences and shameful effects that do necessarily attend them, and are
the cursed Fruit that spring out of that root of bitterness; that though they
are a little pleasant to the taste, yet they are Gall and Wormwood in the
Stomach; and like the Grapes of Sodom, though they look fair to the eye, yet
they are but bitter and poisonous, as the poison of dragons, and the venom of
asps, Deuteronomy. 32.33. and that there was little or no fruit in those things
whereof he is now ashamed, and besides, that the end of those things is death,
Romans 6.21. That he has Naturally an inward fear and dread of a Divine Nemesis
and Vengeance hanging over his head, and of some grievous Punishment or Evil
befalling him for any ill thing he has done, and that he finds by his own wiser
thoughts and better observations, now that he has given himself leave to think,
and to consider things over again with calm Thoughts and sober Reason, after
that his Lusts are cool, and his Passions more sedate, that Sin is but
disguised misery, that it is the mother of all evil and mischief, as it is the
daughter of folly and inconsideration, that the most tempting Vice is but as a
Pandar, whose ways lead to death and destruction, Prove. 3.17. and that Virtue
is the only true way to Comfort and Happiness, That the ways of that are ways
of pleasantness, and all its paths are peace, ver. 3. and that the effect of it
is quietness and ossurance for ever, Isa. 32.17. So that we must suppose such
an one brought to Repentance by such Considerations, and by such a Method as
this following.

1. He is brought to think and consider by some Accident, Affliction or
Judgment, by Sickness or the fear of Death, or something that awakens his Mind,
and the powers of Reason and Thinking, which rouse his stupid and senseless
Soul, and excites his Lethargick drowsy Faculties, dozed with brutishness and
sensuality, and which does, in the Scripture Phrase, bring him to himself, Luke
15.17. This is generally done not only by the Grace of God working inwardly
upon his Mind, but by something else also at the same time, from without which
touches him to the quick, and enters like Joseph's fetters even into his Soul,
and with its piercing keenness stimulates, and even forces him to attend and
consider, and think, whether he will or no, of his Spiritual state and
condition, and then when he looks about him, he fees what a woeful state he is
in, deep and in the mire of Sin and Guilt; to go forward he is afraid, for he
now sees the dreadful precipice before him, which he discerned not before, when
he ran blindfold into Sin, or without sense or fear of danger, as the horse
rushes into the battle, and how to go back he knows not, it is so difficult, and
he is so plunged in the depth of wickedness, but he sees he must perish
inevitably if he do not struggle, and do what he can, and endeavor to the
utmost to get out of his miserable condition, so he prays to God to help him,
and sadly bewails himself, and laments, and weeps over his wretched case which
he finds himself in, and has brought himself to: He repents and grieves for his
past folly, and is now willing to repair and amend it, and to snatch himself,
if he can, as a brand out of the fire, and to lay hold upon some plank that may
save him from sinking in this dreadful storm, wherein he finds he has
shipwreckt his Conscience, and the waters are gone over his Soul, and he is
ready to be swallowed up of the gulf of destruction, then he makes Vows to
Heaven, and whilst the same thoughts continue upon his Mind, resolves to keep
them, and if they go not off when the storm is over, or he do not forget them
when he comes to shore, and is set upon dry land, but these strong impressions
last upon his Mind, and leave a due sense abiding upon his Soul, even when the
violent cause is over, and the affliction is removed, then he is like to be a
good Man, and to repent in earnest, and these thunder-strokes of Providence may
not only startle and rouse him, but as is reported of some Animals, they may
make him conceive and bring forth a new and holy Life, and be available to his
true Conversion and Repentance, and I believe this is Gods usual way by which
he begins to effect this upon most Sinners, by thus bringing them to some
serious thinking and considering. It is very great Mercy when God thus checks
them in their career, and calls to them by the loud voice of his Judgments, and
thus, as he generally does, puts the first stop to them, and makes them bethink
themselves and consider; but then this method must not only awaken, but keep
their eyes open, and make them see and consider those other Thoughts and
Reasons which are the more proper seminal Principles that will be more likely
to produce and beget this true Repentance. Such as are,

2. In the second place, a serious reflection and thorough conviction of the
Evil that is in Sin, and of the real Good of Virtue, as the only thing which
can make us truly happy; for till Men have brought themselves to be fully
persuaded and convinced of this, and to believe it as firmly as they do any
truth in Mathematics, or any other Science, they will never be brought truly
to Repent, that is, to dislike, and hate, and renounce the one, and heartily to
love, and pursue, and embrace the other; for Men will still love their Sins,
and hanker after them, and be ready to comply and close with them upon every
occasion; if they only fall out with them sometimes, as Lovers do with what
they like and admire, and though there may be some bickerings between them, and
some penitential passions and resentments now and then, yet they may still have
their Heart, if they do not upon wise observations and thorough convictions,
believe them to be enemies to their Welfare and Happiness, to the comfort of
their Lives here, and their Eternal Salvation hereafter, and that they get
nothing by them but poor, and empty, and sickly pleasures, but that they bring
substantial misery, and bitter remorse and anguish of Mind, and a thousand
mischiefs and inconveniences along with them at present, besides the terrible
hazards and dangers of another World, so that they are by no means to be loved
or chosen, if we love our selves, or choose our own Happiness: For we must
bring it to this, if we would be steady and certain, to the first Principles of
Self-preservation, and a desire of our own Happiness, which lies at the root of
our Nature, and what we shall always act upon, if we rightly understand it,
and do not grossly err and mistake about it, and a few wise observations, and a
little sober thinking and considering will easily satisfy us, and fully
convince us, that Vice is the certain cause of misery to us, and that Virtue is
the only way to be truly easy and happy. The Sinner will be convinced of this
by his own experience, when he reflects upon his past follies, and sees how
little he has got by his Sins but shame and sorrow, and trouble of Mind,
perhaps a sickly and diseased Body, and a wasted Estate, and wretched Beggary,
and every thing that shall make him miserable in this World, before he goes to
the greater misery of another. For do we not daily see this, how one Man brings
himself by his Sins to a morsel of bread, how he shipwrecks his Fortunes as
well as his Conscience, by Luxury and Prodigality, another consumes his Body as
well as his Estate by Debauchery, Lust and Intemperance; by these they sin, as
the Apostle remarks, against their own Bodies as well as against their Souls;
they make them bear the scars and marks of their Sins upon them, and become
Martyrs in the Devils service, and endure often more torture of Body for their
Sins, than other Martyrs have done for their Religion; sacrifice their Lives to
them, and by living too fast, as they call it, bring an untimely death upon
themselves, and are in so much have sometimes to dye, that their Bodies often
rot before they come into their graves. If these mischiefs do not follow all
Sins, yet some others do, and the greatest of all is inseparable from them,
which is torment and anguish of Conscience, and pain and uneasiness of Mind,
which every Man feels, unless his Conscience be stupefied and mortified, which
is a worse state than the other, upon the commission of any great Sin, and this
is ten times greater than any fancied pleasure in it: This is a sting, a wound,
a prick upon the most tender part of a Man's Soul, a dart struck through his
Liver, a Worm gnawing upon his Vitals; nothing is so close and so cutting a
pain and misery as a Man's own ill Conscience, when it is let loose upon him,
and like a Fury falls upon him with its utmost rage, lashes him with its snaky
whips, and burns him with its fiery torches, it is then a Devil let loose, and a
Hell kindled within his own bosom. They who have felt but a little of it, know
it is more exquisite pain than any belongs to the Body, and what is it then to
endure this for ever, and lie under that, and the further anger of God to all
Eternity. Oh madness and folly, that wants a name, that will do this for any
Sin whatever! Oh the dreadful Evil of Sin, that brings all this, and so many
other mischiefs upon us! But,

3. Virtue on the contrary, has a thousand Comforts, Blessings and Goods,
belonging to it, which should make us love it as we do our selves, and choose
it as heartily and firmly as we do our own Happiness. When we rightly
understand and consider it, we shall find Reason to do so; that neither
disturbs our Mind, nor diseases our Body, nor squanders away our Estate, nor
brings any reproach and discredit along with it, as Vice generally does; and it
takes away no real Good, or true Pleasure, or proper Enjoyment from us, but it
allows us all that we can desire, or that our Nature was made for, within the
due bounds and limits of our Duty, and within those we may enjoy as much
Virtuously and Innocently, as the greatest Liberty and Debauchery can afford
the Sinner. Virtue does not destroy our Pleasures, but refines and purifies
them, and so makes them sweeter and better, and draws them off from the
filthiness, and sediment, and bitterness that lies always at the bottom of all
sinful Pleasures and Enjoyments.

No Man ever repented of his Virtues, or was sorry that he had done a good
Action, but he finds great comfort and satisfaction within himself when he
reflects upon it, and it is a prop and stay to his Mind, and he rests securely
upon it, and is cheerful, confident, and erect under all accidents, and all
dangers and difficulties whatsoever. His Heart stands right, and approves it
self to God, and to his own thoughts, having no ill designs, no base and mean
ends and purposes, but such only as are good and virtuous, and this gives him
great peace, firmness of Mind, and bravery of Spirit, and he feels an inward
strength and vigor in himself, and the constant springs of joy and comfort
rising up in his own breast, and overflowing his Soul.

But Vice sneaks and is cowardly, and fills a Man with fear and confusion, and
all the mean, and little, and uneasy, and tormenting Passions that belong to
Humane Nature.

Virtue approves it self to our Reason, and agrees with the native sense of our
own Minds, and has a Natural beauty and loveliness that commends it to our
first sight and apprehension, and makes it amiable and desirable, esteemed and
honored, and admired by every one, even by those who forsake it, who cannot
but be so just to it, as to commend and approve it very often in others.

But Vice has a Natural ugliness and deformity that makes Men ashamed of it
after they have committed it, and commit it in darkness and obscurity, and
after to deny and extenuate it, as being presently sensible of the folly and
undecency, and unreasonableness of it, as having done what they cannot
justify, and what presently flies in their faces, if they have not a brow of
Brass, and a forehead of Steel. It is contrary and awry to our own Nature, and
against the first sense and tenderness of our own Minds, so that great violence
must be used to commit it at first, and great pain follows upon it. It Is a
force, a Rape upon the Virgin-modesty, and the Natural sense of Good and Evil
that we are born with.

Virtue has always very good and desirable effects upon us in this Life, as
well as great Rewards in another. It Is in the Wise Man's Phrase, and in a true
literal sense, Health to our navel, and marrow to our bones, Prove. 3.8. It
keeps our Bodies in good plight, neither drains or exhausts them with forced
Pleasures, or unruly Passions, nor choaks or suffocates them with immoderate
loads, nor drowns and washes them away with floods of drink, and cups of
intemperance.

It brings a Blessing of God upon our Estates, and often makes us Rich by the
help of Industry and Frugality, whilst nothing is so expensive, and so
impoverishing as Vice, which spends many times all upon its Lusts, and the
hungry Wolf comes often to the door where the Swine and the Goat have been used
to dwell. Though Virtue may not always bring abundance, neither is it
desirable always to a wise Man, though Solomon puts Riches as the common
Blessing in the left hand of Wisdom, Prove. 3.16. yet it makes a little that the
righteous has better than great riches of the ungodly, Ps. 37.16.

Honor and a good Name do more certainly belong to Virtue than Riches, and
whilst Vice brings a blot and a reproach upon a Man's Credit, Virtue makes him
loved, and honored, and esteemed by all that know him while he lives, and
embalms his Name when he is dead, and makes his Memory to be precious.

But above all, it makes a Man truly easy and happy within himself; it secures
him the peace and tranquillity of his own Mind, which is the greatest happiness
in the World: So that all Natural Good, and all that is desirable to Humane
Nature, grows as a proper Fruit out of Virtue, which is the true Root that
Naturally brings forth all Good, as Sin does all Evil; and these are so annexed
to them by the nature and constitution of things as effects to their proper
causes, that nothing can cut them off or precide them, and these besides all
the super-added Motives of revealed Religion, are by plain Reason and
observation of things, very strong Arguments to bring Men off from Vice to
Virtue, i. e. to true Repentance.

4. Therefore Fourthly, A wise Man when he comes to reflect and consider, finds
that that which hindered him from seeing all this before, was only his foolish
Lusts, and his corrupt senfual Inclinations, and his strong Passions, and
violent and unreasonable Appetites, which blinded his Reason and clouded his
Judgment, and darkened his Understanding, and besotted, intoxicated and
bewitched him, i. e. by some unaccountable ways hindered him from discerning
and considering these things which are so plain and evident, and therefore the
reason why he before chose Vice and forsook Virtue, was because he did not see
and consider this, nor was so truly convinced of the Evil of Sin, and the Good
of Virtue, but now he has quite other thoughts and apprehensions about them,
and therefore he is changed in his Will and his Affections, by this change
wrought in his Mind, and his Understanding; and this being a lasting and
effectual change upon all the inward principles of action, has a necessary
influence upon his outward actions that are always moved and turned by those
inward springs and wheels within us; for though a Man is still at liberty, and
is under no force and compulsion from without, but acts freely from within
himself, yet his Will will follow the last dictate of his Understanding, and he
will not choose Evil as Evil, when he apprehends it to be so, and he must some
way have his Reason corrupted, and judge falsely and erroneously, before he will
practice so: Omnis peccans ignorant. If he has a true and lively sense of the
Good of Virtue abiding upon his Mind, he will not choose Vice again: It Is this
sense, I doubt not, confirms the blessed Spirits above, and will do the Souls
of all good Men in Heaven, when they see and know this so perfectly that 'twill
be impossible for them to fall, but now we see things darkly, and judge weakly,
and often change and alter our Minds, as not having such a clear view of
things, nor attending so closely to the dictates of impartial Reason, but our
thoughts are often lured off by the temptations of the Flesh, and our Minds
hearken but to one side, to the false reasonings and suggestions of the Devil
and our own Lusts, or are surprised with the sudden importunity of a
temptation, before they can recollect themselves. Else no Man could say, Video
meliora proboque deteriora sequor, for we cannot but love and choose Good when
we apprehend it, and hate and abhor Evil when it is visible and naked to us. We
must therefore strip Vice of its disguise and its false colors, and wash off
its paint and meretricious charms, and see it as it is in its deformity and
ugliness, and in the miserable and sad consequences of it, and then we shall
hate that which we once loved, and throw away the gilded poison, and shake the
smooth and shining Viper off of our hands, and cast the rotten curtizan from
our arms and embraces.

We shall be ashamed that we were so cheated and imposed upon, so deluded by
the deceitfulness of sin, that we were so weak as to be governed by our mean
passions and low inclinations, which are the imperfection and the soft side of
our Nature, and that we should not live up to that Reason which is proper to
us, and distinguishes us from brutes, that we should hearken only to the
desires of our Senses and our inferior Appetites, and not to the wise voice
and dictates of Reason and Understanding which God had given us. We shall be
convinced of the folly of this, and see the many ill effects that have come of
it, when we consider rightly, and weigh things impartially, and make judgment
not by our Lusts and Passions, but by right Reason and Wisdom, and shall
condemn our selves when we grow cool, for all the mad frollicks and
extravagancies we committed in the heat of folly, and shall then feel the pains
and wounds they gave us, though we were not sensible of them before. Then we
shall see that danger which before we were not duly aware of, and have a dread
and terror of that upon our Minds which is the due punishment of our Sins; for
the consciousness of our own guilt will fill us with terrible fears, and we
shall find the burden greater than we can bear, but how fully to get rid of it
is a defect, and a desideratum in Natural Religion, and therefore we must go
further than that for the other Motives to Repentance, which are fetched from
Revelation, and from the Gospel and Christianity under which God now commands
all men to Repent, as St. Paul says, Acts 17.30. now more than heretofore,
namely, by some more proper and peculiar Motives, greater than Mankind had
before to encourage them to this Duty, such as I shall come now to consider,
and shall offer very largely.

SECT. III. Motives to Repentance from the Gospel.
1. NOW then by Revelation and the Gospel we have an assurance of Gods
pardoning us upon our Repentance, which the World could not have without a
Revelation, for this depends upon the free Will, and anbitrary Pleasure of God,
to which he is not obliged by his Essential and Natural Goodness, and of which
we cannot be certainly assured without an express Promise and Divine
Revelation. Nature taught all Mankind that there was a God, the knowledge of
this is not to be had from Revelation, but must be supposed as previous and
antecedent to it; we learn it not from the Bible, but from the great Volume of
Nature that lies every where written before us with the plainest Marks of an
Infinite, and Perfect, and Wise God, and in that, the Characters of his
Goodness are as legible as these of his Power and Wisdom, by making his Sun to
shine on the evil and on the good, and sending Rain on the just and the unjust,
and by other the Natural provisions and contrivances for the good of his
Creatures, God has shown himself to be no evil and malicious Principle, as some
Heretics imagined, but a Being of Goodness, which is an Essential Perfection
of his Nature, and as Natural and Necessary to him as his very Being. And this
Goodness belongs to him not only as a Creator but a Governor, and obliges him
not to condemn an innocent Creature, nor inflict more misery upon it than he
gives it good by its Being. His Natural Justice, as well as his Goodness,
hinders him from doing any injury by his Power, or acting contrary to the
unalterable Rules of Right and Wrong, from dooming Men to Misery by an Eternal
Decree before they had offended him, from punishing any one more than he
deserves, for the fault of another, and for any fault of its own that was
wholly inevitable and unavoidable, but after Men have wilfully offended God,
and been guilty of voluntary Crimes, and presumptuous Disobedience against his
known and Righteous Laws, and so fallen under his just Anger and Displeasure,
that then he should not punish them as they deserve, this his Natural Goodness
does no way require of him; if it did, then he could never punish any Sin, nor
make any use of the Sword of Justice, but his Goodness would tie up his hands,
and put a necessary and constant restraint upon him, which would make it wholly
inconsistent with his other Attributes, and with his wise Government of the
World, in order to which it is more necessary to punish Sin than to forgive it.
If it be not inconsistent then with Goodness to punish Sin, it is not necessary
from that, it should be forgiven, and God is not obliged to do this from his
Essential or Natural Goodness, but it depends upon a more Free and Arbitrary
Grace and Goodness that was not included in the Natural Knowledge of God, or in
the Notion of the Divine Goodness, as a necessary part of it, and so not
knowable by the Light of Nature. Gods Goodness is over all his Works, and yet,
so far as we know, he never offered forgiveness to a great number of his
Creatures when they once rebelled against him, and yet the Devils themselves
can bring no just impeachment against the Divine Goodness notwithstanding that,
no more could we have done if God had dealt thus with Mankind, if he had
punished us as soon as we wilfully broke his Laws, and never admitted us to
Pardon. A good Lawgiver is bound only to give righteous and good Laws to his
Subjects, and if they break them they make themselves justly liable to the
punishment that was threatened, and it is no more contrary to Goodness to inflict
that, then it was at first to threaten it; and though that be very severe and
terrible, yet if it exceed not the merit of the Crime, i. e. if it be no
greater than is necessary for the ends of Government, for that is the only true
and full measure by which the proportion of the Fault and the Punishment can be
adjusted, it is no way contrary to the Goodness of the Governor to see it
executed. I do not think he is always obliged to punish by his vindictive
Justice, no more than he is obliged to pardon by his Essential Goodness, but
here his Prerogative rogative takes place, and there is room either to pardon
or to punish as he pleases, without regard to any Law or Obligation. Mercy
which is a relaxing of a Law, is due by no Law, if it were it would make void
all other Laws, it would be not a relaxing or an abating of a Law, but a
correcting all other Laws by a Law that is superior to them, and so it would
be an injury or a denying a Legal Right, not to grant it where that snperiour
Law required it, but it is a pure, and arbitrary, and undue favor shown to one
that has no manner of right or claim to it, which a supreme Governor, who has
a Power paramount to all Law, may by virtue of that, grant or deny by the mere
motion and free inclination of his own good pleasure. So that Mankind could not
know that God would do this, would be so good as to forgive their wilful Sins
and Offenses against him from his Natural Goodness, nor could have any certain
grounds to be assured of this, but by his own express promise, and positive
declaration of this his free Grace and good Will toward them. They might have
some faint hopes, and probable surmizes, and small expectations of this from
his Natural Goodness, as Malefactors may presume and hope such a thing from the
temper and disposition of a good Governor, but they could not necessarily
conclude it, or be any way ascertained of it. They might have such an uncertain
encouragement to hope this, as the Men of Niniveh had, Jonah 3.9. Who can tell
if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we
perish not; and this was as high as Men's hopes could rise without a Revelation
of Gods pardoning them upon Repentance. Their Repentance indeed was the most
likely means to turn away his fierce Anger, and the best thing they could do,
but they could not be certain that this would succeed and be effectual, but in
their greatest Humiliation, and Mourning, and Fasting, they must with a
doubtful Heart, and a trembling Hand, offer their Petitions to Heaven, as a
condemned Prisoner does to his angry Judge or incensed Prince, not knowing
whether he will vouchsafe to hearken to it, or so much as to cast his eye upon
it. The greatest encouragement to Repentance is our being sure that it will
obtain our Pardon, and restore us certainly to Favor, and set us right in the
Court of Heaven; and since we that know this can yet very hardly be persuaded
to a Duty that is not so very pleasant or so very easy, with what
disadvantages must those who knew not this, be brought to it; with what
desponding fears and uncertain hopes must the Prodigal, Luke 15. take a weary
journey, and return home to his Fathers house, who knew not whether he should
be admitted or no when he came there; with what a doubtful and perplexed Mind,
with what weary paces and dispirited motions must he take every step thither,
when he could not tell what he should meet with at his journeys end, but had
too much reason to fear he should for ever be cast out and excluded, as he
might have been by his good Father; and this must be the case of the most
penitent Sinner, and of all Mankind, when without a Revelation they had no
assurance of Pardon, though upon their Repentance, but only an uncertain hope
and presumption of it; but now the greatest Sinner who has lived never so
prodigally and wickedly, has a thousand times greater encouragements to return,
and leave off all his vicious and riotous courses of living, because he is most
certainly assured that if he does so his Heavenly Father will receive him with
open arms, and the heartiest embraces, and treat him as kindly and indulgently
as if he had served him many years, neither had transgrest at any time his
commandment, ver. 29. In a word, we have the same encouragements to repent and
leave our Sins now under the Gospel, as Rebels have to come in and lay down
their Arms when there is a Proclamation of Pardon, and an Act of Indemnity past
to all that do so, whereas before there was only an uncertain presumption of
the Princes Mercy, which they could not be sure of without a Revelation.

2. We have not only Pardon given us upon promise now, but granted upon a most
valuable consideration, and founded upon a full Expiation of Guilt and
Atonement of Sin by a Sacrifice, the most perfect Sacrifice of the Son of God,
and so purchased for us, and made over to us by a Covenant established and
confirmed by the Blood of Christ. Pardon of Sin is so great a thing, so
Princely and so singular a favor, the greatest Act indeed that a Prince can
do, and it is so desirable, so comfortable to a poor Criminal, than which
nothing in the World can be more valuable to him, that it can never be too well
assured to us, and we can never be too much satisfied in it. Guilt is always
so fearful and timorous, so terrible and so uneasy a thing; it is such a heavy
load and burden lying upon a Man's Mind, such a deep wound upon the tenderest
part of a Man's Soul, that like a prick upon a Nerve, it puts the whole Man into
convulsions and agonies, and fills him with unexpressible pains and tortures.
There is no such rack, no such Hell indeed, as what is set up and kindled in a
Man's own breast by his guilty Conscience, when he is haunted by his own Sins as
so many Hellish Fiends, and lasht by them like so many snaky Furies, that
poison and sting him to the very Heart, and his own fears of Vengeance and
future Punishment, represent sad and frightful images, like to so many
Specters, always appearing before his Mind, and therefore there is no such
comfort as that which delivers us from Guilt, no such (...), or blessed news,
as what our Savior pronounces to a Sinner by the Gospel, Son be of good cheer,
thy sins are forgiven thee; there is no such anodine as that which plucks out
the sting of Sin, and takes away the pains and the smartings of a wounded
Conscience; that which does this puts not only Oil into the Wounds, but new
Life into the fainting Soul; it is like taking a Man off from the Rack or the
Wheel, and giving him more ease than he feels when he has just voided a Stone
after a sharp fit. And therefore the Remedy that does this is the most choice,
the most precious and valuable thing in the World: What that is we now know by
the Gospel, but Mankind could not know by Natural Light, what would expiate
Sin, and certainly take away Guilt; and therefore the Heathens, though they
tried all means by their Lustrations, Sacrifices, Purgations, and other ways,
(for the sense of their Guilt put them upon all attempts to get rid of it) yet
they could never find what would certainly do it, but must be still fearful and
melancholy under their acknowledged Guilt and unattoned Crimes. Whether
thousand of rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil would be accepted as a price of
their Sins they could not tell, or whether it would not cost more to redeem a
Soul, whether if they brought their firstborn, and offered the fruit of their
Bodies for the sin of their Souls, or offered up their own Blood as was
sometimes done, 'twould be effectual was very uncertain; but there was nothing
they thought too dear it seems, nothing, however cruel either to themselves or
others, that they would stick at in hopes to accomplish this. The most
barbarous and inhumane superstition of the Heathen World in offering up their
Children to Molech; in offering the Sacrifices of Men, which was no unusual
thing among them, arose from the great straight and the great darkness they
were in, as to the expiation of Guilt, and the atonement of Sin, which was so
dreadful, so painful, that they could not bear it, and yet knew not how to
remove it. But now God be thanked, we have that which should cheer up our
Spirits, and put us upon a hearty and a speedy Repentance from all our Sins,
because upon our doing this, we have the Blood of Christ, and the Sacrifice of
the Lamb of God, to deliver us from all Sin. That which the World was so
anxiously, so concernedly, and yet so vainly seeking after before, that is only
to be had and only made known by the Gospel Revelation, the full and perfect,
and certain Expiation of Guilt, which is the greatest Argument and
Encouragement to Repentance: for without that, it is not all our Repentance will
take away our past Guilt; it is not our greatest sorrow, or most penitent tears,
will wash away the stains and guilt of our Sins, unless they are mixed with, and
have all their virtue from the Blood of Christ; and it is not they indeed, or
any thing we can do, that has any proper virtue or efficacy to do this, but
only the Sacrifice of Christ. Repentance is a necessary disposition and
qualification in us, without which no Sacrifice can be available to us, if it
does not as the Scripture speaks, Purge our Consciences, and so purify as well
as atone, which is a strong Consideration to enforce this Duty, because without
it we lose all the benefit of this Sacrifice; but it is not our Repentance that
can either purchase, or procure, or pay for our Pardon, or that can any way
challenge, or upon any account merit or pretend a right to it, be it never so
exact; for by what rules of Justice does it discharge our past arrears of
wickedness, though we stop now and run no further on in the score? What do we
more by leaving our Sins, and becoming good now, than we ought always to have
done, and always were obliged to? or how shall we make that which is past and
done to be undone as it were, and the old account to be blotted out, and the
past Guilt done away? It Is only the Meritorious Sacrifice of Christ can do
this, and whether God could do this without any Sacrifice I will not dispute,
because I know not the Measures of the Divine Government, nor the Secrets of
his Wisdom and Counsel, but by a Sacrifice it is much better obtained and
assured to us, as being granted upon the account of something that was given in
stead of it, and that is worth it indeed in fair Justice, for so was the Blood
of the Son of God of equal value to the Souls of all Mankind, though I
acknowledge it depends upon the free pleasure of the Governor to accept or
refuse such a satisfaction and compensation as was made by that or by any
Sacrifice, yet all this being transacted in such a Method, being granted upon a
valuable Consideration, and being made over to us by a formal Covenant and
standing Agreement, ratified and sealed by the Blood of Christ, as well as a
bare Promise: So that by all these immutable things in which it was impossible
for God to lie, we might have strong consolation, Heb. 6.18. we have hereby the
greatest comfort, the highest satisfaction and assurance in the World given us,
of that which we can never be too much assured of, and which is of the nearest
and closest concern to us in the World, the Pardon of our Sins, and the
Expiation of all our Guilt, which is only to be had, and only fully discovered
by the Gospel; and it is indeed the greatest thing in which the Gospel consists,
as it is different from Natural Religion.

3. From hence, namely, from the Sacrifice and Death of Christ arise new
Motives, and fresh and most endearing Obligations to perfwade all Christians to
repent and leave their Sins. The very Nature of a Sacrifice carries these in
it, and was designed to offer the strongest Motives against Sin at the same
time that it procures Pardon for it. It is the wisest expedient that could ever
be thought of, to show Justice and Severity, and yet Mercy and Clemency at the
fame time; to put a Governor into those two different Capacities, both at once
to forgive, and yet to punish the same person, and to show him to be neither
too easy nor yet implacable, but by an admirable temper and mixture of two
Virtues and two Passions that seem contrary to one another, it finds out a way
to spare the Man, and yet show the greatest displeasure to his Sin, neither to
suffer the Guilty to perish, nor yet the Guilt to be unpunished; so that hereby
the greatness of the Guilt and the greatness of Gods Anger, is as visible
against the Sin in the sufferings of the Sacrifice, as if the offender himself
had suffered; and we have Reasons to dread it the more, even because it is
forgiven us; but we have stronger Reasons, I think, to do this, out of
gratitude to that dear Person who was pleased to become a Sacrifice for us, and
from the consideration of his Love, and what he has done for us, we have most
particular and strong engagements to leave our Sins: For it is the highest
ingratitude, and the most disobliging thing to him that can be to continue in
them, who suffered for this very end, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and cleanse us from all our sins; it is a spoiling all his great
undertaking for us, making void his Passion in effect, and making his Blood to
be but like common Water spilt upon the ground, and yet it is a renewing his
Passion at the same time, A crucifying to our selves the Son of God afresh, and
putting him to an open shame, Heb. 6.6. It Is like running the Spear again into
his Side, making new Wounds in his Breast, and pricking him to the very Heart;
it is doing that which is more displeasing to him than his very Cross, which he
willingly underwent rather than we should live and dye in our Sins. Look then,
O unworthy and impenitent Christian, upon thy Savior offering up himself a
Sacrifice for thee, and consider what a mighty Argument his Death is to
persuade thee to Repent. Do not thy Sins look terrible when thou see them
through the Blood of Christ, and can thou have any hopes that God who spared
not his own Son, will spare thee, if thou continuest in them? And how great are
the Characters of his Love, which are there written in his own Blood? and will
not so much Love prevail upon thee to leave thy Sins, were there nothing else?
How does thy dying Savior, with his expanded Arms, and his Head hanging down,
beseech and entreat thee, and speak to thee as it were from every gaping Wound
in his broken Body, to forsake and renounce those Sins which crucified him, and
for which he dyed? And if with the belief of a Christian thou have but the
Passions of a Man, this cannot but strongly affect and move thee.

4. Christianity and the Gospel set forth and show us the true Nature and Evil
of our Sins, in a better light, and by greater considerations, than Mankind had
before; Sin was always known to be a weakness and imperfection of our Nature,
gratifying a low passion, a foolish humor, a silly custom, acting in
opposition to Reason, and doing things quite contrary to our own wise and calm
thoughts, but by rashness and inconsideration doing that which we shall
afterward repent of, and condemn our selves for, and wish we had never done,
and what we know will tend more to our mischief and prejudice than any real
good to us, only it pleases our fancy, and tickles our senses, and is a little
grateful to us at present; so that it is a sort of Childishness, and want of
Understanding, and of Manly and Rational Government of our selves to yield to
it, and be overcome by it, this it must appear to any thinking Man, to a
Heathen and Philosopher that considered the nature of things, and the
difference of Good and Evil that arose from thence, and therefore that to
repent of it was as necessary as for a Man to act wisely and reasonably, not to
do what is weak and foolish, below the Nature and the Reason of a Man; but now
Christ, besides all this, has represented Sin in more ugly and frightful
characters by the Gospel, as that which had thrown all Mankind into the most
miserable and lost condition, as the work of the Devil which he came to
destroy, as the device and stratagem of evil and malicious Spirits to destroy
us, so that whenever we are drawn into Sin we are drawn in by the Devil, and
used as tools by cunning infernal Fiends, who this way overreach us, and sport
themselves in our ruin and destruction; so that when we think we are enjoying
our Pleasures, and gratifying our Lusts, and using the freedoms and liberties
of Humane Nature, we are but inveigled by those Devils with the baits they lay
for us, and the snares they every where set to entrap us, and are mere slaves
and properties to their cunning and cursed designs upon us, so that Christ came
to rescue us from those by calling us to Repentance, to rescue us from the
snares of the Devil, and redeem us from that servitude and slavery whereby we
are led captive by him. Christianity better acquaints us also with the Nature
of Sin and the Evils of it, than Nature could by showing us the ruins it had
made upon Mankind, and the cost and expenses Heaven was at to repair Humane
Nature; by letting us see the wretched and miserable estate the Sins of Mankind
had thrown them into irrecoverably without a Savior. Our Salvation by that
stupendous and mysterious way makes the greatness of our danger, and the
mischief of our Sins, more evidently known to us, and the whole scheme and
contrivance of it contains other considerations against Sin than Natural
Religion could ever have known or suggested; for by this Sin appears further to
be so malignant and hateful to God, so detestable and odious in his sight, and
so contrary to his wise Government of the World, that he would not pardon it
without the Blood of his own Son shed as an atonement for it, nor forgive it to
Mankind without such a valuable compensation and satisfaction made for it, as
that was. Now this demonstrates to us above any thing its abominable and
displeasing Nature to God, and that according to the wise Rules and Maxims of
his Government, by which he manages the World, it must suffer and be severely
punished, and that there was no escaping of this but by an extraordinary
contrivance of Divine Wisdom and Mercy, which found out a way by Jesus Christ
to save Sinners by Repentance. Sin is a greater debt, a more deep provocation
to Heaven, a more horrid affront to Divine Power and Authority, a more
considerable injury to the good of the World, and to the Justice and Holiness
of God, than to be easily forgiven and passed by, as we find by the mystery of
our Redemption, and the dispensation of Christianity, which shows us above any
thing the Nature and Evil of it, and consequently the great Reasons of our
Repenting from it.

5. As the Nature and Evil of Sin, fo the Consequences and Punishments of it
are greater by Christianity; and Christ by the threatening of those greater
Judgments upon it has called us more loudly to Repentance. Nature and the light
of Reason taught all Mankind the present and Natural Evils that were like so
many Curses cleaving to Sin, like Hercules his poisoned shirt clinging to it,
and sticking fast about it. God had annexed a world of evils and mischievous
effects to Vice and Wickedness, by the original settlement and fundamental
constitution of things; it was a disease to the Mind and a torment to the
Conscience, and very often a disease to the Body and rottenness to the Bones, a
wound to a Man's Credit and a blemish to his good Name, and an enemy to all his
Interests, and to all his Happiness in this World. These plain and necessary
effects of Sin Mankind could not but observe, as so many bitter Fruits
naturally growing out of it as from a proper Root, and like so many plagues
sent from Heaven steeming out of this Pandora's box: And these Natural
Punishments of Sin, and the other as Natural Goods and Rewards of Virtue, were
the true sanction of the Law of Nature. But besides all these, there are a
thousand times greater and more additional evils superadded to our Sins by
Christianity, if we do not in time Repent of them; there are the positive and
eternal evils of Sin in another World; for I can by no means call the Torments
of Hell Natural, which God has revealed to us by the Gospel. How little these
were known to the World before, I might show from the odd fancies of the wisest
Heathens about the transmigration of Souls, and the revolution of all things
within such a period of years; and whatever guess they had rather than belief
of Punishments for Sin in another World, yet that they should be so great as
the Scripture now represents them, and that they should be Eternal, which is
the most dreadful part of them, this can only be known from the Revelation and
Will of God, who may continue our being, and lengthen or shorten our duration
to what time he pleases, and therefore as Christ has brought Life and
Immortality to light by the gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. so in like manner he has
brought Hell and Damnation, and revealed such intolerable and greater
Punishments to Sin than the World knew before, as cannot but fright the most
daring Sinner, and make the fondest Sensualist part with his Lusts, when he
considers that all their tempting charms, and enticing gayety, and momentany
pleasures, shall end in nothing but Hellish torments, unquenchable flames, and
eternal howlings and gnashings of teeth, which must be owned to be a thousand
times greater than all the known, and visible, and Natural Evils of Sin.

SECT. IV. Motives to Repentance from the Consideration of Hell.
NOW because this is the greatest determent from Sin imaginable, and
consequently the greatest motive to Repentance that can possibly be given; for
nothing is so strong and powerful upon most Men as their fears, which is the
quickest and strongest Passion in Humane Nature, and is apt to make a very
great impression where nothing else will, and nothing can be so much an object
of our fear, as Hell and Eternal Misery, which is the utmost and most dreadful
Evil that can be either felt or imagined. I shall particularly and largely
offer and represent it to the Sinners thoughts, both as to its Nature,
consisting in the greatest pains and torments of Body and Mind, and in the most
wretched and miserable state and condition, and as all this is Eternal and
shall never have end: Both which, if heartily believed and seriously
considered, would have a mighty power and almost irresistible force to bring
Men off from their greatest Sins.

I. Then let us consider its Nature, as consisting of the greatest pains and
torments both of Body and Mind, and in the most wretched and miserable state
and condition. I shall not attempt fully to describe, or draw a picture of this
place of Torments, our imagination is to be helped out with all the known
instances of Misery, and so to form an Idea of that future, and unknown, and
invisible one: It is certain it must be adapted to those two parts of which we
consist, our Bodies and our Minds, and what are the proper Evils to either of
those we very well know, sensible Pain and great Anguish and Sorrow, and other
tormenting Passions, and these we must suppose in the highest degree to belong
to Hellish Misery; for as Heaven is the utmost good our Natures can possibly
receive, and are capable of, so Hell is the greatest evil, and as such is
represented to us by that Revelation which assures us of it, attended with the
most sad and woeful circumstances that can be imagined. I shall offer the
thoughts of it to the Sinner under such Ideas and Representations as are given
of it by the Holy Ghost in Scripture. And

1. We must conceive a horrid, dark and dismal dungeon in some deep cavern of
the Earth, designed for horror, and filled with the blackness of darkness, and
inhabited only by cursed Fiends, and frightful Ghosts and Devils, into which
the wretched Caitiff is to be thrown, bound hand and foot, and so cast into
outer darkness, Matthew. 22.13. and delivered into chains of darkness, 2 Pet.
2.4. Darkness is the Natural image and symbol of horror and disconsolateness,
as Light is of comfort and pleasantness; so that the Scripture expresses
Happiness by the dwelling in light, as it does Misery by being cast into outer
darkness, where there is not any beam of light, nor any the least glimpse of
joy and comfort. And thus to be shut up for ever in a place of darkness and
horror, and confined to this dismal and infernal Prison to all Eternity, would
be a dreadful Misery were there nothing else, but they are to be tormented
there as well as imprisoned, and that with the most exquisite pains and
tortures, as they are described to us, in the second place.

2. By Fire and Burning, which is the most terrible, the most keen and painful
of Bodily punishments, which enters the tender parts with pointed and piercing
fury, and dissolves and distorts them with its rapid motion, and has nothing to
abate its extreme cruelty, but that it quickly consumes and dispatches, and
spends it self with its own rage and violence, as well as destroys its
subject. But this is the dreadful Nature of that infernal Fire, that it never
goes out, but is, as the Scripture calls it, unquenchable, and that the
miserable wretches that are condemned to it, shall endure the pain and the rage
of it for ever, and shall never be consumed or destroyed by it, but shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb, and the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever
and ever, and they have no rest day nor night, Rev. 14.10, 11. Let us then set
before us a burning Lake of liquid Fire and melted Brimstone, like
Nebuchadnezzars fiery Furnace, heat seven times hotter than any thing we here
know, and the damned wretches cast into it, and like Dives sadly tormented in
those flames over all their parts, so that the Tongue is swelled with heat as
in a raging Fever, and nothing would be so comfortable to it as a drop of
Water to cool it, and to slake and abate the scorching Calenture. Some are
inclined to think all this but Allegory and Metaphor, and painted Fire, but the
Scripture speaks so often of it, that I cannot but think it may be literally
true, and that Fire is made the instrument of those Bodily pains that are there
to be suffered and inflicted after the general Judgment and Resurrection. Or
however that as great pains of Body are thereby signified and expressed, and
shall really be endured some way or other, as by burning in Fire: For if the
Holy Spirit to help our weak thoughts, and assist our imaginations, has made
use of those known things only as emblems and pictures of some real pains, yet
they are certainly as great or greater than any of those by which they are
shadowed out and represented, as the pleasure of Heaven is much greater, no
doubt, and does far exceed that of a Feast, a Wedding, a Crown, or any such
Earthly resemblance. As to the proper pain and torment of the Mind, which is
the other, and the greatest part of Hellish Misery, for the Mind has a more
quick, and keen, and immediate sense than the Body, that is represented in
Scripture by the worm which never dies, Matthew. 9.46. i. e. by a Passion that
bites, and gnaws, and corrodes, and pains us within, as the Fire, or something
else, torments the Body from without, and this includes in it all those dismal
and reflecting thoughts and apprehensions which the Mind has upon its dreadful
state and condition. As,

(1.) A direful perception of the Divine Anger, Wrath and Displeasure, which
when it lies heavy upon the Mind in the highest degree, will press it into the
deepest gulf of Misery, and fill it with the most terrible Ideas, and most
dreadful apprehensions. Even in this World, when a Sinner tastes but a little of
the Cup of Gods Fury, it is a cup of trembling, and a cup of astonishment, as
the Scripture calls it, Isa. 51.17. Ezekiel. 23.32. and what will it then be when
all the dregs of it must be drunk up! When God hides his Face but a little,
there is all trouble and horror, and what must it then be when he hides it for
ever! The sense and apprehension of lying under the displeasure of Almighty
Power, and provoked Justice, and abused Goodness, and all these highly incensed
against a Man, and never to be appeased, must be very dreadful, and make sad
impressions upon the Mind, The Presence and the Favor of God gives Life and
Comfort, what Death and Misery must it then be to be banished for ever from
both, with a Depart from me ye oursed.

(2.) The Mind will reflect upon what is past with infinite remorse and
anguish, and with great regret curse its own folly and madness that has brought
it to this sad condition, when God had put it in its power to have made it self
for ever happy, had it been wise and considering as it ought to have been. This
will be the great sting of its Misery, that it wilfully brought it upon it
self, and for a few foolish, and rash, and finful actions, undid it self for
ever, and for some trifling reasons and pitiful temptations, the little
pleasures or profits of Sin, which are now all gone, made it self thus
wretchedly and eternally miserable. How with rage and envy will it look up to
that Happiness it has lost, and sees others enjoy, and vex it self with fury
that it should refuse and reject that when it was offered to it; and this one
thought will double and increase its Misery, and make it curse and tear it
self, that it was its own choice.

(3.) As the Mind with looking back will be filled with remerse and anguish
upon its past Sins and past Madness, so by looking forward, and seeing no end
of the Misery it is in, it will be filled and overwhelmed with Despair, which
is a Passion of Mind so perfectly and so unspeakably miserable, that I shall
not venture to describe it, for it is beyond any thing we can imagine, and it
properly belongs to the next head, which is the eternity and endless duration
of these Torments and Misery, which though it be but a circumstance of time,
and not properly that wherein they consist, yet is the most dreadful perfection
and completion of them, which I shall consider by and by.

Let us now but seriously think with our selves what a dreadful state it is to
be under all this torment of Mind, and pain of Body, to lie thus upon the rack
of the greatest tortures both from within and without, and that in such
extremity that they shall make dreadful and hideous signs and expressions of
it, in weeping, and mourning, and lamentation, and gnashing of teeth, Matthew:
22.13. when they shall gnaw their tongues for pain, and blaspheme the God of
heaven, because of their pains, Rev. 16.10, 11. And yet all their bitter cries
and dolorous exclamations shall only blow up and kindle the rage and fury of
the surrounding flames, for none of their sighs shall put out, nor their tears
extinguish any the least spark of those flames which are kindled by the Wrath
of God, who is a consuming fire. Who can express or imagine the keenness and
sharpness of those pains of Body, or the pangs and agonies of Conscience, the
passions, and anguish, and remorse of Mind, and nothing to take off, or divert,
or give the least intermission to all these, but an angry God above, a dark and
bottomless pit of burning Brimstone below, and frightful, and ugly, and
insulting Spirits, like so many executioners, all about it, and no friend to
call to, to pity or to help it.

O sad, and miserable, and intolerable condition! Who would not do all he could
to warn others and himself that they come not to that place of Torments? What
pleasure or profit can there be in the most tempting Sin, that should make a
Man venture the enduring all this for the sake of it? Who would endure this but
one day, or one month, for all the things this World can afford? Who would
suffer it for so long a time as this life of Sin here lasts for all that he
gets by it? Who would endure it a thousand years for all the Kingdoms of this
World, and the Glories thereof, much less who would for a trifling Lust, or a
sinful Inclination, for a little unjust Gain, or unlawful Pleasure, endure it
for ever? Which is the next thing I am to speak to. That,

II. This is Eternal, and shall never have end. This is the dreadful and
amazing circumstance of this Misery, and that which must confound him that
suffers it, that it shall last for ever, so that there shall never be any hopes
of having an end of it, after never so many thousand years, but there shall be
still an infinite Eternity behind, and so as much as there was at the first
beginning. Who can think of this without the utmost horror, and amazement, and
having his thoughts swallowed up with the dreadful consideration of it? It is
so great that some have had their Reason overcome and overwhelmed by it, so
that they have thought it unagreeable, and inconsistent with Gods Goodness and
Justice, to inflict so long and so great a Misery upon any of his Creatures,
and have therefore endeavored to limit this Eternity to a shorter compass of
time, and not to extend it to an absolute but a limited Eternity, as sometimes
it is understood in Scripture, and therefore to reconcile all those places of
Scripture to this notion of it, and to interpret them so, that Eternity in the
fullest and utmost sense may not be understood by them. I shall therefore
briefly examine this Argument, which on the one side seems very careful of the
credit and honor of the Divine Justice and Goodness, but on the other takes
off extremely from the utmost terror of Hellish Torments, in denying them to
be Eternal, so that it may tend in great measure to take off the power and
force of those which are the greatest restraints that God could lay upon Sin
and Wickedness; and since so few are prevailed upon by them, though under the
doctrine and persuasion of their being Eternal, how much fewer would be so if
they thought them otherwise. I shall therefore, First, Briefly show how this
Eternity of Hellish Torments is agreeable to Gods Goodness. Secondly, How it is
plainly and undeniably proved from Scripture and Revelation.


First, How 'tls agreeable to Gods Goodness to punish the few Sins of a short
Life with such great and never ending Torments, when in all Governments and all
distributions of Justice, the Punishment ought not to be so disproportioned,
and so much greater than the Crime. And besides, how a good, and tender, and
pitiful God, should keep a poor Creature in being for ever, merely to let it
suffer, and be miserable, and endure infinite Torments. To this I answer
briefly; 1. Whatever Punishment is necessary to secure the ends of Government,
to preserve Obedience to Laws, and to keep bold and daring Men from breaking
and violating them; whatever is necessary to this end is just, and necessary,
and agreeable both to the Goodness, and Wisdom, and Justice of the best
Government; for otherwise, there must be no such thing as Government in the
World, but God must give up his Authority, and throw the reins loose upon the
necks of his Creatures, if he have not a power to threaten and inflict such
Punishments as shall be sufficient to deter Men from Disobedience, and to
restrain them from Wickedness. Now we easily see to how little purpose a less
Punishment would ferve then that of Hell to those ends, since there are so few
awed even by that, though God has so severely threatened it. If then, for the ends
of Government, and for public good, such a Punishment as this be necessary, it
is consistent both with Justice and Goodness however fevere it be, for this is
the only just measure and proportion of Punishments that they be able to attain
their end, and the Rule of Justice is to be taken not from any private but
public Reasons. 2. God has given us free choice, and proposed both Eternal
Happiness, and Eternal Misery to us; He has set before us life and death,
Deuteronomy. 30.15. so that if we obey him, and live wisely and virtuously, we shall
enjoy the one, but if we choose Sin, we choose Death with it, and our
destruction is of our selves, and we judge our selves unworthy of everlasting
life, Acts 13.46. as Paul and Barnabas told the Jews. Gods proposing such vast
Rewards and Punishments, as it is perhaps a necessary sanction of his Laws, so
it is perfectly our own fault and madness, if we refuse the one and incur the
other.


Secondly, I shall show how this Eternity is clearly and undeniably proved from
Scripture, which it seems to be, because the word Eternal and Everlasting, and
what amounts to that, is always used upon this account, as everlasting fire,
Matthew. 25.41. and everlasting burnings, Isa. 33.14. and the fire that is
unquenchable, and that never goes out, Mark 9.46. Luke 3.17. But to this they
say, that the word Eternal is often used in Scripture in a limited sense,
according to the nature of the thing to which it belongs; as the Jewish
Priesthood is called an everlasting Priesthood, Exodus 40.15. and their Law of
Atonement is called an everlasting statute, Lev. 16.34. though neither were to be
so strictly, nor to last longer than the Jewish economy: So Sodom and
Gomorrha, and the Cities about them, are said to suffer the vengeance of
eternal fire, in ver. 7. of St. Judes Epistle, because it brought eternal
destruction to them, though there be now none of that fire remaining, so shall
the fire of Hell, say they, destroy and annihilate the wicked, and so as the
Scripture speaks, bring everlasting death and destruction upon them, though if
that shall last Eternally, yet they shall not be Eternally tormented in it.

Now in reply to this, I own, that the word Eternal and for ever, is often used
in a limited sense, but that it cannot be so when it is spoken here of Hellish
Torments, there is this evidence, that the same word (...), which is spoken of
Eternal Punishment, is spoken also of Eternal Life, so that if it be understood
of a limited Eternity in the one, it must be so in the other, which no body
ever held or supposed, and yet there is as much Reason from hence to deny the
absolute Eternity of Heaven, as the absolute Eternity of Hell

2. That they suffer Eternal Death, and are Eternally destroyed, is not to be
understood in a strict and literal sense, so that they lose all Being, but yet
are not Eternally tormented is plain from those places where it is said, They
have no rest day nor night, Rev. 14.11. which supposes them not to be in a
state of nonexistence, but of actual pain. It Is said there also, that they
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, and that the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever, ver. 10.11. which can never without violence be
understood of the Fire which still lasts, and which they suppose to be Eternal,
whilst they are not tormented in it, but destroyed by it, though it remains
still as a monument of Gods Justice and Vengeance upon Sinners, for the smoke
of their torment ascending for ever, supposes them to be for ever tormented,
and their having no rest night nor day, necessarily implies this. Besides, as
it is said, The fire is not quenched, nor never goes out; so it is said also,
that their worm never dies. Now though the Fire might possibly continue without
its proper subject, yet the Worm there meant never can, for that is only that
anguish, and remorse, and vexatious reflection of Mind, which if it never dye,
the subject of it must last, and continue, and suffer it for ever. So that
though our Socinian Adversaries avoid the other places of Everlasting
Punishment, and Everlasting and Unquenchable Fire, with some Art and Sophistry,
yet they can never evade those of the worms never dying, and of the smoke of
their torments going up for ever, and their having no rest day nor night, Rev.
14.11.

But not to dispute further of these matters, let the Sinner seriously conssder
and meditate of these infinitely great, and infinitely lasting and never ending
Torments. If there be such a thing as Hell, it concerns him highly to Repent,
and so take care to avoid it. If he do not think this to be true, but secretly
disbelieve it, he must disbelieve all Religion, and all Revelation, and run
into the utmost madness of Skepticism and Atheism; and then let him consider,
that it is not his belief makes things to be true or false, but whatever he
thinks of them, they are and will be what they are in themselves; and it is
certain he can never know them to be false, however he is inclined to believe
them so; and therefore were they never so uncertain, and were it but merely
probable, or indeed possible, that there should be any such thing, yet no Man
in his wits should run the venture, and lie open to so prodigious and dreadful
an hazard as an Eternity of Misery. But to such Christians that firmly believe
them, and have all Reason so to do both from Revelation and Reason too, for all
Mankind had ever some belief and expectations of sad Punishments in another
World for Wickedness, to them it is unaccountable folly and madness to live in
such Sins, and in such courses, as will throw them into this unquenchable Fire,
and consign them to this dreadful and everlasting state of Misery. Is there any
Sin whose charms are so great, whose gains are so tempting, that for the
enjoyment of all these for a little season, it is worth enduring the Torments of
Hell for ever?

If these Terrors of the Lord will not persuade Men to Repent and Leave their
Sins, nothing will. Yet there is one or two other Motives or Arguments to
Repentance from Christianity, which I must propose after this of Hell, and all
the rest, namely,

SECT. V. Other Gospel Motives to Repentance.
6. ANother Motive which may be said to be peculiar to the Gospel, and which
should encourage to Repentance above all others, is the Promise of the Divine
Grace and Holy Spirit to enable us to peform it, to assist us to overcome all
our evil Habits, and to master all the Corruptions and Imperfections of Humane
Nature, to conquer all those Sins that are thought never so difficult, or even
insuperable to Flesh and Blood, and to practice all those Virtues that are most
contrary to our Natural Temper or Sensual Inclinations. Be there never so many
Arguments to the doing of a thing, and never so much danger in not doing it, be
it never so great and important, or never so necessary, yet if after all a Man
be without power and without ability to do it, they will be all in vain, and to
no more purpose, than to persuade a blind Man to see by the convenience of that
Sense, or a lame Man to run by the danger he may otherwise be in, or a Man
tumbling from a precipice to stop before he falls to the bottom, it is only to
mock and deride us with Motives and Arguments to a thing, if it be wholly out
of our power to effect it, and therefore there is no such Motive to the doing a
thing that we are otherwise persuaded is of great moment and importance, as to
be assured of sufficient power to enable us to go through with it, without
which all our Vigor will be dampt, and all the sinews of Industry cut, and all
our Endeavors blasted, by which we should set about it, and we shall run the
Censure of those foolish undertakers our Savior speaks of, Luke 14. who would
make War, or build a Tower, without power to go on with it. God has therefore
given us the greatest Encouragement by the Gospel, that can be to set upon the
practice, as of all other Duties, so especially of this hard one of Repentance,
when he thereby assures us, that his Grace shall be sufficient for us, that he
works in us both to will and to do, that his Spirit shall be given us, and
abide with us for ever, and that we shall be mightily strengthened by it in the
inner man; so that a new, and strong, and vital Principle, shall be added to
Humane Nature to strengthen its weakness, repair its decays, recruit its
forces, support its feeble powers, raise its sunk state, and restore it to the
Virtue and Perfection it had lost by its Sins. How weak and decayed, how
corrupted and degenerated Humane Nature was of its self, both Scripture and our
own Experience do sufficiently teach us; how strong and violent our Passions
are, and how weak our Reason to master and govern them; how prone the Will is
to consent to what is evil be it but a little grateful to Flesh and Blood, and
what strong proclivities and inclinations are in us to many Sins. The Heathens
were very sensible of this corruption and decay of Humane Nature, and into what
a low and degenerate state it was sunk, and therefore they complained very
often of the (...) and (...), of the Souls being sunk into Matter and a
Terrestrial State, its wings being molted, and its powers being drooping and
sickly, and what should raise and restore it, and be a Cure to this Disease,
they could not find out; they felt how strong were the propensions to Vice, and
how the Mind (...), as Hierocles speaks, was carried by its Passions, like so
many weights hanging upon it, and inclining it to Sin, and what should balance
these, what should turn and counterpoize those propensities and inclinations,
what should bear up against all the Corruptions from within, and the
Temptations from without, and relieve and succor the weak forces of decayed
Nature that was so strongly besieged, and so little able to hold out of it
self, this they could not know; for it is only by the Gospel and Christianity
that we have the Promise of Gods Grace and Holy Spirit to be given to us when
we ask it, and to belong as a right to all Christians by virtue of the New
Covenant, and be a standing Principle to prevent and restrain us from Sin, and
work Holiness and Virtue in our Minds. And now by virtue of this we have the
greatest encouragement to Repent and Leave our Sins, which is a Power to do so.
We have a new Principle of Life conveyed into our Souls, and a fresh, and
Heavenly, and almost a miraculous Power given to us, by which the Lame may
walk, and the Lepers be cleansed; i. e. by which those who are Naturally
Impotent may be enabled to do their Duty, and the greatest Sinners may be cured
of their foulest Sins. All the Excuses which were more reasonable and plausible
heretofore of the weakness and impotency of our Nature, of the strength and
power of our Corruptions, of the necessity and unavoidableness of our sinful
Actions, are now quite taken away by this Divine Grace and Assistance of the
Holy Ghost which the Gospel promises and bestows upon us. By this the greatest
Sin may be conquered, the strongest Lust and Temptation overcome, and the
longest Habit and Custom changed and broken, so that no Sinner should be
discouraged from breaking off his Sins by Repentance, by reason of the
difficulty or impossibility of it, since no Sin is too strong for the Grace of
God, but we can in every thing be more than conquerours through him which
strengthens us, and greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the
world, than the Devil or any Sin that we shall be in danger of, which can never
take such possession of any Soul, as not to be cast out by the Power and Spirit
of Christ. However hard it is to overcome a long Custom, and root out an ill
Disposition, and to restrain and check an unbridled Lust and Appetite that has
too long had the reins thrown upon its neck, yet a firm Resolution,
strengthened with the Divine Grace and Assistance of Heaven, will be able even
to quicken and raise those who are dead in trespasses and sins, to create them
again in Christ Jesus unto good works, and to renew them again unto Repentance,
Heb. 6.6. That Lust which we thought was so violent that all the force of
Reason could not stand against it, that Temptation which we called
irresistible, that Custom and Habit which we imagined incurable, that Vice
which we counted too hard for Flesh and Blood to deny, these may all be
certainly, not to say easily, overcome by the Divine Grace, if we will make use
of it. Let the greatest Sinner therefore, with the Power of Christ and the
auxillary forces of Heaven, set upon his strongest Sins, let him but boldly and
resolutely fall upon them, and he shall find they will give ground, and in a
little time their power will abate, and he will, by the help of God and his own
constant endeavors, obtain a full and a perfect victory over them. God will
not indeed, without our own endeavors and cooperation, do the whole work for
us, nor will his Spirit work upon us, as if we were Machines, and had not
internal powers and principles of action within our selves, by an irresistible
force and impulse which shall do all this in an instant, and convert a Sinner
in a moment. No, this must be done gradually and successively, by the bringing
in of other thoughts, dispositions, inclinations and practices, by a kindly and
gentle influence upon our Minds, the Spirit descending like rain, or shedding
its Virtue like dew upon our Hearts, and so bringing forth the fruits of
Repentance in us, not like a violent stream or a mighty torrent, bearing down
all immediately before it. The Spirit of God, which is compared in Scripture to
the winds blowing, where we see the effects though we discern not the cause,
does not by a sudden gust, like a hurricane, convert a Sinner, and turn him
from his Sins, in such a manner as a tree is torn up by the roots with a
violent tempest, but by a fresh and gentle gale it carries the Sinner from Vice
to Virtue, by filling his Mind with new thoughts, and strongly moving and
determining him the right way, and secretly inclining his Mind to choose, and
his Understanding to see and consider what is his true Interest and Happiness,
and by an inward energy and virtue, as a principle of Life, acts secretly and
undiscernably upon all our Faculties, changing our thoughts, desires and
affections, and working upon our Minds, though in a way agreeable to our
Rational Faculties, yet by a Power superior and superadded to them.

And now let every Sinner consider what great Motives and Encouragements, and
so what Obligations he has to Repent by the Gospel, how powerfully and how
endearingly, by Motives both of Love and Fear, Christ does there call Sinners
to Repentance. It was his great work, and for this purpose he came into the
World, to recover lost and undone Mankind, and to rescue them from that state
of Sin and Misery they were in, and to restore them to a state of Virtue and
Happiness. This was a design worthy Christ's coming into the World, and all the
mysterious dispensation of Christianity.

7. And this is of such absolute necessity and importance to us, that it is
impossible we can otherwise escape Misery, and not perish inevitably. God when
he would show the greatest Mercy and Kindness to us in the World, and
demonstrate his Love to us in the highest manner, as he has done by the
Gospel, yet has there told us, that except we repent we shall all certainly
perish, Luke 13.5. This is the perpetual and indispensable condition, upon
which alone we must expect any benefit by Christ and the Gospel, this is as low
as God can go with us. Perfect and uninterrupted Obedience all our lives is his
due, and when we have broken that, and he compounds with us, and accepts of
Partial and Renewed Obedience instead of Entire, i. e. of Repentance, and
returning to our Duty instead of keeping always to it; this is the utmost
favor can be expected from him or that he can grant to us, and Repentance is
the only way by which it is possible for a Sinner to escape Wrath and
Damnation. This I shall a little clear, and make out, and then persuade to this
Duty of Repentance from the absolute necessity of it.

1. Then, it is this alone can consist with the Wisdom and Honor of God, as he
is Governor of the World. God as he is a Being of Infinite Goodness and
Compassion to his Creatures, so he is a very Wise and Prudent Governor of the
World, and therefore though, like a merciful Prince, out of the Goodness of his
Nature, and the tender Inclinations he has for all his Subjects, he is ready to
show all Mercy and Clemency to those that have offended him, yet if he should
do this too easily, without any security of their good behavior for the
future, or any care and provision for their better Obedience, it would not a
little reflect upon the Wisdom of his Government, and represent him as too soft
and easy a Being, and render his Authority in time cheap and contemptible. It
would not only loosen the reins of Government, but be a letting them go out of
his hands, and throwing them upon the necks of his insolent and rebellious
Vassals, if without any ties or obligations for the future, or letting them
know upon what conditions they should be capable of his favor and continue in
it, he should take off all the Punishment their past Crimes had deserved, this
would be to encourage them to commit new ones, and give them just grounds to
hope for an absolute and perpetual impunity. Should God have granted by the
Gospel, or any other way, such an Unconditional Charter of Mercy and Pardon,
this would have certainly destroyed that very Power by which he granted it, and
such a Privilege or Concession as it would greatly have reflected upon his
Honor, so it would have quite undermined his Authority; it would have been a
resigning up his Throne, and a laying his Crown at the feet of his own insolent
Rebels. For what would have remained to him of Power to Govern or to Punish, if
he had done this? If he had set out a standing Act of Grace and Mercy to all
Sinners, without any Condition or Proviso that they turn from their Wickedness
which they had committed, that they should come in and lay down all their
Hostile Weapons, and be Faithful and Loyal hereafter, or else be utterly
incapable of any benefit of it: Without this it had been rather a Dispensation,
or Indulgence to be Wicked, than a wise Proclamation of Mercy to serve the true
Ends and Interest of Government. God indeed has with great Wisdom and Goodness
found out such a temper in his Government, and contrived such an expedient, as
shows the most admirable Wisdom and the most wonderful Mercy both together, and
that is, for the sake and by the mediation of a Sacrifice to pardon, and yet to
punish the Sinner, by the same way to give an instance of his Mercy and a
remonstrance of his Justice; and the design of all that is to show, that though
he is the most inclined to Mercy and Clemency, yet he will never show it but in
such a way as is consistent with the Honor and Wisdom of his Government. He is
willing to abate of his extreme Right over his Creatures, and to take off the
edge and severity of his Laws, so far as Prudence and the Wise Ends of
Government will give leave, but not so far as shall give any manner of
encouragement to Disobedience and Wickedness, and that would be unavoidable, if
he should ever grant a Pardon to wicked Men upon any other condition than
turning away from their Wickedness

2. As it is this alone can consist with the Honor and Wisdom of God, as he is
a wise Governor, so nothing but this can render us acceptable to him, as he is
a truly Righteous and Holy Being. If we consider God as such, as a Being
essentially holy, so that this is not only his Perfection but his very Nature,
then it can never be imagined that he can have any love or kindness, or show
any favor to a wicked Man, till he has turned away from his Wickedness. What
is so contrary to himself he can never love, if he love himself, for he might
by the same reason as well hate himself as love that. The love of God depends
not upon any particular arbitrary inclination, or unaccountable humor and
fancy, as in weak Mortals, but it arises from his own Essential Excellencies
and Perfections, and is grounded upon a true and a lasting Principle, his own
Nature rather than his Will: So that whilst God himself is unchangeably holy,
he will always love any Soul that is truly holy, and comes up to his original
Holiness by such measures and proportions as its Nature will admit, but whilst
the Mind continues wicked, it can never by any means in the World be reconciled
to God, it is alienated from him, it is opposite to his Nature, and it is
therefore the necessary object of his hatred and displeasure, or as the
Scripture speaks, An abomination to him. Sin is the only thing that God hates,
and the only cause why he is angry and displeased with any of his Creatures,
and as long as this remains there is an everlasting breach, and a perpetual
ground and foundation of enmity between them, and not only Light and Darkness,
but Heaven and Hell are more irreconcilable than a Righteous God and a Wicked
Soul. All the Sacrifices that can be offered to atone and expiate for such an
one, if it continues such, were they never so rich, or never so many, can no
more commend it to God, or make its peace with him, than all the Bribes and
Presents of the Indies could pervert a Just and Righteous Judge, or blind the
eyes of Justice and Integrity it self. There can never be any other terms of
Reconciliation between a Wicked Soul and a Righteous God, but only this, that
it become Righteous, and till it do so, it can never become the object of Gods
Love and Favor, unless he change his own Righteous Nature, and cease to be
Righteous and Holy himself.

3. Without this we can never be freed from the Natural and Necessary Evils of
Sin upon our Minds, whereby it will make us inwardly miserable till we are
cured of them; for though we should suppose all the Political Evils, as I may
call them, of Sin taken away and removed, i. e. all that outward Mischief and
Punishment which is to be inflicted upon it from the Arbitrary Will and
Threatening of the sovereign Lawgiver, though he should out of tenderness and
compassion, or for the sake of a Sacrifice or other Consideration, abate of
that, and not execute the utmost Penalties, and those positive Severities that
he had denounced against it, yet so many are the Natural Evils that are annexed
to it, that it would of it self make the Mind necessarily and inwardly
miserable. This does not depend upon the Will of God as a Governor only, but
as a Creator, as he has settled and ordered the nature of things, and made it
impossible they should ever be otherwise. Misery is so entailed to Sin by the
fundamental constitution of things, that it is impossible ever to cut it off. It
is as inseparable from, and as closely connected to it as effects are to their
causes; and we may as well divorce Light from the Sun, or Heat from Fire, as
Misery from Wickedness. It springs out of it Naturally, as a foul stream from
such a corrupt fountain, grows upon it as the proper and bitter fruit from
such a poisonous root, and Sin as a true Parent has the seeds of all Evil in
its own bowels. A Mind that is overrun with Vice will as necessarily be
corrupted, and weakened, and vitiated, as the Body is decayed and impaired by a
Disease. The one will as necessarily put the Mind out of order, as Sickness
does the other; and till it be cured and made sound, it will always be in pain
and uneasy. Its Faculties will necessarily be weakened and impaired, and
disordered by it, and so lose their true and proper happiness; and it will be
put into an unnatural frame and temper, and be like the Body when its Limbs are
out of joint, in great torture till it be set right again. God must alter his
own Nature, and the Nature of things too, or else Vice and Wickedness, whilst
it is continued in, will make the Mind miserable, sickly and uneasy, and fill
it with restlesness and disquietude, and make it a torment and vexation to it
self.

4. Without Repentance, and being freed from our Sins, we can never be capable
of partaking or enjoying any true and positive Happiness, much less that great
and eternal one in Heave. Happiness must be something within our selves, like
Health, it consists in the right crasis and constitution of the Mind, in the
strength, and vigor, and regular operation of all its Faculties. Till it be
put into this state by Repentance and Virtue, it is incapable of enjoying any
true Happiness. Our Vices must therefore be first cured and purged out, or else
our Souls will be as incapable of enjoying their proper spiritual and rational
pleasures, with their Sins, and wicked Habits and Dispositions upon them, as
our Bodies of enjoying their animal and sensual ones witha Lethargy or
Apoplexy, or whatever destroys their proper strength, sense and perception.
Without Holy Minds, and Virtuous Dispositions, and Heavenly Affections and
Inclinations, as we can no way hope for Heaven, so we are no way fitted or
qualified for it, and therefore our Minds must necessarily be disposed and
prepared for that by Repentance and previous habits of Virtue, and such a
divine temper and holiness of Mind, as can alone make us meet to be partakers
of the inheritance of the Saints in light, as St. Paul speaks, Coloss. 1.12.
without which we should no more enjoy Heaven than a blind Man enjoyes the light
of the Sun, whose Organs are spoiled and vitiated, and who wants the use of
those Senses and Faculties by which he should perceive it. So that if a Sinner
should be sent to Heaven with all his unrepented Sins, unmortified Lusts and
vicious Inclinations, and without that love of God and Goodness which is to fit
him for it, he would be not only like him which came to the Marriage Feast
without a Wedding Garment, who must be turned out of that company he was so
unfit for, but like one that had the greatest dainties set before him, but that
was sick, and had no stomach, and so could not taste or relish any of them.
Till the Mind is brought to love God, and delight in him, and in all the
actions of Virtue and exercises of Religion, it cannot be happy in Heaven, but
that would rather be unagreeable and an aversion to it, than an Happiness. Till
a Sinner therefore be brought off from his Sins by Repentance, and restored to
a virtuous, and holy, and good Mind, he cannot enjoy Heaven or Happiness, nor
be freed from Sin and Misery, nor can a Holy and Wise God be reconciled to him,
or forgive him.

Upon all these accounts we see his Repentance is absolutely necessary to
entitle him to Pardon and Salvation, and without this he must certainly and
unavoidably perish. Now,

8. This absolute necessity of it is a strong and powerful Argument to persuade
us to it. Whilst Men have any hopes of escaping with their Sins, this with the
pleasures and temptations of them will encourage them to persist in them, and
to enjoy their Lusts and their Liberties which they have made very hard and
uneasy to deny themselves, but when they find they must either do this, or
else necessarily perish for ever; this, if any thing, will prevail upon Men who
believe and consider the dreadful horror of Everlasting Damnation. Now the
absolute necessity of Repentance is as plain by the Gospel, as the power and
validity of it. We are as much assured that without it we shall be damned, as
we shall be saved with it. Now this above all commends a Medicine to us, that
it will cure us if we use it, but that we shall dye if we do not; however
bitter and unpalatable it may be, however it may disorder us while it is
working upon us, and however painful the operation may be, yet if we must lose
our Lives without it, this will make us choose and endure it, and go through
with it. Though we must cut off a Right Hand, yet if the Gangrene will kill us
if we do not, we shall submit to it. Though it be very painful to part with our
Lusts and our beloved Sins, yet since we must be damned if we do not, this will
bring us to it. If a Man must sink unless he throws away his richest lading,
and discharges himself of his weighty treasure, he will lose that rather than
his Life; and if he be not mad, he will for the same reason, cast away his Sins
rather than his Soul. No Man disputes this when he is brought into such a
necessity, such a strait and exigency as to be thus tried. Now Christ has by
the Gospel put this necessity upon us, either Repent and leave your Sins, or
perish with them. There is no avoiding this, no possibility to prevent it any
way, and therefore when there is but one thing to be done, and such a necessity
for doing it, one would think it should do it self; but this is a necessity of
Reason, of Choice, of Thought, of Deliberation, that requires our Minds to
think of it and consider it, or else it will not work upon us; and therefore we
can throw off the force and power of it by not thinking, or not considering of
it; but if we did as we ought, duly consider of it, it would have an
irresistible force and power upon us, and no Man could hinder the effect of it;
but he that will shut his eyes and not see a precipice may fall down it, and
the greatest necessity of avoiding any danger is took off by not heeding, or
not being sensible of it, though it be never the less great in it self for all
that, and the necessity would work upon any but those who are heedless and
inconsiderate.

Sad is the state and condition of those under the Gospel, who live in a state
of Sin and Impenitence, or in the habit of any unrepented Sin, they are under
as absolute a sentence of condemnation, as if the great Judge had pronounced it
upon them, and bid them, Go ye cursed. Whilst they continue such, there is no
more hopes of Mercy for them than for the damned themselves. Their state indeed
is not as unalterable as the others is, and this is the only difference, for
they are otherwise as much Children of Wrath as they: They are not bound in
chains of darkness, nor confined to this state by an irreversible Judgment, but
they are fettered to their Sins, and to their state by their own choice, and
till they break those bonds, and get free from them, they can never come out of
that sad condition; which should make every impenitent Sinner tremble, and
seriously bethink himself what a sad state and condition he is in, what a doom
hangs over his head, and how near his steps take hold of Death, how he walks
upon the brink of Hell and Damnation, and the least fatal accident, or sudden
death, does irrecoverably throw him in without Redemption, which should make
his Heart tremble, and his Blood chill, and his Hair stand an end, if he
considered it as he ought. Let him therefore resolve to snatch himself out of
the fire, and speedily recover himself from the jaws of Death; Repentance alone
can do this, and this he should set about immediately, and be persuaded to it
by those powerful Motives and Arguments which the Gospel and Christianity
proposes, and which I have from thence offered to him.

I shall subjoyn to these another Motive or Exhortation to Repentance, which I
cannot call so properly Evangelical and peculiar to the Gospel, but what arises
from both Nature and Reason, and some Gospel Considerations mixed together, and
complicated with those, and that is the Consideration of Death, and our being
made ready and prepared for it by Repentance, and therefore that nothing else
can free us from the fears and terrors of it.

SECT. VI. Exhortation to Repentance as a Preparation for Death, or in order to
make us ready to dye.
THE last Motive then I shall propose to Repentance is this, that nothing else
can prepare and make us ready and fit to dye, and therefore nothing else can
take off the fear and terror of Death, to which in all reason we must otherwise
be exposed, and so all our life time subject to bondage, as the Scripture
speaks. Dye we know we must in a little while, and there is none so foolishly
Skeptical as to deny or disbelieve this, and to hope to escape the Grave where
he has seen all his Forefathers laid before him, and which is the common lot
or fate of every Mortal. There is nothing therefore more concerns us while we
live, than to be always ready and prepared to dye, this should be our great
work and business, if we considered the true end of living, or understood the
mighty consequence of dying, as Religion represents them both to us; and he
that is not so foolish as to think he shall never dye, should above all things
take care so to live that he may be always ready to dye; and of the two, it is
a greater folly to think we shall dye, and not prepare for it, than to think we
shall not dye at all. This it is then which a wise Man is concerned to do all
his Life, to be ready and prepared for Death, which he knows will certainly
come, and because it is uncertain when it will come, therefore to be always
ready, and always provided for it. There is so much danger and hazard not to
do this, and the folly of it is so visible, and so amazing, that no Man of
common Prudence, no Man in his wits, one would think, should neglect to do it:
It Is so important, so weighty, so absolutely necessary a Duty, that our Savior
most earnestly presses it in several Discourses, and proposes it in two or
three Parables, that it may make a more strong and lively impression upon our
Minds. In the Parable of the wise and foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. at the
beginning, where the coming of the Son of Man is compared to the unexpected
coming of the Bridegroom at midnight, ver. 6. in others to a Masters surprising
his Servants unaware at the second or third watch, Luke 12.38. Matthew. 24. at
the latter end, and in both the Evangelists, to a Thief stealing upon a Man at
an unknown and uncertain hour of the night: The design of all which is to press
this great Duty upon us of being always watchful, and always doing our Duty,
and always prepared for our Lords coming: This is the Inference which Christ
draws from all those Parables and Discourses; Be ye therefore ready, for the
Son of man comes at an hour when ye think not, Luke 12.40. Christ often calls
himself the Son of Man, and as such he is to be our Judge, and as a Judge he is
said to come when ever he passes Judgment upon us, and therefore St. James
represents the nearness of his Judgment by that phrase, Behold the judge
stands before the door, Jam. 5.9. and his executing Judgment and Destruction
upon Jerusalem was called his coming, Matthew. 24.3. And as his final public
Judgment of all the World at the last day is called his coming, 1 Cor. 15.23.
and several times in that Chapter of St. Matthew, so his private Judging of us
at our Death is his coming also meant by these several Parables, and for that
coming of his we ought to be always ready; i. e. always prepared for dying.
Here I shall show, I. That this Readiness or Preparation consists only in
Repentance, and a holy Life as the fruit and perfection of it. II. The great
obligations we have to be always thus ready and prepared for Death.


I. This Readiness or Preparation for Death, consists only in Repentance and a
good Life as the fruit of it: For nothing else can fit us to dye, but to Repent
and live well, neither can there be any other readiness and preparation for
Death but only that. For we must not imagine that we can be ready on a sudden;
and that though we were utterly unprepared before, that at a few days or hours
warning we can make our selves ready and fit to dye: No, our whole Life, at
least a considerable part of it, is to be spent in making our selves ready; for
we must not think that our Souls can, like our Bodies, be dressed in a few
moments, or that we can be fit to meet the Bridegroom when he calls us in have,
and on a sudden. Virtuous habits are not put on in a moment, nor can vicious
ones be so easily and quickly cast off as our clothes are; no, rather like
Diseases that are chronical, and have by long time been growing upon us, they
require long time, and great care, and much pains, and many remedies, and a
timely course before they can be cured and got off, and before we can be well,
and so ready to meet the Lord. It Is not a few penitential tears upon a
Deathbed will wash away the filth of a wicked Life, or cleanse a guilty and
polluted Soul that has been many years contracting an habitual uncleanness,
whose Sins stick to it like an old Leprosy, and have eat like rust or a canker
into the very heart and substance of it, and yet they must be all got out by
Repentance, and the Soul must be made sound and clear, and recover it self into
a virtuous and good habit before it can be ready for another World, and duly
prepared for a Future State. Indeed there is a great difference to be made
according to the past course of Men's lives; there may be a great many such
happy Souls, who by a very careful Education, and the good Example of their
Parents and others, and by a Virtuous disposition and inclination in
themselves, and above all, by the Grace and Providence of God, have been
always kept from great and mortal Sins, and so never fell into a bad and
damnable state all their lives, but were always virtuous and innocent as to
any such offenses as should forfeit and endanger their Salvation by the terms
of the Gospel and the Covenant of Grace; without that we were all in a damnable
state, and the Scripture has concluded all under sin without that, Gal. 3.22.
For we have all sinned, and come short of the glory of God, and of that strict
and exact Obedience which we owe to the Law of God, so that if he should enter
into Judgment with us, and be severe and rigorous in demanding his utmost right
over us, we could not contend with him, nor answer him one of a thousand, as
Job says, Job 9.3. and no Man can upon these terms be just with God, as he
there says: for so in his sight shall no man living be justified, Psalm. 143.2.
but by the Grace and Mercy of the Gospel, according to which God will now deal
with Mankind, many, I doubt not, have been so justified, that through their
whole lives they never were in a state of Damnation, for nothing puts us into
that under Christianity, but a great, and known, and wilful Sin, or rather a
course and habit of such Sins: and though no Man lives without Sin, that is,
without some Frailties and Imperfections, and lesser Sins, which come not up to
the perfection of the Divine Law, for which he ought to beg pardon, and say,
God forgive us our trespasses, yet God forbid that those should put us into an
ill state, for then no Man in the World would be ever out of it: But oh thrice
happy are those Souls who have not defiled themselves with any great and
damnable Sins, who have always kept to their first Love, and preserved their
first Virtue unstained and unspotted, and have been so trained up in the ways
of Religion and Goodness, that they never wandered or went astray from them,
nor never stepped into the paths of wilful Sin, so that their steps should at any
time take hold of Death; who never past out of that line which divides the two
states of Grace and Damnation, nor ever approached so near to the brink of Hell
as to be in danger of falling into it. These have reason to give thanks to God
all their lives, who has thus kept them out of the snare of the Devil, and
secured them from the jaws of Death and Destruction; and whilst they persevere
and go on in this good state and condition, and pass from strength to strength,
and from one degree of grace to another, and grow up in all manner of Grace and
Goodness, though they have not already attained, neither are already perfect, as
the Apostle speaks of himself, Phil. 3.12. yet they are always safe, and
always ready for the coming of the Son of Man, and their whole Life is a most
sure, a most comfortable preparation for Death.

But these are very few I doubt, not only to the general number of Mankind, but
even to good Men; for most of the good Men we read of in Scripture were, some
time or other, guilty of great and wilful Faults, as Noah, and Abraham, and
David, and St. Peter, and St. Paul, and Mary Magdalene, and whilst they were
so, and before they had recovered themselves by Repentance, I cannot but think
them in a bad state; for Men's states are not fixed and certain in this Life, but
are alterable and changed according to their outward actions, and the inward
temper of their Minds, and when ever a wilful and a known Sin breaks the course
of Virtue, and destroys the habit of Goodness in their Souls, it breaks their
good state, and destroys their comfortable condition; As when a Disease strikes
the Vitals of our Body, and overcomes the Strength and Health of our
Constitution, unless we get it off it will certainly bring Death along with it.
God indeed has prescribed us a certain Remedy, and an infallible Cure for all
Mortal Sins, and the greatest Spiritual Maladies and Diseases that would
otherwise destroy us, and bring Death upon us, and that is Repentance, which
for the sake of Christ and his Merits, and by the Mercy and Promise of God
shall recover us out of that miserable and mortal state into which every wilful
Sin had cast us. This shall set us right again in the Court of Heaven, where we
were cast and condemned before, and this shall bring us to a state of Life and
Grace, who were before struck with the sentence of Death. And blessed be God
who has thus graciously provided for poor, and otherwise lost Sinners by Jesus
Christ! But Repentance, alas, though it be a sure Remedy, yet is not so easy a
one as we imagine; it is a very bitter dose that must not only go down very
unpleasantly, but must work strongly and powerfully upon our Minds, it must not
only make us sick, and sorrowful, contrite and troubled at the very Heart for
every Transgression, but it must purge out of our Souls every Sin, and carry
off every vile Lust and wicked Inclination. It must not only work upon the
peccant humors, and so put the Soul into great trouble and disorder, but it
must perfectly heal and cure it, and to do that it must take away the root of
the disease, it must search to the bottom of the Heart, it must touch us to the
quick in the tenderest part of us, in the most darling Sin, and most beloved
Lust, and it must cut and lance so deep that no secret corruption remain
within, and no fomes Morbi be left behind. In a word, it must perfectly cure
the Soul, and whatever disease it labored under, it must quite remove it, so
that it never return again upon it; for it is but a palliating, a counterfeit or
an imperfect cure till this be done: And till the Mind be perfectly restored,
and amended, and made better, it has not truly repented; and therefore the
Scripture requires in Repentance, not only a broken Heart, which is the most
significant phrase in the World for the deepest trouble of Mind for our past
Sins, but it requires a new Heart, and a new Soul, and a new Creature, and a
new Man, to make up true Repentance; and not only that we be renewed in the
Spirit of our Minds, but that we bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance, and
that we turn from every evil way, and leave and forsake every Sin that we have
ever been guilty of, as I have more largely shown before. We must do all this
before we can be said truly to Repent, and before we can have any good grounds
to expect Pardon of any wilful Sin we ever committed in our whole lives, we
must thus Repent of it: And though we are as sure of forgiveness if we do so,
as if we had never committed it, which is the greatest favor in the World, yet
how will a poor penitent be always afraid that he has not been sufficiently
sorrowful, and fully repented of his Sins; how will his former Guilt affright
him, when it stares him in the face; and how will the sad load of all his Sins
lie heavy upon his Conscience when he is brought to a due sense of them; and
how must he be contented to lose a great deal of that comfort in his Mind here,
though he may be safe hereafter; and though his Repentance may put him into a
good condition, yet it will make his Heart sorrowful, and the remembrance of
his Sins will make it often bleed afresh within him. And when he looks back
upon his past danger he must tremble at it, though he has reason to hope he has
escaped it, and it must keep him always humble, and not over-confident of
himself; and though he has his Pardon in his hand, yet he must still look upon
it with tears in his eyes. Nothing can truly satisfy a Man that he has
repented of his Sins, but that he has left them out of Religious Grounds and
Principles, and has had so much trial of himself, as to know he would not
commit them, though he were in the same circumstances and temptations that he
was in before. And thus when a bad Man is become a good one, when he that was
careless and irreligious is become pious and devout, when he that was vicious
and debauched is become sober and virtuous, when he that was unjust becomes
just and righteous, and besides restitution for all past injustice, would not
commit one act of it to gain all the World, when he that stole steals no more,
and he that was given to drunkenness or uncleanness, or any other Sin, wholly
leaves and forsakes it, and is brought by Religion to be quite another Man than
he was before, then, and not till then, is his Repentance such as may make him
hope for Pardon when he lives, and prepare him to dye with comfort. For to
proceed a little further in this great concern, to make a Soul fit and ready
for its immediate entering upon another state, it must have these two
qualifications at that time.

1. It must be thoroughly purged from every Vicious Habit, or else it is
neither meet to be partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in light, nor
capable of the Pure, and Spiritual, and Heavenly Happiness. As the Tree falls,
so it lies, says the Wise Man, Ecclesiastes 11.3. And the same habit and
temper, as to the main, which the Soul carries out of this World, will abide
with it in the other. If any one habitual Wickedness remain upon it, or the
love of any one Sin be so rooted in it, that if it lived here it would not be
brought off from it, that will ruin it, and make it miserable for ever; for if
we love any one Sin more than Heaven, we must be contented to lose and part
with Heaven for it; and if any Lust or Vicious Inclination be so dear to us,
that we are not willing to give it up for the sake of Happiness, we give up our
Happiness for the sake of that, for they two are so inconsistent, that we
cannot keep both. Let not therefore any Sin remain unmortified in thy Soul, if
thou would put thy self into such a readiness and disposition, as shall fit
thee to enter upon a happy Future State. And,

2. Let all Virtuous Habits, and Religious Dispositions of Mind be then
excited, and exercised, and increased to the highest perfection. It Is these
will fit our Souls for Heaven, and be the true Wedding garment for the
Marriage Feast, and it is these are meant by that expression in the Parable, of
having our Lamps burning, in order to our waiting for the coming of the
Bridegroom. Let our Devotion therefore be then kindled into the highest flame
and ardour, and our Souls expire and ascend up in it to the Regions above. Let
us raise our Minds to the highest love of God, and of our Blessed Savior, and
let our Souls be ravished with the thoughts of their wonderful love and
kindness to us. Let us look up to Heaven, and to those joys which God has
there prepared for us, and let us desire, as soon as God pleases, to be
translated to them. Let us look down upon this World with mean and despicable
thoughts, and let us consider what a poor, and a miserable place it is, and be
very willing to part with it; and let us exercise all Faith, and Hope, and
Trust, and Confidence, in our Faithful Creator and Merciful Redeemer and be
willing to throw our selves wholly and cheerfully upon them, and to trust them
with out Souls when they are going into an unknown place, and to the invisible
Hades. When we believe our Lord is near, and coming in a few minutes, thus
should we wait for him, with our Loins girded up, and our Lamps burning, as our
Saviors expression is, and our Minds put into such a Religious frame and
disposition that we may be as like Heaven as we can, and our Souls may be ready
to go in with the Bridegroom, and to be admitted to the Marriage Feast of the
Lamb for evermore. We must not think that these Habits and Religious
Dispositions of Mind are to be got on a sudden, but we must bring our Minds to
them by previous Acts, and long Preparations, and frequent Exercises
beforehand, and habituate our selves to these Divine and Religious Duties and
Exercises, or else we shall find, like the foolish Virgins, that we want Oil,
and have nothing in our Souls that should feed, and nourish, and kindle, and
maintain these Heavenly Habits and Dispositions, which are the immediate
readiness of our Minds. But to give the plainest advice I can, in so important
a matter, I shall propose two easy Directions, which I would have every one
observe that would make himself the most ready for Death, and the coming of the
Son of Man.

The 1st is, To be doing all the good we can to promote the Honor of God, and
the Welfare of Men; to be as the Parable represents it, Mat. 24. at the latter
end, doing earnestly the business of our Lord, and taking all the care we can
of his Family, and giving them their meat in due season, and discharging all
that trust faithfully and diligently which our Lord has committed to us, and
not smiting our fellow servants, or doing any the least injury to others, or
eating and drinking with the drunken, and living carelessly and idly, as the
evil Servant is said to do, Who put away the thoughts of his Lords coming, ver.
48. Those who do that are apt to be negligent and wicked, but he that is
always watchful, and always waiting for the Lords coming, as the Parable
describes the good Servant, will be faithful and diligent in performing every
Duty, and every Office that his Lord requires of him, and will be contriving
and designing to do all the good he can to please his Lord, and purchase his
Favor; for he knows that an idle Servant shall be punished as well as a wicked
one, and that the omission of a necessary Duty, commanded us by our Lord, will
be as much charged upon us as the commission of any thing that he has forbidden
us: He will therefore be careful and diligent to do all his Masters Commands,
to fulfill all his Will, to help and relieve his fellow servants, and do all the
good he can in his Masters Family, encourage others to do their Duty, exhort,
advise, reprove and admonish them, and prepare them, as well as himself, for
his Lords coming, and Blessed is that servant, who when his Lord comes he
shall find thus doing, and thus employed. But,

2. He that will be thus ready must never allow himself in any Sin, or in the
doing of any thing that he knows is unlawful, and forbidden by his Lord; for if
his Lord comes and finds him in that, He shall cut him asunder, and appoint
him his portion with the hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, Mat. 24.51. There is no hopes for him if he be thus surprised in his
Wickedness, and Death overtake him in the midst of his Sin, like the revenger
of Blood, before he can get into any City of Refuge. He that ventures upon a
wilful Sin, ventures upon the very brinks of Hell and Damnation, and if a
sudden Death turn him over, he falls in irrecoverably; and at best he that
suffers himself to live in a bad state, i. e. in a course of Sin, hangs over
the bottomless Pit by no other hold but the weak and brittle thread of Life,
and if that break, or be cut asunder, he drops into that dreadful place of
horrors. No Man therefore who is master of his Wits, and knows he is not master
of his Life, should dare to live one moment in so much peril, exposed to such
danger and hazard, and venture his Soul and his last stake upon so ticklish a
cast as this uncertain Life is: But he should instantly, whilst he has this
thought offered to his Mind, catch himself out of the Fire, out of the Eternal
Flames of Hell, into which, so far as he knows, he may be just a falling; for
they surround him, and are ready to lay hold upon him as long as he continues
in his Sins, and the gulf is open and ready to suck him in, and swallow him
up, till he plunges out, and rescues himself by a speedy Repentance. Let no Man
then make one hours, one minutes delay, who knows not how few hours or minutes
he may have.

II. For in the next place to give some Reasons why we should be thus ready:
Who knows at what hour the Son of Man comes? Who that is unprepared knows what
time he shall have to prepare himself? Who can tell whether the next moment
shall be his own, and how little time he may have for so great a work? And who
would loyter any part of his time, who knows how much that work will take up;
for it is not a few spare hours, or dying minutes, will put the Soul into a
readiness, will change its temper, and purge out its Sins, and dispose and fit
it for another World? And who can set back Death but a few hours when it gives
a short warning, and is ready to strike us; or perhaps without any warning
seizes and hurries us to the other World. It is every day making up to us, and
approaches nearer us every hour, and with quick and undiscerned steps it dogs
and follows us, and may overtake us before we are aware of it. A sudden Fever
may set the strongest Body on fire, and presently flare out the Lamp of Life. A
Convulsion may seize in a moment the main fort of Life, and surprise us in our
greatest strength. An Apoplexy or a Deliquium may stop the nimble wheels of
Life that moved vigorously and strongly just before, and make all the Vital
Faculties stand still immediately. Besides a thousand accidents from without,
make us in the midst of Life to be in Death, so that we can never be secure,
but we may be a dying, and every time we expire, it may be, so far as we know,
our last breath. Who would not be then ready who may thus be called on a
sudden, who may have the Son of Man come in an hour when he thinks not. Come
he certainly will, but we cannot tell whether in the third or fourth watch of
the night; let us then watch the whole night, that is, be ready always. If we
knew the time of his coming we might be careless, and sleep, and drowze perhaps
till he was near us, but since we are always to expect him at an uncertain
hour, let us put our selves into a posture and readiness to receive him at his
own time. We can never be ready too soon though he come late, but if we are too
late before we are ready, we lose an opportunity we can never regain, and we
slip that time which we shall bewail to all Eternity. Let us think,

2. Upon the certainty of his coming. If there were any hopes that he would
never come, if there were any probability that we should never dye, if any Man
could be so foolish as to persuade himself to doubt of that, he might have some
reason to neglect the other, but no Man can be Skeptical as to that point, nor
be so vain as to dispute himself out of the belief of it, but he knows and is
convinced of that fatal Truth, that he must once dye, and be laid in the same
place of darkness where he has seen so many others laid before him; why should
he not then prepare and provide for that which will dertainly happen? it can
never be in vain or to no purpose to do this; it can be no lost labor, no
unnecessary work, but all must confess it ought to be done one time or other.
Why do we not then do that which we own to be necessary? Why that it is indeed,
says the foolish Sinner, but it may be done hereafter, and at a more
convenient season! Would you not think a Man mad that should talk thus when he
was in danger of drowning, and would not take hold of the rope was thrown out
to him till his last and third rising, but let go what he had in his hand in
hope to catch it again afterward? or he that was like to fall down a
precipice, and would not save himself when he might, but trust to a twig that
was near the bottom? He deserves to perish that will not be willing to be saved
till he is just perishing. And he that allows himself to live in a sinful
state at present, with hopes to get out of it hereafter, is but like him that
stabs himself with a design of being cured, or swallows down a deadly Poison
upon presumption of taking an Antidote after he has done it; the one is
certainly strong enough to kill him, and the other may not be strong enough to
save him, or he may be dead before he can take it. Men's resolutions to Repent
hereafter are always insincere, for if they were not they would Repent at
present: And besides what a sad state are they in till they do this; they are
like Prisoners lying under a sentence of Death and Condemnation, who hope to
procure a Pardon, but will not endeavor to do it till they are called to
Execution, and it be too late. Their unrepented Sins do put them into as
damnable a state as if Heaven had past sentence upon them, and though they know
this yet they are willing to continue so till their state is desperate, and
they are never like to be otherwise. For he has no reason to think he shall be
ever ready, who is not willing to make himself ready at present. Let us not
therefore delay one minute this great work of Repentance, but let us set about
it immediately, and resolve to go through with it, and to live in such a
constant habit and practice of Repentance, and a good Life, as shall make us
duly ready and prepared to dye. For,

3. Let Us consider how terrible Death must be to a wicked impenitent Sinner,
and what concern he will be in at the approach of it, when he must leave all
the pleasures of his Sins, and the remembrance of them fills him only with
terror and astonishment, when all their false charms and meretricious looks,
whereby they before pleased and enchanted him, go off, and they now look ghastly
and frightful, and stare him in the face with a scaring appearance, and with
the sad apprehensions of what they are like to end in; when a dreadful Eternity
presents it self before him, and is like to swallow him up in an horrid abyss
of Misery, when he comes so nigh to the other World that he can look as it were
over to it, and see the sad reception he is like to have there, when he sees
Hell open before him, the bottomless Pit gaping to receive him, and some of the
Flames of it flashing as it were out upon him; when Death like an Executioner
comes to seize and apprehend him, and hurry him before the dreadful Tribunal,
where all his past Actions must be examined, all his secret Sins laid open, and
a dreadful Sentence shall be immediately pronounced upon him. The thoughts of
this is enough to make a good Man afraid, and the best of us must tremble when
we come before this Judgment Seat, and are to have our everlasting Fates
decreed and determined, but the Wicked must be filled with terror and
amazement, who can have no hopes, no refuge to fly to, who has no plea for any
Mercy or Pardon, nor no excuse to make for himself, who has neglected and
despised all the means of Grace that were offered to him, and who would not be
persuaded to any true Repentance before it was too late, and therefore he must
now Repent in vain for ever. Who can express the bitter thoughts, the fears,
the horrors, the agonies of such a Soul at that time? and who would ever feel
them, who has now power and opportunity to avoid them? Death carries something
of terror in it to all Men, as it is a punishment of Sin, and a dark passage
to the unknown Regions that are below, and it may be either great presumption
or great stupidity to have no Fear of it. A good Man may not overcome all the
Natural Fear of Death, but the wicked has all reason to be scared and terrified
with it, when it comes near him, or he thinks of it.

I shall therefore in the last place consider the Terror of Death, and how we
are only freed from this by Repentance and Religion, by the hopes and
assurances of Christianity, and our having sincerely Repented of all our Sins,
and so as I have shown, fitted and prepared our selves thereby for Death.

SECT. VII. Of the Fear of Death, and how we are delivered from it by
Repentance and Religion.
THere is no Natural Evil so great as Death, the King of Terrors, and the chief
of those dreadful things that Humane Nature is afraid of. Skin for skin, and
all that a man has will he give for his life, Job 2.4. He is willing to part
with every thing that he may compound with it; nay what will not he not give to
purchase a short reprieve from Death and the Grave? that he may but set them
back a while, and gain a little more time to live. How is the poor Man willing
to endure any thing, to linger out a miserable Life a little longer, though in
the midst of pains, and aches, and greater torments of Body perhaps then he
would feel in Death it self. How patiently will he submit to the most tedious
penance, and severest discipline that his Physician shall lay upon him, and
swallow down the most loathsome and bitter draughts, that the more bitter cup
of Death may pass from him. How will he endure the utmost cruelties of Surgery,
and bear a living Martyrdom rather than dye, have his Body burnt and scarified,
his Flesh cut and mangled to the Bone, his Limbs cut off or sawn asunder, that
so he may dye by piece-meals, and outlive some part of himself, and escape out
of the hands of Death, though it be never so narrowly, and run away from it
though he leave a Leg or an Arm behind him. This shows how Natural the love of
Life is, and how willing most Men are to preserve and purchase it at any rate,
and with what abhorrence they look at Death, and how it frights and startles
them when it comes near them; when they behold its pale look, and its terrible
visage, and see the ghastly monster laying hands on them, and ready to lay them
prostrate at its feet, how does it then appalle and terrify them, and make
their Blood chill, and their Spirits cold and clammy, and their Hearts dye
within them, when they think how their once brisk and sprightly bodies, that
have been long enjoying all the sweet Pleasures of Life and Sense, shall in a
moments time be deprived of all those, and become only a heavy clod, and a cold
and senseless lump of Flesh, laid out upon its once warm Bed, and then locked
up in its little Cabin, and so laid in the proper place of Rottenness and
Putrefaction, where it is to molder into Dust, and to be as clean forgotten in
a little time as if it had never been. This is a very mortifying, and a very
melancholy Consideration to most Men, and when they consider that in a little
time this must certainly be their own case, and their own fatal condition, this
must keep them in perpetual fear and bondage; if there were no provision
against this Natural Fear of Death, if Religion did not afford us some helps
and assistances against it, and there were not something to take off, and abate
its Natural Terror, and to support, and strengthen, and encourage the Mind of
a good Man against it. Death as it is the Punishment of Sin, and was for that
end ordained by God, and brought into the World, for by sin entered death, as
the Apostle says, Romans 1.12. carries some marks of his Anger, and so must
necessarily have some degree of Fear accompany it; but Christ who was to
deliver Mankind from the greatest Punishments which our first Parents drew upon
themselves and their Posterity by their Transgressions, and was to free us from
the saddest effects of theirs and our own Sins, he has, though not quite, taken
away this Punishment, no more than he has the other temporal ones occasioned by
the Fall, for we must still dye, and still have some fear of Death, yet the
worst effects of Death, and for which it was most to be dreaded, those Christ
has delivered us from; and it was one great reason why he became a Man, and why
he took part of the same flesh and blood of which we are partakers, and which
makes us subject to Death, That through death he might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is, the Devil, and deliver them who through fear of death
were all their life time subject to bondage, as the divine Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews assures us, Heb. 2.15. Now the ways by which Christ and
Christianity do this, are chiefly these two; I. By assuring us of another Life.
II. By taking away the sting of Death which is Sin upon our true Repentance. I
shall,


1. Show this. Then,

2. Enquire whether a true Penitent and good Man ought to have no Fear of Death.

3. Give some Directions about thus overcoming the Fear of Death, that so we
may not be too much terrified with it when it approaches.

I. Christ and Christianity free us from the Fears of Death, by assuring us of
another Life, and of a Glorious Immortality after Death. Death would be very
terrible indeed, if it took away our Being, and made an end of us when it came
and put us into a state of Annihilation. If the Grave were to swallow us up,
and we were to pass into the dark abyss of Nonentity when we went out of the
World. If when we expired our last Breath, our Souls were to pass with it into
the soft Air, and we were to be no more after we went off the stage of this
World. Nothing can be so close, so desirable as our being, which is the
foundation of all Happiness and Enjoyment to us, which some have thought so
considerable that they have supposed it more eligible to be miserable than not
to be at all, though I can by no means be of their mind, and think being only
in order to be miserable, to be no desirable thing, if the Misery be greater
than the Comfort of being, and bare existence is a very thin evanid, abstracted
thing to be compared with solid and substantial Misery, but the closest
Principles of Self-love and Self-preservation, must make us very unwilling to
part with our Beings, and all the Pleasures and Enjoyments that belong to them;
and therefore if we were to resign up those by Death, it would be very
terrible: And how could we be sure we did not, if we had not firm and certain
grounds of another Life after this, or if we had nothing but the uncertain
guesses and conjectures of it from Natural Light. Most Men indeed had some dark
intimations of this from thence, and did either hope or fear there might be
such a thing rather than believe it. But now Christ has brought Life and
immortality to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. He has utterly dispelled
that cloud which kept those of this World from seeing into another, and has
clearly and manifestly revealed to us the certainty of another and an Immortal
State, and by his Resurrection from the Dead and Ascension into Heaven, given
visible and ocular demonstration of it. And how should this take off the Fear
of Death, when we are sure of another Life after it, when it is only a passage
to another and a better World too, if it be not through our own fault, if we
are not unprepared and unfitted for it? if we are, then indeed this is no great
Comfort to us, but we might wish that Death would put an end to our Being; but
if we have Repented us of all our Sins, and are truly prepared for Death, this
should much lessen and abate the Fear of it; when though we may be a little
unwilling to leave our old State and Circumstances, our old Dwelling and
Habitation, our old Friends and Acquaintance, and to go into a new and unknown
place, yet we are sure in the general, that we shall be much better provided
for, and in a much better condition than we are here; and though the passage
seems to us rough and dangerous, and we are loath to leave the shore, and to
launch into the mighty deep of Eternity, yet this is a sort of Childish
fondness in us to what we have been used to, and like the humor of him that
would not leave his poor and pitiful Cottage that he has always lived in,
though he were to go and take possession of a Kingdom in another Country. Do
not Mankind that have more Wisdom and a larger Spirit, willingly leave their
own Native Country, and Kinsfolks, and Relations, and transport themselves to
an unknown place, where there is any fair hopes and probability of mending
their Fortunes, and living in a more happy and comfortable condition? and have
we not as good evidence, and as much reason to believe that Heaven is as rich
and happy a Country as the Indies, or any other place where we have never been,
and had only relations of them from others? has not Christ given us as much
assurance of this as we can desire? and has not the Scripture described and
drawn the Chart and Map of those Heavenly Regions, and given us as true and
full an account of the Pleasures and Riches of them, as we can wish for or
expect in this Mortal State? If we knew them so fully and particularly as we
shall do hereafter, we should not so much love Life as we now fear Death; but
God has concealed the particular knowledge of them from us at present that we
may be willing to live here, but the general knowledge of a Future and Glorious
Immortality which we have by Jesus Christ, whereby we are assured that Death
does not conclude our Being, but only translate us to a much better State, if
we be fit for it by Repentance, this should deliver us from the Fear of Death.

II. Christ has taken away the sting of death, as the Apostle intimates, 1 Cor.
15.56. and so has delivered us from the servile Fear of it, for the sting of
death, as he there says, is sin. It Is that which makes the darts of Death so
sharp and poisonous, because they are envenomed with our own Sin, and dipped in
our own Guilt. Were that but once drawn out, we might play with the harmless
Serpent, and it would not bite or wound us. Could we disarm Death of those
Terrors with which our own Sins dress it up, it would not appear so ugly and
so frightful to us. It Is they which put us in a state of Bondage and Servility,
and depress and sink our Minds with a slavish Fear that we are going to
execution when we are going to dye, and that we are committed to the Grave but
as to a Prison where Death like a terrible Lictor or Executioner is to torment
us, or we are to be delivered over to him that has the Power of Death, that is
the Devil. Now this may justly terrify us, when we think that whenever Death
arrests us, it hurries us only to a place of Torments, and seizes us as
condemned Prisoners to be carried where we must suffer. It Is not leaving the
Pleasures of this Life makes Men so unwilling to dye, as the fear of going to
the Miseries of another. It Is not a present Temporal Death they are so afraid
of, as that Future and Eternal one which comes after it And this indeed is
justly to be feared, were Hell to swallow us up as well as the Grave, and were
we to sink into the bottomless Gulf when our feet take hold of Death; but
Christ has delivered us from all the danger of this, if we do not wifully throw
our selves into it. He has taken away all that Guilt, and all that Punishment
due to our Sins which we are afraid of, if we have but sincerely and timely
repented of them; and though Death summons us to Judgment, and we know our
selves Criminals, yet by the performance of that we have our Pardon signed in
the Blood of Christ, and Heaven will certainly allow of it to a Christian if he
have not forfeited it by a desperate Impenitence. True, and sincere, and
perfect Repentance will free us in great measure from the Fears and Horrors of
Death when it comes near us. Our Sins indeed will then be most apt to scare us,
when Death sets them in order before us, but we have all the assurance of the
Gospel, all the assurance of Heaven, that if we have duly repented of them,
they shall no way hurt or endanger us; I will not say that they shall no way
make us afraid, for this perhaps would not become a very modest, and humble,
and penitent Sinner to be quite fearless, but he will have great hopes with his
fears, and very cheerful and comfortable grounds that shall greatly lessen and
abate them; The righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 13.32. Hopes that his
Sins are pardoned in and through Christ, and that whenever he goes hence, he
goes to a Glorious and Blessed Immortality, and this will take away if not all
Fear of Death, yet such a troublesome and tormenting one, as fills us with
perplexity and confusion whenever we think of it, and makes us all our life
time subject to bondage, as Scripture speaks. And this will help to resolve
that Question I proposed in the second place, namely,

2. Whether a true Penitent, or good Christian, ought to have no Fear of Death?
I Answer, He ought to have no such Fear as makes him all his life time subject
to bondage; such a base, slavish, immoderate Fear, as makes him not enjoy
himself, but sinks down his Spirit, and depresses his Mind to that degree, that
he is always uneasy, and perplexed, and disturbed at the thoughts of it. Such
as has been storied of some, that they would not have the word Death named in
their hearing, for the very naming and thinking of it, made such an impression
upon them, and struck them with such a panick Fear, that like the Handwriting
upon the Wall to Belshazzar, Dan. 5.6. in the midst of their jollity, it would
make their countenance change, and their thoughts trouble them, so that the
joints of their loins were loosed, and their knees smote one against another:
But above all, such a Fear of Death as makes a Man think it a greater Evil than
Sin, and so to avoid that will deny his Savior and renounce his Religion, or
do any thing whatever is necessary to escape a present Fear of Death. This
makes him a slave to every one that has power to kill him, and to save his Life
he will deliver up his Conscience, his Soul, his Savior, his Religion, and all
those things which ought to be a thousand times more dear to us, and which we
should be much more unwilling to part with than our lives. These are
unreasonable and unlawful Fears of Death, but there is still a Natural Fear of
Death which may belong to a penitent good Christian, and which it is not
necessary he should wholly overcome, as it is a Natural Evil, as it is a
Punishment of Sin, as it is a going to our last great and terrible Trial before
the Bar of Heaven, a Trial upon which our Souls and their Eternal Fate of
Happiness or Damnation does depend. This may cause some Fear in a true
Penitent, or a very good Christian, and I do not know that God has any where
forbid it, or that he has promised such a full assurance to every true Penitent
and good Man, as wholly to take away all kind of Fear of Death, or that this is
any want of saving Faith in him. In some extraordinary cases God may give it,
as in cases of Suffering and Persecution, when an extraordinary assistance of
Gods Spirit, and an extraordinary assurance of their Salvation, took away all
Fears of Death and made them go to the Flames and to the Gibbet rejoicing and
triumphing, but that this is ordinary and constant, I see no Reason nor no
Scripture to believe. The Fear of Death is a Natural and Invincible Infirmity
to many a true Penitent, and good, and humble, and timorous Christian, who
though his Conscience accuse him not of any great and ill things, yet may
magnify every little fault and imperfection, and not forgive it himself, though
God does, nor be at peace in his own Mind, though he be with God, It Is a great
perfection to conquer the Fears of Death, if it be done upon good grounds, for
some have no Fear of Death out of a senseless stupidness, because they have no
sense of what follows after Death: And we find the greatest part of Men who
have most reason to be afraid of it, to be the least so, out of mere Natural
courage and hardiness, and for want of thinking, or believing, or considering
the things of Religion and another World; others from false Principles and
Mistakes, by thinking a Pardon or Absolution sets them right in the Court of
Heaven, and that they may boldly appear there with some such security, or those
that have low thoughts of Religion, and think a little Sorrow for their Sins,
and a few Sighs, and some Prayers when they come to dye, will carry them to
Heaven as well as if they had lived never so Holily, and Righteously, and
Godly. Now if Men's Confidence and Fearlesness arises from such Mistakes as
these, it is like the hope of the Hypocrite that shall perish, Job 8.13. and
such presumptuous persons only rush into Hell with their eyes shut, and see not
their danger before they are in it. On the contrary, a modest and humble
penitent Christian may be afraid where no Fear is, may judge too hardly of
himself, and may be though quite out of danger, yet not out of all Fear; for
after all God will not judge us by our own Fears, or Hopes, or Opinion of our
selves, which may be all groundless and mistaken, but he will judge Righteous
Judgment, and correct the Errors by which we may pass Judgment of our selves;
and the Terms of the Gospel and not our own Thoughts shall be the Rule by which
we shall be judged at the last day. But to take off the Fear of Death as much
as we can, and to free our selves from a slavish and immoderate degree of it,
the best Directions that can be are these two.

1. What has been already given, duly to prepare and fit our selves for it by
a timely and thorough Repentance. 2. To join the liveliest Act of Faith with
this our Habitual Repentance, and exert that at the time when Death is near us.
(1.) To perfect our Repentance, and so to live in the habit of that and of all
goodness, that we may be the best prepared to dye that we can be. Dye we know
we must. Death if it be not now near us, and yet we do not know but it may be
dogging us at the heels, yet will certainly in a little time come up to us, and
fright and startle us when it does, if we do not take great care to be ready
and prepared for it. Since we must therefore necessarily encounter this great
Monster, this terrible Enemy which there is no escaping but we must certainly
grapple with him, let us all our lives prepare for the battle, let us arm our
selves with the whole armor of God and Religion, with a careful, and pious,
and good life, with a timely and thorough Repentance of all our evil ways, with
a sincere, and upright, and good Conscience, and with avoiding every thing that
we know is sinful and unlawful, and which will make Death terrible to us
whenever it comes. Let us not be such desperate Bravoes in Sin, as to venture
upon that with a false Courage, which will make us the worst of Cowards when we
come to dye; but let us be so wisely afraid of Death now, as to live with that
care and exactness that we may not be afraid of it when we come to it. It were
well if some Men were more afraid of Death than they are, and as I am sure they
have all reason to be, that so they might be brought off from their evil ways,
and not run headlong upon those dangers which are very near them, though they
are not sensible of them. The sword hangs over their head though they do not
see it, and nothing but the thin thread of Life keeps it from falling upon
them; they walk blindfold upon the brinks of Hell and Damnation, and it would
be well of Fear would open their Eyes, and make them recover themselves before
Death makes it too late. Nothing can truly and thoroughly arm us against the
Fears of Death, but Repentance and a good Life: To those who have lived in the
practice of them Death is a very harmless thing, it is but lying down to sleep,
closing the eyes and going to rest, the Bodies being senseless a while, till it
awakes at the great day of Judgment, and passing a longer night in the Grave
till it arises more fresh and lively in the morning of the Resurrection; and as
for the Soul, it is a short and quick passage from Earth to Heaven, and
therefore such have no reason to be afraid of it, when it approaches them never
so near. But then,

(2.) Let the true Penitent quicken his Faith at that time, and raise that to
the highest and strongest pitch, that so he may then look beyond the grave, and
see, and believe, and desire those happy and glorious things which God has
prepared for him in another World. If we believed those as we ought we should
never be so afraid to dye, if we were so affected with those pleasures that are
above, and that are at Gods Right Hand for evermore, we should not be so loath
to part with the Pleasures shall I say, rather with the Troubles and the
Miseries of this Life. Did we think as we ought of that perfect peace, and joy,
and satisfaction which is not to be had here, but to be met with only in
Heaven, we should not be so fond to abide in this Valley of Tears, and not go
up to those Mansions above, where is full Joy and Contentment. Let us fix our
thoughts and set our hearts upon those happy Regions of Bliss and Glory, and we
shall not fear to pass through the shadow of Death to come to them, though the
way to that Heavenly Canaan is through a Wilderness, through the dark and
unknown Region of Death, through which a thousand wandering Souls are always
passing, yet we shall be conducted safely through it by Angels, who will bring
us to the Palace of the great King, where we shall be received by our blessed
Master and Savior, and by all the Saints and holy Souls that are gone before
us, who as they rejoice at a Sinners Repentance, will now welcome him to his
Fathers house; and we shall then as much wonder at our selves for fearing to
dye, as we are now willing to live. If the account which Scripture gives us of
those invisible Regions be true, and we do fully believe that Joy, that Glory,
that Blessedness, that unspeakable Happiness which is there revealed to us,
this our Faith, joined with our Repentance, should overcome the Fears of Death,
and make us not only not afraid, but desire to be dissolved, and to be willing
to lay down this load and luggage of Flesh, because we know that if our earthly
house o^ this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. And there shall be no more Sin,
nor Sorrow, nor Repentance: but the blessed Penitent, now he is safely arrived
at his happy Port, shall look back upon the past hazards and dangers he was in,
and comfortably remember how his Sins like so many Rocks had like to have split
and shipwrecked, and swallowed him up in the gulf of Perdition, and how by the
wonderful Grace of God he has happily escaped them, and is come safe to
Heaven, and therefore will now offer Eternal Thanksgivings, and pay his Vows of
Praise to his great Deliverer, and rejoice evermore in his Glorious and
Heavenly Salvation.

CHAP. III. Whether all Sins are Pardonable, and may have the benefit of
Repentance.
I Am next to consider, Whether all Sins are Pardonable, and may have this
benefit of Repentance. This has been denied by a great many, and particularly
by the Novatians, who would not allow Pardon and Absolution to wilful and great
Sins committed after Baptism; and this is charged upon Smalcius and other
Socinians, that they deny the same to heinous and habitual Sins of Relapse,
into which any shall fall after they have once Repented, and been freed from
them. And there are some places of Scripture that seem very much to favor
these hard Opinions, as Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. For it is impossible for those who were
once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the
world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance.
And Heb. 10.26. For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins. And 2 Pet.
2.20, 21, 22. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world,
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again
entangled therein and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than the
beginning. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment
delivered unto them. But it is happened unto them according to the true
proverb, The dog is returned to his own vomit, and the sow that was washed to
her wallowing in the mire. And in other places the Scripture speaks of a Sin
unto Death, 1 John 5.16. as of a more malignant and deadly Nature, and
different from all other Sins which are Mortal, and Sins also unto Death
without Repentance: And our Savior says expressly of the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, that it is unpardonable, and shall not be forgiven, neither in this
world nor the world to come, Luke 12.20. Matthew. 12.32. i. e. as St. Mark
expresses it, It has never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation,
Mark 3.29. And what that is, is not fully agreed on by Divines, and so there
may be fear, if not danger of a Christians falling into it, and so into an
unpardonable state, by the Holy Ghosts being so many ways concerned in his
Salvation, and he having so many ways to Sin against him.

This gives therefore great trouble to a great many Minds, and if one
particular Sin, or any sorts of Sin, be unpardonable by the Gospel, they will
be very fearful, and can hardly be satisfied but that they have committed that
Sin, and so are cut off from all hopes by it; and they will like melancholy
persons who read of such grievous diseases, fancy immediately that they have
them themselves, and that such and such symptoms are already upon them.

If we cannot therefore assure all Persons of Pardon for all manner of Sins,
however great or however circumstantiated upon their true Repentance of them,
it will very much take off from the encouragements to this Duty, and by taking
off Men's hopes in many cases, and shutting the door of Mercy against them,
hinder them from performing this Duty, and make them if not act desperately and
madly, as Men without hopes generally do, yet throw them into a comfortless and
despairing condition, and overwhelm them with remediless sorrow and trouble.

The general scope and design of the Gospel seems to be to remove all this, To
preach good tidings unto the meek, to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound,
to comfort them that mourn, Isa. 61.1. To call those to come to Christ who are
weary and heavy laden, by reason of their Sins, with a promise, that he will
give them rest, Matthew. 11.28. To preach Repentance and remission of sins in his
name among all nations, Luke 24.47. without excluding any Persons, or excepting
any Sins whatsoever, to proclaim a general Amnesty and Act of Pardon, to all
who Repent and come in to the Gospel. Had there been an exception, as to a more
notorious Traitor, to any one, though a single Sin which Mankind had been like
to fall into, this would have abated both from the Goodness of God, and the
Comfort of Men, when he should be represented as implacable in some cases and
never to be appeased, and the other should be left in such danger and hazard,
that if they fell into some Sins, which it was very possible for them to do,
that then there should be no hopes, nor no means of recovery for them.

God, I doubt not, is more merciful, and Mankind not so miserable, as to have
any Sin whatever utterly unpardonable which is Repented of, but as our Savior
says, All manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, Matthew.
12.31. And as Isaiah told the Jews of old, and it is not less so under the
Gospel, Though your sins be as scarlet they shall be white as snow, though they
be red like crimson, they shall be as wool, Isa. 1.18. that is, of however
high a nature or degree they are, they shall upon Repentance and Amendment be
done away and forgiven. No Sin is too great for the infinite Mercy of God to
forgive, and the infinite Merit of Christ's Blood to atone, nor is any excepted
in the Covenant of Grace which God has made with Mankind, wherein he promises
universally to be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and
iniquities he will remember no more, Heb. 8.11. Jer. 31.34. without any bar or
reserve to any Sin of what nature or aggravation soever. I shall therefore
Examine and Answer those places of Scripture which seem to give any countenance
to the other severe and cruel Doctrine, as to Sins of Apostasy, after Baptism,
or upon Relapse, and then largely consider the Nature of the Sin against the
Holy Ghost, and how or whether that is unpardonable, so as to free all honest
Minds from any trouble about it.

SECT. I. Of Apostasy. Sins after Baptism. Upon Relapse.
FIrst then as to those places of the Hebrews which are brought as the ground
of the Novatian Doctrine, for the irremissibleness of wilful Sins committed
after Baptism, they do not belong to any Sins of a Christian whilst he
continues such, but to one renouncing Christianity, and wholly Apostatizing
from it, even after he has professed it, and had miraculous evidence and
conviction of it. They who were enlightened or Baptized, (...), and have tasted
of the Heavenly gift, have been sensible of the Benefits of Baptism, and the
Privileges of Christianity, and been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, have
further had those miraculous and extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost
conferred upon them, which new Baptized Persons then very often had, and have
tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, have had a
sense of the excellency of the Gospel and the Christian Revelation, and those
powerful and great Miracles, (...), which accompanied the dispensation thereof,
and the times of the Messiah, or that have been duly affected with the powerful
Considerations of Eternity and another World, which are the great things their
Religion sets before them; if such as these shall (like Julian afterward, or
the Gnostics then) fall away from all this, and apostatize from their Faith
and Religion by the Fears of Persecution, or the Love of this World, it is
impossible to renew them again to Repentance, seeing this their revolt implies
no less than the crucifying to themselves the Son of God afresh, and putting
him to open shame; i. e. the condemning of Christ as a Malefactor and Impostor,
and so joining and consenting with the Jews in Crucifying him as such, and
bringing an open reproach and discredit upon him, as if he were a false
Prophet, and that upon Trial and Experience they found his Religion to be
false, and therefore forsook it. This Apostasy and renouncing the whole
Religion of Christ, is meant also by Sinning wilfully after we have received
the knowledge of the truth, Heb. 10.26. It is sinning in the same word and
sense as the Apostate Angels did when they revolted from Heaven, 2 Pet. 2.4.
for in the next Verses it is called, Treading under foot the Son of God: i. e.
Contemning him as a vile miscreant, and as if he were not Risen from the Grave,
but lay dead there, and so were to be trod upon, and counting the Blood of the
Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing; as if it were shed
justly, and so were the Blood of a common Malefactor, and doing despite unto
the Spirit of Grace, reproaching all the evidence by which the Holy Ghost
confirmed the Truth of Christ and his Doctrine, both in him and his Apostles.
This can be no less than a malicious apostasy and defection from Christianity
in general, and not only a wilful breach of any of its particular Laws.

And something like unto these is that Sin unto death, in St. John. 1 Ep. 5.16.
that which deserved the utmost and severest censures; as he which under Moses
Law sinned presumptuously, and was (...), did make void and throw off the Law,
was to dye without mercy, Heb. 10.28. So under Christianity this presumptuous
Sinner was to be Spiritually cut off from all the Benefits of Christian
Communion, and from the Prayers of the Faithful, as we find they were by the
Discipline of the Primitive Church.

This was so severe at first that they denied all Peace and Absolution to such
Apostates and Lapsi, even in articulo Mortis, at the point of Death, and would
never receive them again into their Communion, thereby to fright all persons
from all false and cowardly compliances in those times of danger and
persecution, but afterward the Church was forced to abate of this rigor,
which had made such Disturbances, and occasioned those great Schisms of the
Novatians and Donatists. There were other Sins also for which the guilty
Penitents were excluded from all Communion to the last in those purer and
severer Ages, as Murder, Adultery, and those Unnatural Lusts which they called
Monstra, these were never admitted to Pardon and Absolution of the Church, as
appears by the Canons of those ancient Councils of Eliberis, Arle; and Ancyra
and by the Writings of Tertullian and others, and the opposition made in Africa
to the Decree of Pope Zephyrine, and by the milder Canons of the Council of
Nice afterward, but all this was only prudential, and an external Discipline
in foro humano, which the Church altered according to its Discretion, but they
did not deny all Pardon with God for those Sins upon Repentance, nor utterly
cut them off from all hopes in another World, but allowed God could pardon
them, though not the Church; that they might be forgiven, though not in this
World, yet in the World to come, according to that Jewish Notion, that though
there were no Sacrifices nor ordinary means of Expiation for some Sins, yet
that God would forgive them hereafter.

Secondly, That Sins are Pardoned after Baptism as well as before, is plain
from the Incestuous Corinthian, who though he had committed such a Sin as was
not usual among the Gentiles, and was to be put out of the Church, and to be
delivered unto Satan for it, yet this was not to cut him off from Pardon and
Salvation, but as a better means to bring him to both; it was only for the
destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit might be saved in the day of the
Lord, 1 Cor. 5.5. And this sure was the design of those severe and long
Penances in the Primitive Church, whereby though they excluded Sinners from the
benefits of Communion and means of Grace, yet it was not to bereave them of all
hopes of Pardon, and consign them irreversibly to Damnation, but to beget a
greater terror and dread of Sin, and to make their Repentance for it more
complete and perfect, and so by those present Judgments and Severities here, to
prevent their Eternal Condemnation hereafter, for this ought to be the Rule and
Measure of all Church Power and Discipline, it ought to be for Edification not
for Destruction, and they could not miss of this. The Spirit of God writes to
the Church of Ephesus, which were a company of Baptized Christians, to Remember
from whence they were fallen, and Repent, and do their first works, Rev. 2.5.
And St. Paul threatens the Christians at Corinth, to bewail and correct those
which had sinned, and not repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and
lasciviousness they had committed, 2 Cor. 12.21. but does not denounce that
they were unpardonable, Sad would it be if all wilful Sins were so after
Baptism, this would make Christianity a more terrible and severe dispensation
than the Law, and put us in a worse condition than we were without it, and no
Man would then be Baptized till he was a Clinic and near dying, and going out
of the World; but Baptism puts us into a state of Pardon, and the Grace and the
Virtue of it continues all our lives; and if we sin we have an advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2.1. and his Mediation will upon
our Repentance procure Pardon at Gods hands at all times for us.

Thirdly, I shall next consider Sins of Relapse, when a Person after Sorrow and
Repentance for a Sin, yet falls into it again, and repeats it after he has
resolved against it, and been convicted of the heinousness of it; now this is a
sad case, and shows the power of his Lusts, and the weakness of Religion upon a
Man's Mind, and no Man who is in this state can be said to Repent: He is no more
got rid of his Sins than a Man is of a Fever because it intermits sometimes,
and he is well by intervals, but his Fits return again upon him, which shows
that the Disease is still in his Blood, as the other's Relapses do that sin
still reigns in him, because he obeys it in the Lusts thereof. A Man in the
beginning of his Repentance from some habitual Sins, may not get rid
immediately of all his Evil Customs and Sinful Inclinations, but they may
sometimes draw him back again, and sometimes master and overcome him, and he
may rally again, and recover himself, and at last vanquish them: Now whilst
this Conflict lasts, and it is uncertain which side will get the better, and
have the final victory, no judgment can be made of a Man's state, because the
issue is doubtful and uncertain. He is fighting and striving for his Life, for
his Soul, and for Heaven, and he may by his own care and endeavors, and by the
assistance of Heaven conquer and overcome his Sins, and to him that overcomes
God will give of the tree of life, Rev. 2.7. but if he is overcome by them, he
is a slave of Sin, and a captive of the Devil, and a child of Hell, and heir of
Damnation; but what shall a Man do who has often thus relapsed into Sin after
his most serious Vows and Resolutions against it, are his Sins against those
unpardonable, and is there no hopes for him? I Answer by no means, if he can
but recover himself from them, and after all attempts at last get rid of them,
and bring forth the contrary fruits of Repentance and Obedience. I confess such
an one ought to suspect himself, and to suspect his Repentance, till by many
trials he has made it good, and confirmed it; and he ought to be doubly
watchful over himself, and to take heed least Sin enter again at any of those
weak places at which it used to have admittance, and to fortify himself
against all those temptations and opportunities that used to betray him to it,
and therefore to keep his Mind to a close sense of Religion, and to a careful
use of all the Means and Instruments of it, and to beg earnestly of Heaven
Grace proportionable to his needs, and then if it be not his own fault, it will
certainly be sufficient for him. But such Relapses, though they are not quite
hopeless, nor put a Man into a condition that is desperate, yet they are very
dangerous, they grieve Gods Holy Spirit, they give a new Wound to our
Consciences, they make the old Wound that was healed bleed afresh, and render
it more difficult to be cured again, and more ready to mortify and become
incurable, they bring the Mind to a weakness, and unsteadiness, and
irresolution, and to have no power or command over it self, but let its good
Purposes and Principles be bore down by a weak Lust or a silly Temptation, and
one such fatal Relapse sets it back a great way, and makes it with great
difficulty roll up the same stone which has driven it so much downwards, and
with greater labor set upon the same work and design which such a miscarriage
makes more hard to be effected.

They who make Repentance lie in some transient Acts, which upon new Sins are
to be repeated toties quoties, like a Medicine to be taken as often as the same
illness returns, forget that Repentance is a state of Health after Sickness, a
state of Virtue and Obedience after Vice and Disobedience, and that when such a
state is once broken, it is not easy to be made whole again, but like a broken
Limb, it cannot be set without great pain, and long time to grow together
again, and that if it be often broken it will contract an habitual weakness and
lameness.

How long God will suffer a Sinner thus to continue in a state of Falling and
Rising, Repenting and Relapsing, before he cuts him off from any hopes of
Pardon or benefit of Repentance, we do not know, nor how long a hardened
impenitent wretch may go on in a course of sinning before the means of Grace,
and the day of Salvation may be over with him; so that if he knock God will not
open, and there shall be no place found for his Repentance. This is a secret
likewise which is only in the breast of the Almighty, who threatens that his
Spirit shall not always strive with man, Genesis 6.3. And behold now is the
accepted time, now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. And to day if ye will
hear his voice harden not your hearts, Heb. 3.15. And if thou in this thy day
had known the things belonging to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine
eyes, Luke 19. 42. And seek the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him
while he is near, Isa. 55.6. So that God is not always to be found, nor
always near, and it may be too late for the things of our peace, and the
accepted time and the day of Salvation may not continue always, but a Man may
sin so long till God will withdraw his Grace, and may come to an unpardonable
pitch and an impenitent state, and may despise the riches of Gods goodness, and
forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
to repentance: But after his hardness and impenitent heart, may treasure up
wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of
God, Romans 2.4, 5.

This should keep us from neglecting the present opportunities, and not put off
our Repentance from day to day; But to day, while it is called to day, hearken
to his voice, lest we be hardened with the deceitfulness of sin. But if any be
under those Fears that he has brought himself to that sad state, this is the
only true satisfaction can be given him; Whilst he is willing to Repent, and
has a just sense of his Sins, and of his ill state, he is not hardened, and if
Gods Grace does so far work upon his Mind as to make him see and apprehend the
necessity of Repentance, and the forsaking all his evil ways, then it is not
quite withdrawn from him; and if he be willing to try all means, and use his
best endeavors to get rid of his Sins, there is great hopes that he may effect
this, for God will never be wanting to assist our sincere Wills and hearty
Endeavors; and if his Spirit works in us to will and to desire to leave our
Sins from a right apprehension of the danger and mischief of them, and produce
such convictions and illuminations in our Mind, it is certain it has not
abandoned or deserted us, and it will work in us to do also, and to effect and
perform those good thoughts and purposes if we persist in them, and endeavor
with our utmost power to make them good and effectual. No Man is cut off from
Pardon who Repents and becomes a good Man, though he has been never so bad an
one, and no Man will have Gods Grace denied him, who is at any time sincerely
willing and desirous to make use of it, but it is a hard and insensible state
that has sinned away its Life, and its day of Grace, and has only deep horrors
and fruitless sorrows when it is too late to amend and become a good Man, that
is hopeless and desperate.

SECT. II. Of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, its Nature, and whether
Pardonable or no.
WHat is the particular Nature of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and wherein
that which is so dreadful does truly consist, the Scripture methinks is very
plain, though they who have left that, and followed their own or others
conjectures and opinions about it, are very confused and intricate, and very
different and divided among themselves. They have made a great many Sins
against the Holy Ghost when God has no where in Scripture made but one, and
that being of so dreadful and heinous a Nature, we must be careful to apply it
no further than we have warrant from the Word of God, and from our Savior who
best knew it; and it appears clearly from his Discourse about it to be this, A
blasphemous charging of the Miracles he did by the Power of the Holy Ghost to
the Power of the Devil. This the Pharisees did Matthew. 12.24. when Christ had
wrought a mighty Cure and Miracle upon a Demoniack to the admiration of all the
People that had brought him unto him, ver. 21. Then was brought unto him one
possessed of a Devil, blind and dumb, and he healed him, insomuch that the
blind and dumb both spoke and saw. And all the people were amazed, and said, Is
not this the Son of David? But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This
fellow does not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils. Our
Savior when he had confuted that unreasonable and malicious Calumny against
him, by showing how unlikely it was that the Devil should thus destroy his own
Kingdom and Interest by being divided against himself, and lending him his
Power to cast out Devils, and that it might as well be pretended that all
Miracles that were done by their Prophets of old, or by others amongst them
afterward, were performed by a Diabolical Power as well as his, and so they
would destroy the force and credit of their own Miracles as well as those he
did, he immediately proceeds to discourse of this Sin, Wherefore I say unto
you, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto them. And he
repeats it again in the next Verse, And whosoever speaks a word against the
son of man it shall be forgiven him; that is, yet may with less guilt and
danger abuse me, for any thing else that does not so immediately reflect upon,
and reproach the Spirit of God, as when ye called me wine-bibber, and glutton,
and a friend of Publicans and Sinners, but whosoever speaks against the Holy
Ghost; if ye use any reproachful sayings against the Spirit of God by which I
do my Miracles, this shall not be forgiven neither in this world nor in the
world to come. Neither here, nor as some of you vainly expect hereafter, but
shall be certainly and severely punished in both. Now here is no mention at
all, nor the least intimation of those other Sins in which some have placed
this Sin against the Holy Ghost; as in final Impenitence, which the Pharisees
could not then be charged with, not Apostasy from Christianity, which they had
not at all professed, nor were by this very likely to do; nor denying the Truth
for fear of Suffering, as in the instance of Francis Spira, which is often said
to be his Sin, nor any of the six Sins in which the Schoolmen have placed it,
as Envying our Brothers Graces, Impugning the known Truth, Obstinacy,
Impenitency, Desperation and Presumption, which two latter are unluckily put
together to make this one Sin, when they are so contrary to themselves.
Whatever mixture there might be of these, or any of these, or the like Sins, in
the Minds of the Pharisees who committed this Sin against the Holy Ghost, yet
those are no more this particular Sin here meant by our Savior, than Pride and
Covetousness, and other Sins that might go a great way, and be no small causes
to bring them to this Sin, and dispose their Minds for it; but St. Mark sets
the thing beyond all dispute in chap. 3. ver. 28.29, 30. where he relates these
words of our Savior, thus, Verily I say unto you, all sins shall be forgiven
unto the sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme:
But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost shall never have
forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation. And then he gives the
reason of our Saviors saying all this to them, namely, because they said he
has an unclean Spirit; i. e. a Diabolical and impure one, which makes it as
manifest as can be desired, that this their Sin was their blaspheming and
speaking so reproachfully of the Holy Ghost which was in Christ, as if that
were not the Holy Spirit of God, but an unclean and a Devilish Spirit. How
great and horrid a Sin this was, will appear from these four Considerations.

1. It tended to destroy the whole Truth of Christianity, and consequently to
rob the World of all the benefit it has by it. There could nothing so malicious
be contrived to undermine the Foundation of the Gospel, as this assertion of
the Pharisees, that our Savior wrought his Miracles by the help of an evil or
unclean Spirit; for this was to make him a Magician, a confederate with the
Devil, and so to represent his Religion as a work and contrivance of Hell, that
could tend only to the mischief and destruction of the World: For if no good
thing could come out of Galilee, as in a Proverbial derision they gave out to
the People, to be sure no good thing could come from Hell and from evil
Spirits. The Devil would never lend his Power had he been able, to promote or
establish any thing but a false Religion, that should withdraw the World from
the Worship of the true God. The greatest demonstration for the Truth of
Christianity were the Miracles of Christ, as he often appeals to them, John
10.37, 38. John 14.11. Mat. 11.4. and if these were done not by a Divine but a
Diabolical Power, and by a compact with the Devil, they are then the greatest
Arguments against it; for then it may be only a mystery of iniquity brought
into the World by him whose coming is after the working of Satan with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.9, 20. as Antichristianism is described.

2. It tends not only to undermine the Truth of Christianity, but of all
Revelation whatever from God. The greatest proof and demonstration that can be
given to any Prophet that comes from God to reveal his Will to Men, is his
working of Miracles, and satisfying those he is sent to that he has a Divine
Authority and Commission, by his showing his Credentials from God, who would
never suffer a Cheat and Impostor to do such mighty works as must necessarily
cheat and deceive those that see them. Now if notwithstanding that he teach
nothing contrary to the Nature of God, nor of Good and Evil, and yet perform
such wonderful Miracles as can be done only by the Finger of God, and by a
Divine Power; if we will still suspect this, then we can never be satisfied of
the truth of any revelation from Heaven, and so the Pharisees did not only
undermine Christianity, but even their own Law; for it might with as much
reason be said, that Moses and the Prophets who pretended to come from God, and
wrought Miracles to show they did so, yet were only the Prophets and
Ambassadors of the Devil, and did all their Miracles by his Power, as of Christ.

3. This must proceed from a very spightful temper and malicious humor that
made them speak this against their Consciences, and the sense of their own
Minds. Sure they who were eyewitnesses of his Miracles, and so had the best
and fullest evidence of the truth of them, and who heard the excellency of his
Discourses and Sermons, in which was nothing contrary to the Worship of the
true God, or the Moral Duties of Religion, they must as our Savior once told
them, know both him and also whence he was, John 7.28. When they must be
convinced that he was both an innocent and good Man himself, and that his
Doctrine commanded the highest Virtue and Goodness, and tended to destroy the
whole Power and Interest of the Devil in the World, they could not surely
believe themselves, or think this their black charge was true; but when they
saw the People amazed at his healing a Demoniack, and saying, Is not this the
Son of David? Matthew. 12.23. And so they feared that they should have lost their
Power and Authority together with their Law, and that the People should have
left them and followed him, then they gave out this vile and abominable
reflection upon him, that he did all this by the Power of the Devil, which was
the utmost shift that Malice could invent to blind the eyes of others against a
Truth which they could hardly be supposed not to see themselves.

4. It was the most taunting, reproachful Slander against God and his Holy
Spirit that could possibly be, and therefore is always called Blasphemy, which
is the most daring, provoking and transcendent Crime against God that can be,
and proceeds from the most contemptuous and scornful, most wretched and
depraved temper of Mind. To slander and calumniate the Son of Man was a great
Sin, to call a sober and temperate Person a Glutton and Wine-bibber, a friend
of Publicans and Sinners, and to raise slanderous and false stories against any
Man's Credit is one of the greatest though the commonest Sins; but to proceed so
far as to slander and reproach God, this was accounted by one of the Heathens
as bad or worse than to deny him, but to represent the Holy and Blessed Spirit
of God as an Apostate Angel, as a Hellish Fiend, and to reproach, and scoff,
and calumniate whatever he does for the good and salvation of Mankind, as the
work and intrigue of the Devil. This is such an horrid Sin, that our Savior
says, it should not be forgiven, but bring certain Judgment upon them.

I come now to inquire how and upon what account it is Unpardonable, which is
the greatest difficulty about it. Now though no Sin in its own Nature be
unpardonable, because none so great but that the infinite Mercy and Goodness of
God does still exceed it, and none is exempted from that General and Gracious
Promise of Pardon which he has made to Mankind, and none has so much Guilt in
it, but that the Blood of Christ and Merit of his Sacrifice is able to atone
and expiate for it, and none does so far corrupt and deprave the Mind but that
the Grace of God can restore and amend it; yet a Sin may however be
unpardonable by reason of some circumstances attending it, and chiefly upon
these three accounts.

1. As not being Repented of, for so every wilful Sin is unpardonable: For
though the Gospel proposes Mercy and Pardon to every Sin and Sinner without
exception, yet it is upon this never failing condition of Repentance and
Amendment, without which we shall as certainly perish, as if there had been no
place for Mercy at all, but we had stood under an irreversible decree of
Condemnation for the first Sin we had committed. The Covenant of Grace is made
upon that Condition on our part, which if we fail of, we shall as certainly
lose the benefit of it as if there had been no such Covenant made.

2. That Sin is also unpardonable by the standing terms of the Divine Mercy,
which is not curable by all the ordinary means of the Divine Grace, but resists
and baffles all those remedies which can be used to that purpose. As a Disease
is uncurable when it is too strong for all the remedies that can be used
against it, so is a Sin unpardonable when it is too hard for all the means
whatsoever that are proper to amend it. As when a Man will be an Infidel and
disobedient to God when he sees plain Miracles before his face, and will not be
convinced by all these, which are the best and only means to that purpose, when
he will still be obstinate, and harden himself against the highest evidence
that is possible, as Pharaoh did, when he could not but confess that the
Miracles were done by the Finger of God, and yet would not hearken unto him; or
as the Pharisees, and some of the Jews, who would not be persuaded to
Christianity by all the visible Wonders, and extraordinary Miracles wrought by
Christ and his Apostles. What was there more to be done to satisfy those Men?
and how could any thing that God and the Divine Power was able to do convince
them of their Infidelity, if this would not? And so now when all the
considerations, and all the credible evidences of Religion will not work upon a
Man, nor persuade him to a good Life; when he resists all the means of Grace
that God has appointed, he then resists the last and utmost remedy that should
do him good, and so is necessarily in a hopeless uncurable state and condition.

3. That Sin is unpardonable which provokes God to withdraw his Spirit, and all
the influences of the Divine Grace, and to give them up to a spirit of slumber
and a reprobate sense, and hardness of Heart, as he is sometimes said to do, if
not for one Sin, yet for a great many obstinately and irreclaimably continued
in.

And now let us examine the Sin against the Holy Ghost by these 3 ways.

(1.) Can it be said to be unpardonable because unrepented of? It seems not
upon this account, because it is probable that many of those who were guilty of
it did afterward Repent, and turn Christians. Among the many numerous
Proselytes to Christianity in the time of our Savior, and especially of the
Apostles, it cannot be proved or thought that there were not some of those made
Converts that had fallen into it; and Christ when he prayed for his Enemies,
and for his Crucifiers, most earnestly entreated his Father to forgive them all
without any exception, Luke 23.24. by which he had plainly some hopes of their
Repentance and Amendment, and if he had not, it would have been in vain to have
used so many means as he did afterward to that purpose; besides that he
intimates not the least word to them of their Impenitence, nor was that to be
said of them till the last, this would not sufficiently distinguish this Sin
from any other great and wilful one, for any such unrepented of and that by a
particular Repentance, is unpardonable as well as this against the Holy Ghost,
unless we will venture to say what we have no sufficient warrant for, and
therefore is very bold, and especially when it is a kind of limiting the Grace
and Mercy of God, that Men could never Repent of this as they can of all
others, but that God who has opened a door of Mercy and Repentance in all
other cases, has absolutely shut it in this, so that they shall never be able
nor willing to enter in.

(2.) Is it unpardonable upon the second account, as it was not curable by any
means that God had appointed and thought fit to use to that purpose? This it
seems not to be neither, because God had not yet made use of all the means that
he intended for the Conversion of the Jews, and the Scribes and Pharisees. Our
Savior indeed had done a great many Miracles to testify his Divine Power, but
still there were a great many more which remained behind, and which he had not
yet performed. If we look into the Gospel of St. Matthew and St. Mark, and
observe the time when our Savior had his discourse of this Sin, we shall find
he wrought many very considerable Miracles after that; and what was the design
of all them, but to persuade those to believe in him, and to embrace
Christianity, who were not persuaded so to do by his former ones. And there
remained another Motive behind, which was an evidence even beyond all, and
which was such an Argument to convince the Jewish Infidelity, as did outdo
almost all the other Miracles of our Savior, and that was his Resurrection
from the Dead. This was the great and irresistible proof for the Truth of
Christ and his Religion, and of this especially the Apostles were to be
witnesses to all the World, as being the strongest demonstration of
Christianity; and it is beyond all controversy, that a great many who were not
brought to believe in Christ for his Miracles which they saw him do, or had as
much reason to believe as if they saw him, yet were afterward convinced and
believed upon his Resurrection; and yet besides this sign, which our Savior
says was to be given them after they had charged him to do his Miracles by an
unclean Spirit, Matthew. 16.4. for that was meant by the sign of the Prophet
Jonas, there yet remained another means to cure the Infidelity of these People,
and bring them off from their unreasonable unbelief, and that was the sending
the Holy Ghost in so visible a manner upon the Apostles on the day of
Pentecost, whereby the Jews saw and heard those poor unlearned Men, who were
Fishermen, and Publicans, and Persons of ordinary Rank, and little Education,
speak all sorts of Tongues and Languages, more than the Learnedest of their own
Rabbis were able to do, and work all sorts of Miracles as great as ever Moses
or any of their Prophets were recorded to perform. This also without doubt made
a great many Proselytes to Christ and his Religion that were not so before, and
brought in vast numbers of Believers into the Church, as we read in the Acts of
the Apostles. Now when so many means were appointed and used by God, and those
such strong and powerful ones, even after the Jews had been guilty of that vile
reproach of many of our Saviors Miracles, who can say that this Sin was not
curable by any remedies when they were not all used, but there were still many
others to be applied? and who can say that the Scribes and Pharisees had
resisted the last means of Conviction, when our Savior and his Apostles had
after that so many others to offer to them, and which might probably prevail
upon them? it feemeth more likely from this which is so plain and undeniable,
that the Sin against the Holy Ghost was the resisting all the means whatever
that were or could be used by the Spirit of God, both in Christ and the
Apostles too for the bringing Men to Christianity, and so it became
unpardonable because it baffled the last means that could be used against it;
and as to the word (...) or reproach, which ought to be taken notice of as the
very specific form and essential difference of this Sin, none seem to be more
literally guilty of that, no not the Scribes and Pharisees, who said, Christ
did his miracles and cast out Devils by Beelzebub, or an evil Spirit, than they
who in the time of the Apostles, when they saw them filled with the Holy Ghost,
and speaking with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance, Acts 2.4.
yet mocking and vilely reproaching all this, said, These men are full of new
wine, ver. 13. The ascribing this visible Power of the Holy Ghost on the
Apostles to Drunkenness, and (...) mocking at all this, as if they had been
inspired with the Spirit of Wine, or of Bacchus, rather than the Spirit of God,
seems as great a reproach and calumny to him, as the (...) against the Miracles
of Christ and the ascribing them to an unclean Spirit: And this was more
especially the time of the Spirits economy and dispensation, when he was so
plentifully poured out upon the Apostles and other Christians, and was sent
into the World to be Christ's Advocate, and the public Patron of Christianity,
whereas before when Christ was not glorified, it is expesly said that the Holy
Ghost was not yet given; John 7.39. For all these Reasons I should be inclined
to be of their Mind, who think this to be the true Sin against the Holy Ghost,
which is therefore unpardonable because uncurable by all the means which the
Spirit of God could use, were not the words of St. Matthew, and St. Mark
especially, so plain, that our Savior spoke of this Sin because the Scribes
and Pharisees said, He has an unclean Spirit, Mark 3.30. and because there is
no other thing mentioned by our Savior as the reason of his discourse about
it, but because when he had healed the Blind, and the Dumb, and him that was
possessed with a Devil, the Pharisees said, This fellow does not cast out
Devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the Devils, Matthew. 12.22, 24. Our
Savior did not only forewarn the Pharisees, and tell them that this calumny of
theirs came very near, and was a preparation to the Sin against the Holy Ghost,
and that this would be likely to bring them to commit that afterward, if they
took not great care of themselves; but he seems plainly to charge them as
already guilty, and not merely in danger of it, and that which they had already
said was no doubt a most horrid Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, and nothing
could be worse than to reproach the Spirit that was in Christ himself, to whom
he was given not by measure, but in a more full and extraordinary manner than
he was to others afterward: For though the Holy Ghost was not before given to
the Apostles nor other Christians till Christ was ascended into Heaven, yet he
was given to him, and to reproach him in him was like the reproaching the
Authority of a Prince, not only in his Envoys and Ambassadors but in his own
Son.

So that allowing the Sin against the Holy Ghost to be the ascribing the
Miracles of Christ to the Power of the Devil, which seems to be the plainest
and simplest account of it, and most agreeable to the words of our Savior, and
to the only places of Scripture where it is ever mentioned, and in such a
difficult matter we must be careful not to venture further than we have clear
Authority from the Scripture it self, then from what has been largely said on
this Head, it does not seem that this Sin was therefore unpardonable, because
it had resisted and been too hard for all even the last means of Conviction
which was to be used to recover Men from it, since there were many others that
God had appointed after that.

(3.) In the Third place, Can we say it is unpardonable upon another account,
because God was thereby provoked to withdraw his Grace and Spirit from those
who were guilty of it, and to give them up to hardness of Heart, and an
uncurable state of Mind? This we must not say of any but where God himself has
expressly declared it, and it would be great rashness as well as
uncharitableness to pronounce this of any, but where God has first pronounced
it, which he has not, that I know of, of the Scribes and Pharisees upon the
account of this Sin against the Holy Ghost. Our Savior indeed charges this in
some measure upon the whole Jewish Nation, who believed not in him
notwithstanding the mighty works which they saw him do, and this was a partial
but not a total nor an incurable hardness to all, nor so far as we know to the
Scribes and Pharisees themselves, but there were means still used to recover
them, which would have been all in vain and to no purpose, if they had been
under an irrecoverable and judicial hardness, and it had not been only
blindness or hardness in part which had happened to Israel, Romans 11.25. or to
the Jews. And we shall venture too far out of our depth, if we offer to say
that God made use of many means and remedies to convince and convert the Jews,
the Scribes and the Pharisees, when he had appointed and decreed that none of
those should have any effect or good operation upon them, this will hardly be
consistent with the Goodness and Mercy, or with the Truth and Sincerity of the
Blessed God, nor does he ever for any one Sin, but for a long obstinate course
of many provoking Sins continued in irreclaimably against the Methods of Divine
Grace, give up any Person to hardness of Heart.

There remains, I confess, another way by which a Sin may become unpardonable,
and that is by being exempted by God from the general Promise and Covenant of
Pardon which he has made with Mankind. He who has all Sovereign Power, and an
entire Right of Punishment, and upon whose Free Grace and Arbitrary Favor all
Pardon and Forgiveness depends, may except what Sin he pleases out of his
General Act of Grace and Proclamation of Pardon and Indemnity, but this surely
should be done particularly and by name, and in the very Act and Proclamation
it self, there in the very Charter and Covenant of Grace which God has signed
with Mankind, this ought to be expressly exempted, and whether this Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost be so or no is the question, or whether this expression
of our Saviors concerning it, that it shall not be forgiven, may be mollified
and understood not in the utmost rigor of the Word, but as a great many of the
best Interpreters of Scripture have judged, particularly St Chrysostom of old,
and Dr. Hammond of late, that this Sin shall hardly and not without great
difficulty be forgiven, and not so soon or so easily as other Sins, that it
supposes and proceeds from such a corruption of the Mind that is more dangerous
and more hard to be cured than any other distempers it is subject to, but yet
that it is not quite impossible, as the words literally taken seem to imply. I
shall offer you the Reasons that plead for this Opinion, and then determine
what is most safe and satisfying in this matter.

1. It is very usual in Scripture to represent a thing that is very hard and
difficult, as if it were utterly impossible, and never could be. This our
Savior himself does in the case of the Rich Man's entering into the Kingdom of
Heaven; to express the hardness of it, he does it by a thing that is utterly
impossible, Matthew. 19.24. It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a
needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God, And so does the
Prophet also make use of a Natural impossibility to represent the great
difficulty of a Man's turning from a long course and custom of sinning, Jer.
13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots, then may
ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil. Not but it is possible,
notwithstanding those Proverbial expressions, that a Man who has been
accustomed to do evil a very great while may yet be brought off from his Sins,
and become a good Man, or else all the Exhortations to Repentance, and Promises
of the Gospel are in vain, and so may a good Man become a very bad one too, and
fall from his own stedfastness, and become guilty of abominable Sins: As David
did that was a Man after Gods own Heart, notwithstanding that St. John in the
same way and manner of expression with these, declares concerning him, 1 Ep.
3.9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin; for his seed remains in
him: and he cannot sin because he is horn of God. That Phrase, he cannot,
denotes not an utter impossibility, for the Prophet as well as Experience too
plainly show the contrary, that a righteous man may turn from his
righteousness, and commit iniquity, and dye in it, Ezekiel. 18.26. Things are
sometimes so expressed in Scripture, as they often are also amongst Men, as if
there were no hopes, nor no probable means of effecting a thing, when yet there
are very certain ones, as in that expression 1 Samuel 2.25. not a little parallel
to this, If one man sin against another the judge shall judge him, but if a man
sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? Not that there is no Advocate,
nor no way of interceding with God when a Man thus sins against him, but to
show the guilt and danger of it above the other. That place of the Hebrews,
chap. 6. ver. 4. For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, etc.
If they shall fall away to renew them again to Repentance; that is by very good
Interpreters thought to denote only great difficulty, and not impossibility in
the utmost rigor and strictness, which it is plain none of the other Phrases,
however they may sound, must be taken in; and therefore this expression of our
Savior concerning the Sin against the Holy Ghost, they think may be mollified
and understood with the same largeness and latitude as those, and to import
only thus much, that it shall be more difficultly repented of, and so more
hardly forgiven than any other Sins.

2. Both the first part of this Verse, That all manner of sin; and blasphemies
shall be forgiven unto men, and many other absolute and unconditional Promises,
or Threatenings, or like Declarations in Scripture, must not, they say, be too
rigorously and literally understood; for if they are, the truth which is now
evident in them, as they are taken with that fairness and equity, and those
supposals which must go along with them, will be forced out, and they will
become false; for it will not be true, that all manner of sins and blasphemies
shall be forgiven unto men, for then none should be damned of made miserable in
another World. And when St. Paul says, They that do such things shall not
inherit the kingdom of Heaven, Gal. 5.21. it must not be made a certain and
general conclusion from thence, that none who were ever guilty of any one of
those Sins, whereof he there gives us a black Catalogue shall ever be saved,
nor become capable of entering into Heaven, but that they shall not be so
without Repentance and Amendment, though that is not there mentioned, nor any
provision concerning that is so much as intimated in that place; nor is that,
though necessary, Condition to the forgiveness of every Sin expressed or put down
in our Saviors general Declaration, that all manner of sins and blasphemies
shall be forgiven unto men, but it is without all Controversy to be supposed;
and the same allowances that are to be made to all these and the like
expressions of Scripture, without which, if they are strained over-rigorously,
they would not be true, these they think reasonable to apply to our Saviors
expression concerning this Sin, and that where it is said not to be forgiven,
that is, not without a very particular and full Repentance of it. And to
strengthen this a little further, they observe that there is another Phrase and
Expression concerning this Sin, used by our Savior, where the sense must not
be forced so far as the words would seem to carry it, and that is this, That it
shall not be forgiven neither in this world, nor in the world to come, Matthew.
12.32. As if our Savior did thereby intimate that any Sins should be pardoned
in another World, which are not in this. Some Interpreters think that some of
the Jews had this opinion as the Papists now have, and that our Savior
therefore used the expression to take off all hopes from them that had such a
vain belief, and levelled his words against that, but I rather think this to be
the plain sense, that it was only a common Phrase among the Jews, that the
thing should not be, or never be, without regard to any such opinion, which we
have not sufficient authority to prove the Jews had, but only that Death they
thought was a kind of Expiation for some Sins in their Life: However this
Phrase must have some allowance made for the words of it, and so they would
have the other.

3. Another Reason for the abating the severity of the Expression concerning
this, is that there are other Sins which seem equal to this in guilt and
heinousness, which are yet all declared to be pardonable; and those not only
the most wilful Sins, against Natural Light as well as Revealed Religion, but
against Christianity and even the Holy Ghost; such as were those of the Heathen
World, described Romans 2. and yet they were received into the Christian
Religion, and made partakers of the Christian Covenant, as it is plain many of
the Corinthians also were, whose Names were put in the List of the vilest
Sinners, 1 Cor. 6.11. And the Apostle expressly tells them, That such were some
of them; to wit, Fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, effeminate, abusers of
themselves with mankind, thieves, covetous, drunkards, revilers, extortioners,
ver. 9.10. and yet these very Men were washed, were sanctified, were justified
in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God, ver. 11.
And St. Peter's denial of his Master after he had seen all his Miracles, and
been so fully convinced by them that he was, as he had confessed, the Son of God,
was a very great Sin, yet upon his repenting and weeping bitterly for it, it
was forgiven. Nay, they who treated our Savior with the basest and the
cruelest usage, and at last barbarously murdered him, our Savior prayed his
Father even to forgive these; and therefore that greatest of Sins, the putting
an innocent Man to death, and Crucifying the very Son of God, this was not
excluded from Pardon, but the very Blood that they thus villanously shed was an
Expiation for the very Sin of shedding of it. And if it be said, that these
however great and horrid Sins, yet were not so immediately Sins against the
Holy Ghost, against whom peculiarly this unpardonable Sin is committed, if we
carefully examine the Bible we shall find a great many Sins and Provocations,
chiefly if not directly against him, wherein he was particularly affronted, if
not blasphemed and reproached, and yet not unpardonable. St. Paul owns himself
a Blasphemer as well as a Persecutor, 1 Timothy 1.13. and wherein can we think his
Blasphemy consisted? not in blaspheming God, the God of Israel, for he was a
very strict and Religious Worshipper of him according to the Law, and the
strictest Sect of the Jews; but it must be in blaspheming Christianity, and
such things as were done to the spreading and confirmation of that. And nothing
seems to be so likely a subject of his Blasphemy as the Miracles of Christ and
the Apostles, because nothing was so strong an Argument for the Christian
Religion, which could not well be reproached, unless those were evil spoken of,
and yet he obtained Mercy, and became the great instance of an hearty Penitent,
and a zealous Convert. But we have more particular Instances of some Sins
against the Holy Ghost himself, that tended to reproach and dishonor him in a
high measure, and yet are no where declared to be unpardonable. Ananias is said
to lie to the Holy Ghost, Acts 5.3. and to tempt the Spirit of the Lord, ver.
9. and vertually to deny his Knowledge and Omniscience, by denying part of the
Money for which he had sold his Estate that was devoted by him to the Church;
and Simon Magus who offered Money that he might purchase the Holy Ghost, and
thought a few pieces of Silver a just Price, and valuable Consideration for
him, and that the Power of God might be bought and sold for a little Money; He
did reproach the Holy Ghost, by which the Apostles did their Miracles, in the
highest manner; Acts 8.19. and therefore St. Peter very severely reproves him,
ver. 20. Thy money perish with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of
God may be purchased with money. And that expression might have been thought to
have put him into an irreversible state of Ruin and Perdition, had not St.
Peter added what shows it to be otherwise; ver. 22. Repent therefore of this
thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be
forgiven thee. And there is another Instance that seems as great and immediate
a reproach to the Holy Ghost as what the Pharisees were guilty of, in charging
the Miracles which Christ wrought by the Power of the Holy Ghost to an Evil
Spirit, and that was the mocking at the Disciples upon whom the Holy Ghost was
poured out on the day of Pentecost, as if they had been inspired with new Wine,
Acts 2.13. and yet this has no Mark set upon it by the Apostles, whereby it can
be certainly known to be either the Sin against the Holy Ghost meant by our
Savior, or a Sin that was unpardonable.

4. As there are other Sins that seem equal to this yet certainly Pardonable,
so there are expressions concerning some other Sins which seem as much to
exclude them from all hopes of remission, and to pass as severe and desperate a
Sentence upon them, as Christ does here upon this; and yet the best
Interpreters think they admit of an abatement and mitigation, as in Heb. 6.4.5,
6. For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted
the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come: If they shall fall
away, to renew them again unto repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves
the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. And again, Heb. 10.26. For
if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin. The Sin that is meant in both these places
is most probably the Apostatizing from and renouncing of Christianity, which
the Christians were then in great danger of in those times of Danger and
Persecution, and therefore the Apostles had all reason to represent it as the
most hazardous and guilty, and to let them know that after they had once fallen
from their Baptism, they could not be renewed by another Baptism, and after
they had rejected the Sacrifice of Christ, there was no other Sacrifice to be
expected to be offered for their Sins, nor was Christ to dye more than once:
This was indeed a very horrid Sin, and to those especially who had probably had
extraordinary Gifts communicated to them, as the Phrases there used seem to
denote. These might well be charged with those tremendous expressions, ver. 29.
That they had trodden under foot the Son of God, and counted the blood of the
covenant wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy thing, and done despite unto
the Spirit of Grace. But yet the Primitive Church, how severe soever it was at
first to the Lapsi in denying them Communion after they had Apostatized, yet it
was the same also to many other Sins, to whom it utterly denied the Communion
of the Church for ever as well as to Apostasy, though the Persons were never so
penitent who committed them: And whilst they kept to this most severe
Discipline which they were forced afterward to abate, yet they did not
peremptorily sentence those penitent Apostates, nor any others, to certain
Perdition, but left them to the Mercy of God, for which they would not engage
to be Sponsors or Sureties, as not being able to ascertain them of it; and this
is the most, I think, of what St. John says of the sin unto death: I do not
say that we shall pray for it, 1 John 5.16. i. e. we cannot have such an
assurance that God will hear the Prayers for that as for other Sins, and
therefore we cannot so confidently encourage Men to pray for it, though he does
not at all forbid them to do it. This Sin unto death was very likely also to be
Apostasy from Christianity to the Idolatry of the Gnostics or the Gentiles,
and that was certainly a very deadly Sin, and such as was not to have the
benefit of the Prayers of the Church; but to say that this would never be
Pardoned, after St. Peter's denial of his Master was, and after the Church did
frequently admit the Lapsi at least to Lay-Communion, I think we ought to have
a more plain and manifest Revelation of the Will of God in that matter than we
have from that difficult place. However from these three places which come the
nearest to this Sin, though there is no mention of it in any of them, it
appears that either other Sins, as well as that particular one of the
Pharisees, may be represented unpardonable, or else that those expressions
which are used to set out the guilt of those Sins are yet to be mollified and
abated. But,

Lastly, The Evangelical Covenant of Pardon and Forgiveness being expressed in
such general and large terms as extend universally to all manner of Sins,
without any exception whatsoever; and there being no one Sin whatever exempted
out of that in the Charter it self, or in the Form of Absolution prescribed by
Christ Matthew. 16.29. John 20.23. they think it is more agreeable to say, that
no one particular Sin, how great soever, is unpardonable by the Gospel; and
that this will be a greater force and violence to those many Promises of the
Gospel, than to mitigate the severity of those expressions which seem to speak
otherwise of some Sins, and particularly of that against the Holy Ghost: And
therefore to come to a resolution in this matter that may be safe and
satisfying, I shall do it very briefly in two particulars.

1. I say, That either for those Reasons the Expression here may be mollified,
and not taken in its literal and rigorous sense, but so as to import the great
guilt of the Sin and difficulty of its Pardon, but not the utter impossibility.
Or else,

2. That there were some particular circumstances in that Sin of the Pharisees,
which make it a Sin proper to them in those times, and such as Christians are
not now in any possible danger of committing; for though we have sufficient
Reasons to believe the truth of Christianity upon the account of the Miracles
done by our Savior, and we have an unquestioned assurance of the truth of
those from undoubted History, and universal Testimony and Tradition, yet we
cannot have that ocular evidence, and visible demonstration of them that the
Jews and Pharisees had; and therefore if any of the Jews in our days who have
swallowed many of them this blasphemous account of Christ and his Miracles,
that he did them all by the Power of Magic which he learned in Egypt, if they
do now vent this horrid Calumny, yet I think they are not so perfectly
Criminal, nor is this so high a degree of villainy in them as it was in their
Forefathers, who saw the very Miracles done before their faces, which is the
highest evidence that can be. And unless the Person be in all those
circumstances that they were, which would make him a great deal more
inexcusable, I question whether he can be charged with this Sin. And therefore
as a Conclusion from the whole, and as the most useful remark from this
Subject, I shall advise these two things.

(1.) That no Sinner be discouraged from Leaving his Sins howsoever great, nor
from Hopes of the Divine Mercy, upon any ungrounded Fears that he is fallen
into this Sin, and so is in a hopeless, irrecoverable, unpardonable state. By
what has been said it appears that no one now has reason to do this; and it is
certainly the greatest design of the Gospel and our Saviors coming into the
World, to persuade Mankind that were sunk into the saddest Sins and Wickedness,
to Repent and Forsake all their Evil ways: And there is no such means to
encourage to this, as to assure them of the Divine Mercy, and the certain
Forgiveness of all of them if they do. It Is this is the way to bring Men in to
their Duty and Allegiance, when their Governor proclaims an universal Act of
Grace for what is past; whereas the being cut off from all such hopes, makes
them go on, and grow more desperate; and it is by this Goodness and Mercy of
God, held forth to all Sinners, and so fully displayed in the Gospel and the
Death of Christ, that we are led to Repentance, and therefore it ought by no
means to be lessened or diminished unless we would make God less Good than he
is, and hinder Men from ever becoming better.

(2) Let us take care to avoid all manner of wilful Sin, and especially all
those great ones that come near and any way approach to this Sin against the
Holy Ghost. A very wilful Sin, in a Christian especially, is in some fense a
Sin against the Holy Ghost; it is a grieving, a quenching, and a resisting the
Spirit, in the language of Holy Scripture. That Blessed Spirit is concerned as
the great promoter of Virtue and Goodness in the World, and as the great
Principle of it in the Hearts of Men, and whenever we do any wicked thing we
offer violence to that, and by our rude and vicious carriage we affront, and
grieve, and at last banish and drive away that Blessed Guest out of our Souls.
Whatever is Wicked and Sinful is so contrary to his Pure and Excellent Nature,
that it is highly offensive to him; and if we go on in a course of long and
customary Wickedness, we sin the more against him, and come the nearer to that
sad and wretched state that is unpardonable. I do not think indeed that any one
Sin, or particular Act of any Sin whatever puts us into that condition, but as
every Sickness and Indisposition of Body is a tendency to Death and Mortality,
so every wilful Sin is a corruption of the Mind, and an approach to a state of
Spiritual Death. And there are some Sins that bring this sooner upon us, as the
acting against our Consciences, and the sense of our own Minds, an opposing the
Truth that is evident to us, a scoffing at Religion and making a mock of Sin,
an abusing the Scriptures and ridiculing the Holy Word of God, an obstinate
resistance of all the motions of Gods Holy Spirit upon our Minds. These and
such like gross and obstinate impieties, though I do not think they are any of
them the very Sin against the Holy Ghost, for that ought not to be extended
further than we have a warrant from Scripture, yet they are so many approaches
as it were to it, and have more of the ill symptoms of that upon them, and
therefore we ought especially to avoid them lest they bring us by degrees into
that sad state which is unpardonable; for though one Sin, I believe, do not do
this, yet a great many may, and especially such as those which do so waste the
Conscience, and corrupt the Mind as to make it uncurable. And this is the
saddest State and Condition in the World, next to the State of Hell and
Damnation, though it be not the immediate Sin against the Holy Ghost.

Having endeavored to give the plainest and fullest Satisfaction I can to the
most doubtful and scrupulous Minds about this Sin of the Holy Ghost, I shall
now Discourse of some other things of a Lesser Nature, which many Penitents and
good Men are apt to be greatly dissatisfied with, and have dark and wrong
thoughts about. As, I. Concupiscence, the Lustings of the Flesh, or struggle
between that and the Spirit, which they find in themselves. II. Trouble of
Mind, and a wounded Spirit, which many lie under by reason of their Sins, or by
reason of Melancholy, or both together.


SECT. III. Of Concupiscence, the Lustings of the Flesh or struggle between
that and the Spirit.
THE right understanding of our selves is very necessary to the right
understanding of Religion. Religion is fitted and adapted to Humane Nature in
its present state and capacity in this World, and is designed not to destroy it
but to perfect and improve it, and raise it to its true Happiness and
Perfection. We cannot be like the Angels in Heaven, nor like pure and glorious
Spirits whilst we live here upon Earth, and have Bodies of Flesh and Blood
united to our Souls. God who made us, and knows our Frame, did not intend to
destroy and undo his own Creation by the Precepts of Religion, nor make us
cease to be Men by becoming Christians. We find indeed in our selves a great
many weaknesses and corruptions, strong passions and sensual inclinations,
which if we did not wisely govern would be great occasions of Sin to us, and if
we let them loose would carry us into a thousand Mischiefs as well as Sins and
Wickednesses. They who give the reins to those, and the full swinge to their
Natural Lusts and Passions run into all Vice and Debauchery, and commit all
uncleanness with greediness. And the best of Men cannot be wholly free from
that Original Concupiscence, and those Sensual Motions and Desires that are not
always agreeable to Reason and Religion; but they complain of this bondage of
corruption, and this body of death, which they cannot be delivered from, Romans
8.21. and 7.24. Grace and Religion, though it gives us another Principle, and
conveys new powers of a Divine and Spiritual Life into our Souls, yet whilst
the Animal and Sensual Life remains, and whilst we are compounded of Flesh and
Blood as well as Spirit and Reason, and have a Carnal as well as Spiritual
Principle in us, there will be a mighty struggle and a great contest between
those two, and a kind of civil war in our breasts between those different
Parties, and which of those shall be uppermost, and have the chief Power, and
gain the Victory, is the great point, and the great concern of all Virtue and
Religion; since in all of us, as the Apostle says, The Flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are contrary one to the
other, so that we cannot do the things that we would, Gal. 5.17. And this we
know by Experience as well as by Revelation. Now this Concupiscence that
remains in good Men is often matter of great trouble to them, and they know
not what to judge of it, or how far it is a Sin and ought to be Repented of,
and what way they may best overcome it. I shall therefore to clear and satisfy
their thoughts about this matter of the struggle or Lusting between the Flesh
and Spirit, show these three things.

First, That mere Lusting on either side is not what makes either Sin or
Virtue, or denominates a bad or a good Man. Secondly, That these are the proper
matter of Vice or Virtue, in which the trial and exercise of them lie. Thirdly,
That we ought to lessen the Power of the Fleshly Lusting, and increase that of
the Spirit, and what are the proper means to do this, I shall briefly consider.
First, That mere Lusting on either side is not what makes either Sin or
Virtue, nor what constitutes or denominates a bad or a good Man: For this
Lusting is in both good and bad, though according to several degrees and
measures; in the one the Lusting of the Flesh prevails, and in the other that
of the Spirit, and it is from this, the prevalency of either of these, and not
the mere contention of them, that we are counted good or bad before God. The
best of Men may have the same Passions, Appetites, and Bodily Inclinations with
others, and may be disposed thereby to such Lustings and Desires of the Flesh,
but they do not let those carry them to unlawful Practices, to undue Ob^ects,
to consent to what is sinful, or commit any thing that is forbidden by a Divine
Law. The worst of Men may have some ineffectual Desires and good Motions
stirred up in their Souls now and then, and it may be with some force and
violence that they overcome the tender sense of their own Minds, and the
strugglings and rebukes of their own Consciences, and their own Spirits and the
Spirit of God may strive within them against their Lusts and sinful
Inclinations, but the latter is too hard for them, and the Temptations of Sin
and Wickedness prevail over all their faint Desires, good Wishes, Purposes or
Resolutions. It Is certain no Man can be wicked but against the sense of his own
Mind, the smiting of his Conscience, the convictions of his own Reason and
Judgment, and a strong inward Principle that makes Vice troublesome and uneasy
to him at its first commitment, before he has worn off Natural Shame and
Innocence, and is hardened by Custom, and long continuance. We have Naturally
in us a Principle of Virtue as well as of Vice; they are both indeed blended
and mixed in our Nature, and therefore the Spirit does as truly Lust against the
Flesh, and has strong Natural Motions against that, as the Flesh has against
the Spirit. We have the Natural Seeds of Probity, good Nature, Pity, Charity,
Kindness, Modesty, and other Virtues sown in our Hearts, and appearing in the
first tender indications of undisguised Nature, in Children and Infants, as
well as the seeds of Vice and Wickedness, and all manner of Pravity and
Corruption that grow up afterward in Men's Lives. There is an Original Lust and
Concupiscence to Good as well as to Evil; and as there is an Original Sin in
our Nature, in a true sense and meaning, so there is an Original Righteousness
still remaining in us, as not only Nature and Experience, but St. Paul's words
here of the two Lustings of the Flesh and Spirit, do plainly suppose and
demonstrate. But because some have thought that the first Motions of
Concupiscence, or the mere feeble and ineffectual Lustings and Desires of the
Flesh after Evil or undue Objects, is truly and properly a Sin, I shall clear
and consider that Point, and take off the trouble that some have thereupon in
their Minds.

1. These mere Lustings or first Motions of Concupiscence cannot be Sin,
because they are Natural, and result from our very Frame, and Make, and
Constitution; and as an Argument that they are so, and so come from pure
Mechanism of Body, and the Temperament of Blood and Spirits, they are the same
both in us and in Brutes who have such Bodies as we have, and who never were
capable of Sinning or Falling, or being punished as such. Now nothing that is
purely Natural can be Sinful, for as such it is the work of God and part of his
own Creation which he has pronounced to be good, and it plainly serves such
good ends and designs for the benefit of the World, as God thought necessary,
and as are wisely appointed by him. It Is therefore making God the Author of
Evil, or with the Ancient Heretics, making an Evil Principle to be our
Creator, to suppose any thing in us that is purely Natural to be Sinful.

2, These Lustings and first Desires were in our first Parents before the Fall
(for they are only the inclination of our Animal Nature to its proper good, and
a suitable Object) when they beheld the forbidden Fruit, and saw that it was
good for food, and pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired, Genesis 3.4.
Had they gone no further but only seen it, and thought it fair and lovely to
the eye, but checked this their Desire and Lust after it with the Consideration
of Gods Prohibition, and of the Punishment he had threatened against the eating
of it, they had not then lost their Innocence, nor broken Gods Command, nor
incurred the grievous Penalty of it.

3. Those Natural Desires and Inclinations were even in our Blessed Savior,
who was in all things tempted like unto us, yet without sin, Heb. 4.15. Who as
he increased in Wisdom and Stature, and grew up as a Man, so he hungered and
thirsted, and felt pain, and was extremely sorrowful even unto Death, and
prayed that the bitter Cup might pass from him; which all showed that he took
our Nature with its Weaknesses and Infirmities upon him, and that those are not
Sins unless they go further, and make us do something unlawful which he never
did; but his Virtue would not have been so great, nor could he have been
tempted by the Devil, or rewarded by his Father for his Obedience, had not he
had the same Natural Desires and Inclinations that belong to Flesh and Blood.

4. These first Motions are unavoidable, and not under the power or command of
our Will, any more than such sensations and perceptions from Objects suited to
such Faculties and inward Powers; so that we can no more help such Motions and
Desires arising from such causes, than the seeing things when they are set
before our Eyes, or having our Ears struck with such sounds as are near us. The
Mind is as suddenly struck with such a Desire and Inclination from such an
Object making impression upon it agreeable to its Nature and Capacity, as it is
by our outward Senses. Indeed the Mind can judge of this afterward, and has a
power to determine it self as it pleases, either to choose or refuse such a
Motion offered to it, and this we call Will; and if it does choose it, and
consent to it, then as St. James says, Lust has conceived and brought forth
sin, James 1.15. but it is not Sin before it has thus conceived and brought it
forth; and though the Action be not yet produced, yet when the Mind has
consented to it, from thence it derives its Sinfulness, and all its Blame and
Guilt, and there wants nothing in it self but only Power and Opportunity, which
are things without it, to bring it into Act: So that as a weight is the same,
though its tendency downwards be stopped by what it lies upon, so is the pravity
of the Will when it consents to an unlawful Desire, though it be hindered from
executing it. But I shall show this further in the Second Head of Discourse,
namely;

2ly, That these Lustings and Desires of the Flesh and the Spirit are the
proper trials of our Virtue, and the chief matter of our Obedience; and
according as either of these prevail upon us, so we are fixed in our Moral
state here, and our Eternal state hereafter. The Flesh sollicites us with the
temptations of Bodily Pleasures and Delights, with the enjoyments of the Animal
Life, and the sensible and present good things of this World; and if we choose
those without regard to the Laws of Virtue, and Religion; if we are so fond of
them that we will break through those to obtain them, and prefer the short
gratifications of Sin and Flesh for a season before the better Pleasures of
Virtue and Innocence, and the Glorious Rewards of them for ever, then our
choice is foolish and unreasonable, and our destruction wilful and unavoidable.
The Spirit proposes to us the dictates of Wisdom and Reason, and shows us both
the folly and undecency of being thus governed by our lower Appetites, and
being led away by those like Brutes that have no understanding, and not living
up to the dignity of our Nature, and letting our Reason curb and control those
sensual inclinations: And it further lays before us the great obligations of
Religion, and the strong and powerful considerations of another World, and by
all these it prevails upon all that seriously think and consider, let their
Carnal Inclinations be never so strong, and the Lustings of their Flesh never
so fierce and violent; though their first Motions cannot be quite hindered and
suppressed, and the fire of Concupiscence cannot be quite extinguished and put
out, yet it may be kept under and hindered from ever blazing out, from ever
gaining any consent of the Will to what is unlawful, and from ever committing
it by outward deed or action; and while it does so, it is safe though it be
still tried, though it be in a state of perpetual warfare, and the Flesh be
such an intestine enemy as cannot be wholly destroyed, but like the Canaanites,
its Lusts may be still a thorn in our side to vex us, Number. 33. and to buffet
us, 2 Cor. 12.7. yet we may still master and conquer it, and keep it under, and
make it subject as a Vassal to the Laws of Reason and Religion. It would be more
easy, and more happy, if we brought it into a condition that it could never
stir, or rebel, or rise up against the Spirit, but it may be as great Virtue,
and greater Victory, and more highly rewardable to struggle and overcome; and
like Socrates, though by Nature and Constitution we are never so perverse and
ill disposed, yet to become otherwise by thought and Philosophy, and to owe our
Virtue though not to our temper yet to our care and circumspection, to the
power of Grace and Religion: That will change our Hearts and our Tempers, and
renew us inwardly in our Minds, and instead of stony Hearts, give us Hearts of
Flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. and instead of Fleshly and Earthly Desires give us
Spiritual and Heavenly ones, and whatever we are by Nature, make us meek and
gentle, sober and temperate, pure and chaste, and entirely Virtuous by
Principle, Habit and Resolution. It Is very happy when a Natural Temper disposes
us to acquire those Christian Virtues; when the Soil is kindly, and fitted for
them to take root and grow up in it, but we must prepare and cultivate it, and
weed out those corruptions that are in it, till we plant it with all those
Graces, and it bring forth those Fruits of the Divine and Spiritual Life,
though we are at never so much care and pains about them.

How we may bring the Spirit to prevail always over the Flesh, and to conquer
the Lustings of it, and by what means we may lessen the Power of one, and
increase that of the other, I am in the Third place to consider.

1. These Lustings of the Flesh, so far as Natural, are not Sinful, but but may
be consistent with the contrary Principle of the Spirit when kept within due
bounds, and governed by the Laws of Virtue and Religion. We cannot be without
such Passions, Appetites and Inclinations whilst we have Body and Flesh about
us, and these are part of Gods Creation, and not made in vain, but put in us
for good ends so far as they were designed by God and Nature. They were not
given us to torment and vex us with unsatisfied Desires and impatient
Appetites; like Tantalus his Punishment, to have the daintiest Fruit before
him, and be set up to the Chin in a cool River, and yet not taste the one, nor
quench his thirst with a drop of the other: No, Religion does not tie us up
from any proper Natural Enjoyments with a touch not, taste not, handle not, but
allows us the satisfying and gratifying our Natural Appetites and Desires
within the bounds of Virtue, Decency and Lawfulness. It lets us eat of all the
Trees, and Fruits, and Dainties of this Earthly Paradise, only it keeps us from
the forbidden Fruit, and suffers us not to gratify our Desires brutishly and
unreasonably, and without regard to public and private good, which is more to
be regarded than any Man's particular humor or pleasure. God therefore, as we
are Rational Creatures who are to promote the universal Happiness of the whole
World, has given us such Laws as conduce to that end, and we are always to
observe them, and not transgress the limits and prescriptions by which he has
bounded our Sensual Desires and Inclinations, and without destroying them has
made them useful and serviceable to the wise ends of his Providence. So that we
are not bound with the Stoics to root up those, nor with the Asceticks to deny
our selves such gratifications as are Innocent and Decent, Lawful and Useful.
But,

2. We are to destroy the Excesses and Irregularities of them which are
vicious, mischievous and unbecoming; and this Religion means when it bids us
mortify our earthly members, and crucify the Flesh, with the Affections and
Lusts; and pluck out a right eye, and cut off a right hand when they offend us,
or draw us to Sin; not that we are to destroy hereby any part of our Nature, or
any of the Passions and Inclinations resulting from it, but so far as they are
unnatural and immoderate, inflamed and heightened by folly and fancy, and
exceed the measures both of Nature and Reason, Virtue and Religion, and exceed
the bounds both of Humane and Divine Laws, so far we are to destroy, kill and
mortify them; for they become then mischievous and pernicious to the World,
and bring shameful and miserable effects along with them, and are a reproach
and a dishonor to our Reason and our Nature, as being contrary to and below
both. The frame and make of our Bodies require to be sustained with Meat and
Drink, and the Natural Appetites of Hunger and Thirst are to be gratified with
what is acceptable to the Taste and Palate, but when this runs into Luxury,
Gluttony and Drunkenness, when Vanity, Brutishness and Debauchery mixes it self
with our Meat and Drink, then these Natural Appetites are vicious and
immoderate, forced beyond Nature by Folly, Fancy and Custom, and our Table
becomes a Snare and a Sin to us. We cannot but desire the good things, the
conveniences, the plenty, the riches of this World, for we see the usefulness
and the necessity of them to our present Life, but to desire them so
immoderately, as not to be content with a moderate competency and sufficiency,
with food and raiment, as the Apostle has fixed a competency, 1 Timothy 6.8. with
what answers the wants of Nature and the circumstances of our Condition, but to
be always craving after more without any use or occasion, this is that
immoderate desire of Riches which we call Covetousness; and so in other things
it is the Excess, the Irregularity, the immoderate and the vicious Abuse, not
the Natural Passion and Inclination it self that is to be denied, restrained
and mortified.

3. To do this we must so check, and restrain, and deny even our Natural
Appetites that we may have the power and government always over them: Now if
we let them loose, and lay the reins upon their neck, and let them take their
utmost liberties, and go always to the furthest bounds of what is lawful, they
will hardly be kept in as they ought to be, but we shall walk upon the brink of
danger and the side of a precipice, where it will be hard to escape falling
sometimes, and our Sensual Inclinations will grow more heady, strong and
ungovernable by being always indulged, and not used to a more severe
discipline and management, which all wise Men have therefore prescribed by the
Rules and Precepts of Mortification and Self-denial.

4. To abate these Lustings and Desires of the Flesh, and increase and raise
those of the Spirit, let us consider how little and mean are the objects and
gratifications of the one in respect of those of the other. How the one are
low, sordid and Brutish, the other Rational and Angelical, such as the highest
order of Beings next to God are capable of. How little is there in all the
Riches, and Greatness, and State of this World, how much less in all the mad
frollicks of Debauchery, and all the beastliness and filthiness of Brutish
Lusts, in all those things that make up Carnal Enjoyments, and are the sum,
as the Apostle reckons them up, of all that is in the World, The lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, 1 John 2.16. How much
greater and nobler is it to have a wise, and sober, and virtuous Mind, easy
Thoughts, and a cheerful Conscience, Spiritual Desires and Affections set upon
things above, and strong and well-grounded hopes of an Eternal Life and a
Glorious Immortality: These are the Objects of our Spiritual Desires, and we
should increase those by representing the worth and value, the greatness and
excellency of these above any other things that we can choose or desire, or any
enjoyments of the Animal and Sensual Life. It Is a vain fancy and opinion of the
latter, whereby we raise our imagination and heighten our expectation of
something great and extraordinary in them, it is that kindles our Affections,
and inflames our Desires after them; but did we wisely consider how vain, and
trifling, and inconsiderable they are, and how poor, and little, and short, and
sorry gratifications they afford, this would wean us from such weak fancies and
opinions of them, and so slack and cool our Desires and Lustings after them.

Lastly, We must use all Religious Means and Methods to mortify and abate the
Lustings of the Flesh, and strengthen and increase those of the Spirit by the
Acts and Exercises of Religion, Piety and Devotion. It Is in the growth and
prevalence of the latter lies our Moral State, and the greatest exercise of all
Virtue, and in the right ordering and governing of our Passions Appetites and
Inclinations, so that we must use all possible Methods to keep the lower
Appetites under, and obedient to the superior, and not let them dethrone our
Reason, or disobey Religion; and therefore we must use all the helps we can
have from Religion and Philosophy, and the Divine Grace and Assistance, to tame
our inordinate Lusts by Fasting, by Watching by Prayer by due watchfulness and
circumspection over our selves, and over all the weak places of our Nature,
that Sin do not enter in at some of those inlets that are unguarded, and do not
surprise and easily beset us when we are unprepared and unarmed by Religion
against the assaults of it; and there is nothing so helpful to this, and to
increase and strengthen our Spiritual Desires so that they shall always
prevail over the Lusts of the Flesh, as the constant and uninterrupted
exercises of Piety and Devotion: These give life, and vigor, and nourishment
to our Spiritual Desires, and keep them always warm, and heated, and intent
upon their proper Objects, whereas a neglect of those begets a carelessness
stupidity and senslesness of all those things, and sinks Men into a mere
Sensual, and Animal, and Worldly, and Brutal Life. Nothing is therefore so
proper to bring us to these Spiritual Desires, and to make those always
prevail over the Lusts of the Flesh, as Devotion and Piety, which raise the
Mind to things above the Body, and above this World, and take off and abstract
the Soul from Sensual and Carnal Enjoyments, and make it live up as near as it
can to that Life it shall have in Heaven, when it shall be all Spirit, and have
no Flesh or Lusts to contend with or be contrary to it.

I shall in the next place consider another thing which befalls many a Sinner,
and which, though a due effect of his Sins, and an evidence of the sad state they
bring him to, and so may be of great use to be duly considered on this account,
yet is a kind of Excess of Repentance, and sometimes too great an extreme that
way, and what ought to have the nicest Resolutions, and best Directions given
about it to cure and remove it; I mean, Trouble of Mind, or a Wounded
Conscience, which many a Sinner lies under, and which I shall briefly Represent
and Discourse of, by considering how great a Misery it is above all others in
this World, and what Cure and Remedy there may be for it, or for those who are
fallen under it.

SECT. IV. Of Trouble of Mind, or a Wounded Spirit.
THE greatest part of our Happiness or Misery lies in our Minds and Spirits, in
those inward Faculties and Sensories which are distinct from our Body and
outward Senses. We feel very often more pleasure or pain in those distinct from
the Body than the Body it self is capable of; for these are quicker and more
sensible than Matter and Body can be, and are the proper subject of perception
of any Pleasure and Pain, and of all Rational Happiness or Misery. A Man's
inward Thoughts do often give him more torment and uneasiness, anguish and
disquietude of Soul, and more real pain and misery than any Bodily torment, or
even Death it self; and therefore some have chosen Death, and have willingly
endured any Bodily pain rather than lie under the greater pain, agonies and
horrors of their own Minds, and many that have been under those, yet have felt
an inward ward joy comfort and satisfaction of Mind that has supported them
under the worst pains and sufferings of Body and the greatest outward evils
that could ever fall upon them, and their Minds and Spirits have been cheerful
and erect and despised the threatenings of Tyrants, and born the greatest
tortures of Body, and the hardest calamities of this World. Thus did all the
Martyrs, and thus do many good Men and good Christians enjoy an inward
happiness of Mind, a peace, and comfort, and delight of Conscience under a
painful and sickly Body, a poor and necessitous Condition, and under a great
many outward Evils which they are here subject to; but there are some closer
and more inward Evils felt by others, a guilty and uneasy Mind, a troubled and
disquiet Conscience, a scaring dread of a Divine Vengeance hanging over their
heads, and a fearful expectation and looking for of Judgment, which shall
devour them in a little time, these are such dreadful Evils as sink down a Man's
Mind, and oppress it with an insupportable burden greater than it can bear, and
swallow it up in a gulf of unspeakable and intolerable Misery. This is the
greatest and the worst of Miseries, to which no other Misery nor no other Evils
here that we are subject to are comparable: As the Wise Man observes, Prove.
11.14. The spirit of a man may sustain his infirmities, but a wounded spirit
who can bear? I shall consider three things relating to such a Wounded Spirit
or Troubled Mind.

I. How little all other Evils are in respect of this. II. How dreadful and
insupportable that is. III. What is the proper Cure or Remedy for it.
I. All Worldly Evil, or all that we can call outward Misery to a Christian, is
in respect of that but like a small Wound to a sound Body, a little scratch
upon the Skin, which though it may pain a Man a little, and be something
uneasy, yet may be well enough born, and will heal of it self, or by the help
of proper Remedies, so long as it touches not the Vitals, nor comes near the
great Vessels of Life; but inward Misery the pain and anguish of a Man's own
Mind caused by his Sins and an evil Conscience, is like a dart struck through
his Liver, like a sword piercing into his Bowels or his very Heart, like a
prick upon a Nerve or the most tender and vital part of us, which puts us into
Convulsions and Agonies, and scatters all the force and power of our Animal
Spirits. When any outward Affliction falls upon a good Man, he has something to
support himself, His heart stands firm, or is fixed trusting in the Lord,
Psalm. 112.7. He has inward springs of Comfort rising up in his Mind that supply
it with fresh vigor, and overflow and refresh it with constant recruits. Under
the greatest losses and disappointments here, he is sure he cannot lose Heaven
if he take care to live well, nor be disappointed of his expectations
hereafter; and that at present he has a good Providence that will not leave him
destitute or unprovided, but do what is best for him. Under the greatest
Calumny and Slander that others may load him withal, which is as uneasy as any
thing to an ingenuous Mind, yet when a Man's Conscience acquits and vindicates
him, though all the World should reproach and accuse him, he has more peace
from thence than disturbance from all the noise and clamours of others. Under
the greatest Sickness or the fears of Death, when that most terrible thing
comes near him and stands before him, though he may not be wholly without fear,
yet he is not without hopes and comfort too; but now what shall a wicked Man do
under all these, when his Mind is sick as well as his Body, when Death scares
him, and comes as he thinks, to torment him before his time, when he is afraid
to dye, and yet thinks he must dye when ever he is a little ill, how often does
such an one dye? how often does he taste the bitterness of Death? and how does
he feel something in his Mind worse than Death to his Body, and the agonies of
his Conscience are the foretaste of that second and Eternal Death.

This shows how dreadful and unsupportable a Wounded Spirit is, which is the
second thing I was to consider, but I have prevented my self in some measure
with what I have said already, and I dare not undertake fully to describe that
which they who have felt tell us it is impossible to represent, or give account
of: What horrors they have been in, what dismal terrors they have layn under,
how they have suffered, as they imagine, the very torments of Hell, so great
have the torments been above any thing else they could ever conceive or have an
Idea of: So that I take this to be a sensible proof and demonstration of a
Hell; and if a Fiend had come from thence, and with the ghastliest look and the
frightfullest appearance had told us what he felt there, it could not have been
more convincing nor more affecting than what an old and despairing Sinner has
both felt and confessed before he came thither; when God has made him preach
this without rising from the dead, to warn his Brethren from the like Sins, and
if it were possible to make them Repent, and not come into that state of
Torments, when without going to the other World, or having a Messenger come
from thence, they have seen and heard him cry out in the anguish of his Soul,
like Cain, that his sins and his punishment is greater than he can hear, Genesis
4.13. When the wrath of God has layn heavy upon him, and the arrows of the
Almighty have stuck fast in him, and he has been forced to drink of the wrath
of the Almighty, as Job expresses it, Job 21.20. Or as the Psalmist more fully,
when he tells us, Psalm. 75.8. In the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the
wine is red, it is full of mixture, and he pours out of the same, the dregs
whereof the wicked shall wring out, and drink of them. This bitter Cup of Gods
Wrath mixed with all the poisonous extracts of his own Sins, the wicked has
been forced to drink, and has found that these are not vain and empty words,
but real and sensible things, that we want proper words to express; for all the
terrible Idea's and representations come very short of the things themselves,
to be whipped with Snakes, and lashed with Scorpions, to have hot burning
Torches and flaming Swords held and applied to us, which were the Metaphorical
descriptions of these tortures of Conscience, are far short of what they are in
themselves, and nothing indeed can come nigh the sense of them, nor is what we
feel in pain or pleasure to be ever drawn fully and to the life in picture.

When a Man feels something in himself that nothing else is like, when his Soul
is overwhelmed with the deep Passions of remorse, anguish and despair, when God
hides his Face and takes away all Comfort from him, when he has no more hopes
of Mercy, and judges himself as incapable of it as the damned in Hell, when
Gods Spirit has left him, so that he can neither pray nor do any thing to
relieve himself, but lies as a condemned Caitiff, a Malefactor sentenced, past
all hopes of Pardon, and only expecting Punishment, and the last stroke of
Vengeance, this is a sad, a deplorable condition which I have known many a
Sinner in under a Wounded Spirit, and had one great instance before me when I
was writing this.

These Wounds are not felt indeed by many a Sinner in the heat of Blood, in the
career of his Lusts, and the hot persuit of his Sins, when in his high frolicks
and jovial diversions he drowns the noise of his Conscience, or lulls it asleep
with charming Pleasures, or full Cups, or some unthinking madness, but it will
awake one time, or other, and like a sleeping Lion when it is roused up by some
Judgment, by some Sickness, or Affliction, it will fall terribly upon him with
rage and fury, and tear and consume him; then all the wounds which sin gave it
will bleed afresh, and it will feel them afterward, unless they have been
cured by a timely repentance; if they have festered, and gangrened, and
mortified the Soul for a time, yet when it comes to it self it will feel them
with unexpressible pain and anguish, which nothing can assuage. I mean when a
Man has sinned away his Life, and Death and his Sins are set together before him
and it is hard to know which is the more terrible. When the Sting of Death
swelled up with Sin and Guilt strikes as deep into a Man's Conscience, and
wounds his Spirit, as Death it self strikes into his Body with its fatal dart,
so that he suffers a double death at the same time, and the Spiritual far more
painful than the Bodily. I take a Wounded Spirit here in the highest and most
common sense; and though when a Man's Spirit is dejected and sunk with any thing
it is very hard to bear it, which may be the sense of the Wise Man's words in the
forequoted place, when the strength of a Man's Mind is lost which should support
him under all his infirmities that he is subject to from without, yet nothing
does so sink it, so wound and destroy it as Sin and Guilt, especially when it
is come to such a degree, and to such a sad condition as we commonly mean by a
Wounded Spirit; i. e. a Mind deeply pierced with the sense of its own Guilt,
and of Gods Anger upon it. This likewise admits of degrees, and in some cases
it is a very happy thing for a Sinner, and it is to be sure always a just
Punishment.

I shall therefore in the Third place briefly consider what is the proper Cure
and Remedy of such a wounded Spirit or troubled Mind; for there is no Spiritual
Illness but what is curable if we take it in time, by Religion; no Wound of
Soul but what there is Balm for in Gilead, in Christianity; there is no Disease
too great for our Heavenly Physician, but what the Gospel has a proper and
certain Remedy for, if we duly and timely apply it. A Man may tarry too long
indeed, and not use the Physic till it be too late, till Death comes and puts
an end to the time of Trial, and the time of Repentance; and then a Wounded
Spirit, i. e. the extremest Sorrow for a Man's Sins, the deepest Contrition of
Soul for them, cannot come up to true Gospel Repentance to which there is a
certain promise of Pardon and Forgiveness, for that is only upon turning to
God, and leaving all our Sins, and leading a new Life, and bringing forth the
Fruits of Repentance by Obedience to the Gospel for the future, which is a
necessary condition by the terms of the Gospel which he cannot perform whom God
cuts off before he can do it; and therefore such an one must be left to the
Infinite Mercy and Righteous Judgment of God, to be dealt with by such measures
as are not within the Covenant of Grace, or the Terms of the Gospel, for by
those I cannot see any title he has to Pardon: But in other Cases a Wounded
Spirit may be the greatest Mercy, and even the very beginning of Health, or of
a Cure to a Soul, when God does not suffer a Man to go on senslesly in his
Sins, till he come to a seered Conscience, and a reprobate Sense, and to
hardness of Heart and blindness of Mind, but by some methods of his Grace and
Providence alarums his Conscience and awakens his stupid Mind, and brings his
almost senseless and stupefied Soul to some Spiritual sense of his condition.
Then his Soul will be wounded as David's was when he reflects upon those Sins
which he committed without consideration, and he will be sore struck and
smitten as every Penitent must, at the remembrance of his evil ways. All
Repentance is such a wounding of the Soul as makes its Heart bleed within it,
and its Blood and Spirits melt into Tears and Sorrow for what it has done; it is
not such an easy thing as most men think it to be; it is such a Pain, such a
Wound to the Soul, that the Pleasure of the greatest Sin is but a poor trifle
to it, and no man that rightly understood it would venture upon any Sin from
the reserved hopes of it. Repentance is a bitter Remedy made up of very strong
and unpleasant ingredients, and we must go through a long course to purge out
the old Disease and take away the root of it; so that before a wicked mind can
be cured by it, it must be cut, and lanced, and wounded, and have very severe
applications made to it. The work of Regeneration or the New Birth cannot be
wrought without many pangs or throws, nor does God ever almost bring a bad man
to become a good one without some trouble and disorder of Mind. There is a
trouble of Mind indeed which is excessive and unreasonable, for every Sinner
ought in some measure to be troubled in Mind and he has not a due sense of his
Sins if he is not, but there is a trouble of Mind which takes away the hopes of
Mercy and throws Men into despair, which is commonly called a Wounded Spirit,
and it is so in the highest degree; and whether there is any Remedy for that,
and what it is, and what advice is to be given in such a case, and what
judgment to be made of it, I shall briefly consider.

1. Then this is often joined with Melancholy of Body which is very hard to be
cured, and till it be so it is apt to darken the Mind, and bring a cloud over
the Spirits, and to fill the Soul with very black Idea's and Imaginations, and
to hinder it from making true judgment of it self or its own actions; and this
is as pityable, and ought as much to be remedied by Physic and Care, as other
Diseases of Body, for I have known very good Persons subject to it; and one of
the best means to cure it is to know that this is one cause of that trouble of
Mind, which will be so much abated when one is persuaded from whence it often
comes, or is heightened: For Melancholy is not curable by Religion or
Divinity, and they who are subject to it should take the more care of their
lives that there be no true and great cause to fall in and join with the
Melancholy of their Bodies, and they should make a judgment of themselves in
their best tempers, and when their thoughts are clearest, and should trust
others, and especially their Spiritual Guides to judge for them, since they are
so unfit generally to pass judgment upon themselves.

2. This Trouble of Mind which makes Men despair of Mercy is most unreasonable,
and contrary to the whole tenor and design of the Gospel; for there is Pardon
held out to the greatest Sinner by the Blood of Christ, and to the greatest
Sin, or the greatest number of Sins if we Repent of them, and leave them, and
become good Men before we dye. This is as certain as the Gospel is true, and
therefore no Man has any just cause to despair for the greatest Sin or Sins,
who is so heartily troubled for them that he would not for the World commit
them again, and who resolves never to do so by the Grace of God, but to
practice the contrary Virtues, and who makes good this Resolution by a
Virtuous, and Pious, and Religious Life, this Man will as certainly be happy as
if he had been always innocent and never had offended God: I cannot say he
will be in a state as comfortable and free from trouble, though if he has thus
Repented and become a good man, he has good reason to be so, but he will be as
safe, and if he has still some trouble of mind remaining upon the remembrance
of his Sins though never so long past, and he cannot see the Pardon of them
with the same certainty and evidence that he knows he committed them, yet this
shall not hinder his Pardon nor affect his Salvation if he has truly and fully
Repented of them. For,

3. And Lastly, This Trouble of Mind which proceeds from judging too hardly or
severely of himself is rather an Infirmity than a Sin, and God will not condemn
a Man for it though he may condemn himself; for God will not condemn a Man
unjustly though he should unjustly condemn himself, much less because he does
so. Despair is indeed a sad state, but I cannot say it is always a damnable
Sin, or want of Faith as some think, for it may arise not from a disbelief of
the Gospel, or of the Divine Goodness, or the freeness and fullness of Gods
Grace in and through Christ, but merely from a false, and mistaken, and too
hard and humble an opinion of a Man's self, and this is a fault not of a Man's
Will but of his Judgment, and a weakness and imperfection in his Understanding
for which he shall never be condemned by a Righteous God, but he will reverse
this false Judgment which he made of himself when he lived or when he dyed, and
set it right in the Court of Heaven, and do Justice to him at the great
Tribunal, though he did not do it to himself here. That God will judge Men
according to their Works is plain in Scripture, but no where that I know, that
he will do so according to their Thoughts, their vain Hopes, and presumptuous
or vain Fears, and Troubles, and Doubts, and even Despairs of themselves. So
that though this Trouble of Mind or this Wounded Spirit be a comfortless and
unhappy state, yet it truly depends upon the cause to make judgment of it, or
to conclude any thing from it, and true and timely Repentance is the best and
certainest Remedy for it.

CHAP. IV. The ill Consequences drawn from the Privilege of Repentance
Obviated and Prevented.
THE most wicked and greatest of Sinners who have any thoughts of their Souls
and of another World, though they are not prevailed upon by this to become
better, yet make this reserve and refuge to themselves, that they will Repent
hereafter at some time or other, and so escape the Wrath to come. They know and
are very sensible, if they have not shaken off all Religion, and all thinking
and considering of these things, that except they repent they shall all perish;
but they hope and intend to prevent this by the benefit of Repentance, and so
make use of that not to bring them off from their Sins, but to encourage them
in them, with hopes to avoid all the miserable consequences of them and yet
live in them, and so by this privilege of an after Repentance they set aside
the present necessity of a good Life, and wholly destroy or supersede all
Religion.

I shall therefore endeavor to prevent that most common and most fatal abuse
of it, for I am confident there are more Souls perish by that, than by any
other mistake whatsoever, and a thousand times more than by downright
Infidelity and Disbelief of all Religion, which is a very rare thing and it is
hard to find out any certain instances that have ever been of it in the World
it is so much against the Natural Sense and Reason, and Apprehension of Mankind,
but the other is the commonest thing in the World even for Christians perhaps
above any others, to make false Reasonings to themselves from this privilege
of Repentance which we have in the highest degree from the Gospel, to think
they may secure and save their Souls, and yet indulge and allow themselves in
the present enjoyment of their Sins, because they may set all right by
Repenting of them hereafter. I shall therefore against this error and abuse of
Repentance and to obviate this mischievous Consequence offer these following
Considerations.

1. Can we think a Wise God would make such a Grant and Concession to his
Creatures as should destroy all Religion, and make void the necessity of
Obedience and a good Life? which according to these Men's thoughts is
unavoidably done by this Gospel-priviledge of Repentance: For since, say they,
a Man is as certainly safe who comes in at any time upon Repentance, and shall
be as certainly saved by the Terms and Conditions of the Gospel as if he had
spent all his Life in the strictest Virtue and Religion. What need is there of
such an early, and constant, and perpetual Obedience, and spending a whole Life
in the servitude and drudgery of Religion, when coming in at the eleventh hour,
and working but a short space at the latter end of the day, will have as much
Wages, and as sure a Reward, and be as certainly accepted by God? Shall not a
Sinner when ever he returns and repents find Mercy? Is there any time or bounds
prefixed to his Repentance, so that he may not do it so many years hence as
well as at present; and after he has taken a great deal of liberty, and had the
full swinge of his Lusts and vicious Inclinations, when they afterward grow
calm and cool of themselves, and he is tired or satiated with them, then to
leave them after he has had a full and a long enjoyment of them: To Repent time
enough to avoid all the bitter effects and punishments of them, after they have
fully tasted and exhausted all their sweetness and pleasantness, and then throw
away the poisonous core when they have sufficiently eaten of the dainty and
forbidden Fruit. Men to be sure will draw such consequences to themselves, when
Religion they think puts such an Argument into the hands of their Lusts which
are apt to be too strong of themselves against all Religion and Reason
whatsoever, and when they have such a fair color and pretense as they suppose
from Religion it self, they will be sure to improve it to destroy all Religion
by this one part of it, and by turning its own weapons upon it self: So that
like the Eagle in the Fable it shall receive its mortal wound from a dart that
comes feathered from its own wing, and by this subtle contrivance it shall be
made to countermine it self. Is Heaven then to be thus outwitted and
over-reached in its own policy? And whereas it designed this privilege of
Repentance to bring Men to Virtue, shall the Devil find out a stratagem whereby
to be too hard for it even upon its own ground, and make it an instrument to
encourage Men in their Sins? Has God like a soft, and easy, and indiscreet
Prince granted such a Charter, and made such Concessions to his Subjects as
shall destroy his own Power and Government, and make their Obedience loose and
precarious? No sure, neither his Wisdom nor his Power is to be thus lessened
and diminished; nor is the Grace of God, the greatest favor of the Gospel to
be thus turned into wantonness, and a principle of looseness and licentiousness,
as these Men make it who thus presume upon Sinning at present upon the
advantage of an after Repentance, and resolve therefore to run on in the score,
and to take up great sums in hand, and be much in debt to Heaven, because
they think the whole may be compounded pounded at the last, and made up for a
very little. We may be sure in the general there must be some great error and
mistake in this matter, and that it is either a false Principle that these Men
go upon, or that they draw a very false Conclusion from it; for God must be a
very easy Being, and Religion must have a very weak place in it if it lie open
to such a consequence.

2. We commonly tell Men in the second place therefore to prevent this, that
the after Repentance is very hazardous and uncertain, for no Man knows that he
shall have time to do it hereafter, or that he shall not be surprised with a
sudden and unexpected Death before he has performed this Repentance he
designed, and this indeed is very considerable; and were there nothing else,
yet a wise Man would not venture his Soul and its Eternal State upon so great
an uncertainty as Life and Futurity is, for that we know is no more in our own
power to command, than it is to recall the time that is past, and who that
thinks and considers what Eternity means would hazard it upon so ticklish a
cast, and so perfect a lottery as the continuance of Life is. Do not we see
most of the World snatched away on a sudden, Death hardly giving them any
warning, but coming upon them with secret and undiscerned steps, and stealing
up to them and striking the fatal blow before they were aware of it; and what
shall this poor wretch do whose Life is done before his Repentance is begun? He
who intended so many years hence to begin his Repentance, shall begin it sooner
in another World, but shall never end it, but Repent in vain to all Eternity,
in weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth for his folly and madness in not
Repenting sooner.

But though this be a monstrous hazard, and no Man in his Wits would lie open
to such a danger which can never be repaired but may be easily prevented, yet
this uncertainty of Life seems not a sufficient security to Religion, because
it is a security only by accident, and it is in great measure lost if a Man do
live out the usual period which many do, and which most hope to do; and there
ought to be greater Reasons to oblige them to a present Repentance and a
constant Obedience, than the mere fears that they may dye sooner; and it would
be strange if Religion should depend upon such an uncertainty, and a Man should
find a way to free himself from the necessity of it the greatest part of his
Life, if he were sure to live long.

3. Therefore we strengthen this commonly with another Consideration, and that
is, That though a Man may have Time to Repent hereafter, yet God may not give
him Grace to do it, especially if he so provoke him by such a neglect and abuse
of this Grace as quite defeats the end and design of it, and nothing can be
more highly provoking and a more just ground for God to deny us his Spirit,
than thus to abuse and pervert this Grace of the Gospel as to make it an
encouragement not to Repent but to Sin because they may Repent. Besides, the
longer the Custom and Habits of Sin continue upon us, the more root they take,
and the more difficult are they to be plucked up; and the Mind is in time so
much hardened by them, that like a chronical Disease or an old Ulcer, by being
suffered to run long upon it, they grow almost incurable: And he must be in a
fad condition who lets the power of his Sins thus grow upon him, and yet who
finds them so difficult at present to be overcome, and who has that power daily
lessened if not lost whereby he should do it. But still though Gods Spirit
shall not always strive with man. Genesis 5.3. yet we cannot positively determine
to what degrees of wickedness a Man must arrive before God will wholly withdraw
his Spirit from him; nor can we say that God denies necessary Grace to any
whereby they may Repent so long as they are in this state of Trial and
Probation, or that there are any such, though the greatest of Sinners, who are
debarred or excluded from the power and privilege of Repentance, for this
would tend to discourage a great many from Repentance, and do as much harm by
shutting those out of all hopes, as by opening the gate too wide to others, or
letting it always stand open to any that will come in at any time.

There must be therefore some other Considerations to take off the force of
this mistake, and to preserve the absolute necessity of a good Life and a
constant Obedience, which I shall endeavor to find out and offer.

4. Then, Such a Repentance as the Gospel makes the condition of Pardon and
Salvation, is nothing less than a constant Obedience and an entire and
universal Goodness of Life, at least after a wicked one, or after great
failures and miscarriages; for Repentance as I have often said, is to the Soul
like a recovery of Health to the Body after some great Sickness or Illness. The
whole Body, or the part ill affected must be made perfectly well and restored
to its former strength and soundness, or else it cannot be said to be
recovered. The Disease must be thoroughly got off, the sickly matter must be
discharged, the illness must be cured and removed, and the Patient must get his
former strength, and be able to perform the proper and vital operations, or
else we cannot say he is well. So a Sinner must wholly get rid of his past
Sins, must purge them all out by Sorrow and Contrition, must have his Mind
wholly freed from them, and himself brought to such a Spiritual strength and
soundness as to perform the Duties and Operations of the new Life, or else he
is not recovered by Repentance, nor brought from a bad state to a good one. He
may be under a method of Cure indeed, as a sick Man is under a course of
Physic, whilst he is under Sorrow for Sin, and Contrition, and Compunction,
and the like, which are good means and instruments, and beginnings of
Repentance, and so are mistaken for the thing it self; but his Repentance is
not finished, nor is the great work perfect and complete, till from a bad Man
in any kind he is become a good one, till this is done, which God knows is not,
the most easy nor the most speedy thing in the World, but requires long time,
and great care, and pains, and labor, there is no title that I know of to
Pardon by the Terms of the Gospel, nor is there any true Gospel Repentance such
as we can give any warrant or assurance of remission to by the Covenant of
Grace, or the known and ordinary Rules of Gods Mercy. Were Repentance only a
sudden Passion, or a transient Act of the Mind, were it only an inward Sorrow
Trouble and Compunction of Heart, it might be quickly performed, and no Sinner
would be without it; but Cain, and Herod, and Judas might be said to Repent
thus far and after this fashion, for thus the one repented and said, I have
sinned, Mat. 27.3, 4. the second was exceeding sorry for what he had done,
Matthew. 6.26. and the other was so sensible of his Sin that he cried out, My
punishment is greater than I can bear, Genesis 4.13. But true Repentance is only
known and made to be so by an habitual and lasting change both of Mind and
Life, by an actual amendment and reformation, by a turning away from all our
evil deeds and all our wickedness whatsoever that we have committed, and doing
that which is lawful and right, which is the clearest and fullest Scripture
expression that gives us the true Nature of Repentance which includes constant
and actual Obedience, and destroys these foolish and wicked reserves of
securing our selves by playing an after-game of Repentance. They who design
this have no sense of the true worth and excellency of Religion, but are only
for making use of it for a little turn at the last, as Goal-birds learn to read
merely for the sake of their Neck-verse; for though they like their Sins much
better and would always live in them it is plain if they were left to their
choice, yet they at last unwillingly bring themselves to part with them as Men
throw over their Goods in a Storm for fear they should be lost and Shipwrecked
with them: Thus miserably do they mistake and misunderstand the true Nature of
Repentance, which is a perfect changing the Habit and Temper, and Frame of a
Man's Mind, and bringing other Thoughts and Principles and Inclinations into it,
which is called in Scripture a new Heart and a new Spirit, and this producing
an entire and permanent and universal change of the Life and Actions, and
making a Man become better in every particular and in the whole a very good Man.

5. It is observable that Repentance is all along in the Gospel made a Duty
previous and antecedent to Christianity, and what was supposed to go before
Baptism, and what was necessary beforehand to fit and prepare Men to become
Christians; thus they were to repent, and be baptized, Acts 2.38. John the
Baptist who was to prepare the way for Christianity, did it by preaching
Repentance for this reason, Because the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand, Matthew.
3.2. i. e. Christianity or the state of the Gospel, which is agreed by all to
be there meant by the kingdom of Heaven was now approaching; and our Blessed
Savior upon that Principle and Argument preached the same Duty, ver. 17. From
that time he began to preach, and to say, Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand. And the Disciples of Christ preached this Duty Mark 6.12. when they
were to prepare and dispose Men to receive Christ and to embrace Christianity,
and when any that were adult were received into the Church and Christianity by
Baptism, they were supposed to be Penitents before they were Christians. It was
a Duty and a Condition always employed and required, that they Repented of
their past Sins, and sincerely promised and resolved upon a new course of Life.
That they who had their conversation in times past in the lusts of the flesh,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and were by Nature the
children of wrath, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2.3. i. e. in the state they
were in before they were Christians, (for the Gospel considers all Mankind as
in a state of Sin and Guilt before they are admitted into Christianity which is
a state of Pardon and Salvation) that these when they were made Christians were
to put off the old man with his deeds, Col. 3.9. i. e. all the old Habits and
Acts of Sin which they were guilty of in their unchristian state, and were to
put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. and they were to become new creatures in Christ Jesus, and
were therefore then said to be regenerated, and to be born again, and are
represented in Scripture, as dying unto all sin in Baptism, that they should
not henceforth live any longer therein, Romans 6.2. They are buried with Christ
by baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead, even
so we also who are baptized into his death should walk in newness of life, ver.
3. So that after Baptism we should reckon our selves to be dead unto sin, but
alive unto God through Jesus Christ, ver. 11. So that the body of sin is then
to be put off and destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin, ver. 6.
Thus though Men were considered as Sinners before their Baptism, yet they were
looked upon ever after as Saints in the Scripture phrase and account, and were
supposed to have repented and renounced all their Sins before they were
admitted into Christianity, and that as a previous and antecedent Condition
necessary to qualify and prepare them for it, and therefore there was usually
some time of trial and probation appointed by the Primitive Church, to see
whether those Candidates of Baptism were sincere or no in their Promises and
Pretenses, and if afterward they broke and violated those, and committed any
great and notorious Sin which they had renounced in their Baptism, and was
contrary to their Baptismal Covenant, they turned them out of the Church for
it, and excluded them from the Benefits and Privileges of Christianity; so
that they accounted not those for true Christians who were Penitents, and who
stood in need of Repentance for any great Sin: And indeed he is not a Christian
who does so, he is fallen off from Christianity, and has quitted and renounced
his Baptismal Vow, and has forfeited the rights of it, and has put himself out
of the Christian state and the state of Grace, who is guilty of any Mortal Sin,
and who is in a state of Repentance for it. Penitence was therefore always
accounted by those first Christians a very terrible and dreadful thing, if we
read of the cries and tears, and discipline and behavior of the ancient
Penitents, though the looseness and irreligion of latter times has made it to be
thought a slight, and easy, and trivial matter, but it is plain from Scripture
that it was supposed as previous and antecedent to Christianity and from the
Primitive Church that it cut Men off and excluded them out of it, and that so
far in the opinion of some as never to be again admitted into it. The Ancient
Church at first accounted him so far from being a Christian, who was in the sad
and wretched state of Penitence for any great and Mortal Sin, that it thought
he deserved never again to be received into the Church, nor admitted into
Christian Communion, no not in articulo mortis; It was so horrid a reflection
in its esteem upon Christianity, such a disgrace to the Gospel of Christ, and
so unworthy the Christian Profession to have a Christian guilty of any such
great Sin as Murder, Adultery, or the like, that it would never own him again
that was so, nor receive him as a Christian. But,

6. Though Christianity be a permanent state of Pardon and Remission, so that
this is by no means to be denied to Sins after Baptism, according to the
Novatian Heresy which sprang out of that first severe Discipline of the
Church, and which it was afterward forced to condemn, yet it is a thing
strange, and unknown, and unagreeable to Christianity, that Men should go on in
a course of renewing their Sins, and so renewing their Repentance for them as
often as they think fit. This would be making Christianity run in the Popish
Circle of Sin and Repent, Repent and Sin, and so dance round without any
danger, provided we stop at the last at the right point. I am far from that
severe Principle charged upon Novatus of old, and Smalcius of late, which
allows not Repentance to any great and voluntary Sins committed after Baptism,
though that were given only to the Adult and to those of full Reason and
Understanding; this would be the most uncomfortable thing in the World to the
best Christians, few of which could set up to themselves this narrow Ladder,
and so go alone to Heaven by it, as Constantine said to one of the Patrons of
this Doctrine. And I think the instance of the Incestuous Corinthian, and the
unworthy Communicants at Corinth, and many other places in the New Testament
clearly confute it; and it makes the Christian Covenant so much worse than the
Jewish which had standing means of Expiation and Remission, that it needs no
more to confute it: And though Baptism be not to be repeated, yet the benefit
of it reaches forwards as well as to what is past, as Christ's Death also does,
and we are partakers of Christ's Blood for the remission of Sins in the other
Sacrament as well as this, without any necessity of the pretended Sacrament of
Penance for this purpose, as the Papists argue: But though the Gospel has given
us a standing Charter of Pardon upon Repentance, which is not forfeited by
every new breach and violation, yet if we do not accept of it, and perform the
Condition after it has been offered and tendered to us, we may justly be
debarred and excluded from it, and God may when he pleases, without any breach
of Promise or of Covenant, cut us off from it; for he may take away our Lives
when he will, and so shorten and limit the time when this Privilege shall
expire and determine, and when we shall no further have any benefit of it. Like
a Prince who sets out a Proclamation of Pardon and Indemnity to all Rebels
that shall immediately come in, and return to their Allegiance, if they delay
and refuse to do this, they forfeit all their right to it, and may be siezed
and executed when ever he thinks fit. Should a Government grant a General
Pardon to all Offenders when ever they shall please to come in and claim it, it
would destroy it self, and encourage all manner of Villainy and Wickedness: And
if God should grant this to all Sinners when they had stood out in rebellion
against him all their Lives, that at the last moment of them they should have
the full and entire benefit of it, he would unavoidably encourage them in their
Sins, and relax and abate all the Obligation to his Laws, and unloose Men from
the necessity of a good Life, which was very far to be sure from the design of
God in granting this Privilege of Repentance. But it is an horrid abuse of it,
and a turning this Grace of God into wantonness, and putting a trick upon God
and Religion by thus perverting it, and drawing such mischievous consequences
from it. I hope I have taken away the very Grounds of that fatal Mistake, and
the common and false Reasonings that many make to themselves from it, or at
least shall do so before I have done, and particularly by the next Chapter.

CHAP. V. Of a Deathbed Repentance.
SECT. I. The Case of the Thief upon the Cross Examined.
THE Relation and Account of the Thief upon the Cross, and our Saviors
Discourse with him, though it be put in, and lie in the Gospel only as a mere
History, and a matter of fact that belonged to the manner of our Saviors
dying, his being crucified between Two Thieves, so that it was not intended or
designed by any of the Evangelists to teach any Evangelical Doctrine, or to
give any peculiar Rule, Principle, or Instruction that was extraordinary, and
that was to be learnt and collected, confirmed and authorized only by that, and
therefore though it is mentioned by all the Evangelists, yet by Three of them
very shortly and briefly, as a mere circumstance remarkable, chiefly for this,
that the Legs of the Two Thieves were broken, as was usual in crucifixions;
whereas Christ being sooner dead, prevented this, and so literally completed
that Prophecy, A bone of him shall not be broken: And for the sake of another
Prophecy, That he should be numbered with transgressors, and be a Companion and
fellow-Sufferer with the most infamous Criminals, and Malefactors, and nothing
farther was intended or designed by it, so far as we know, or appears to us
from Scripture, as the proper use, and the genuine purpose of it, though by
accident indeed it was an honorable Confession of Christ, and a bearing
Testimony to him before his Crucifiers, and also an Owning a future state of
Bliss and Happyness after this Life, when a Man was going out of the World, by
his desiring Christ to remember him in his kingdom, and Christ's promising,
that he should be that day with him in Paradise; but these were Truths not to
be learnt from hence only, but elsewhere, though they were hereby very solemnly
attested to: But there has been a Doctrine raised from hence, and not to be
learnt from any other place of Scripture, never taught by Christ, or any of his
Apostles, but wholly taken up, and founded upon this Instance of one of the
Thieves upon the Cross, which has from a matter of History and Circumstance
been improved to Teach and Advance a new Doctrine, no where else to be found in
the Bible; namely, That a wicked Man, when he comes to dye, may hope to be
happy and go to Heaven by virtue of a sudden Conversion and a short Deathbed
Repentance, though he has spent his whole Life never so carelessly and wickedly:
Or that a Deathbed Repentance may be by the Gospel sufficient and effectual
for a Man's Salvation, who has lived a very ill Life, and who does not sooner
Repent of it, than when he comes to dye. Now this I think is not only the
falsest, but the most Pernicious and Mischievous Doctrine that can be, for it
plainly takes away the necessity of a good Life, since that is not necessary
which a Man can any way hope to be saved without; and so tends to encourage Men
to continue in their sins, with the hopes that they may have time enough to
repent of them when they come to dye, and that there is a possible, if not a
likely way to save themselves at the last, though they live never so wickedly,
provided they have but a little time and warning, which hardly one in five
hundred but has to perform this sudden Repentance, and are not prevented to do
it by a sudden Death, which is an accident that happens but to few; If there be
nothing else but this accidental uncertainty to secure Religion, and the
necessity of a good Life, so that otherwise a Sinner may at the last claim the
full benefit of Pardon by the Gospel Covenant if he come in then by a short
Repentance, though he has stood out all his life in Rebellion against God, and
may, as we commonly say, dye well, and make a good end, though he lived never
so ill: If this be true, then this Gospel-Priviledge of Repentance destroys the
Gospel it self, and the main End and Design of it, and takes away the necessity
of Gospel-Holyness and Obedience, in order to our future Happyness; it removes
and alters those Conditions of Salvation which are indispensibly required by
the Gospel, it abates and remits the plain terms of it, and by such a clause of
Privilege takes away all the Authority and force of its Commands, and all the
Terror of its Threats and Punishments, and in effect unlooses all our
Obligations to the Law of God, and to a good Life; whatever does this, and has
such mischievous Consequences, and is so contrary to the first and plainest
Truths in Religion, as I shall show this is, cannot surely be a
Gospel-Doctrine, and therefore I am persuaded that is not which allows
Salvation to a mere Deathbed Repentance by the terms of the Gospel.

The Great thing to support this, is the instance of the Thief upon the Cross,
Luke 23.42, 43. though I shall show there is no certain ground or true
foundation to be had from that of any such thing if we fully consider and
examine it.

As to the Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard, Matthew, 20. who came in at
the Eleventh hour, and were rewarded as well as those who were hired at the
first; this belongs to another matter, and is spoken in favor of the Gentiles,
who though not so soon called and taken into the Covenant, as the Jews yet
should afterward be called and received into it, and have as great
Privileges, and as great a Reward as the Jews themselves, who were Gods first,
and peculiar People, hired and called in long before them: So that this is
foreign to the case of a late and short Repentance of a dying Christian, who
was called or hired as soon as he was baptized, and knew Christianity; and if
he loyter all the day, and will not work at all, no not one hour, or any
considerable part of his Life, till Night comes, and then when it is too late,
and he cannot work at all, only falls a crying and sorrowing, and repenting for
this his loytering and being idle, there is nothing in the Parable to excuse
such an one, but only those at the most, who had not the knowledge of
Christianity, or the means of Salvation sooner offered them, but came in and
worked as soon as they had, as soon as they were called and hired. The Parable
taken altogether, must not be applied further than this, as if it extended to
all those Christians who come in and Repent only at the last, or even to those
who have one hours time in proportion to their whole lives to do a few Acts of
Obedience, for it is by no means true that he who works and is Religious a
short and very little part of his Life, shall be as well rewarded, and have as
full an hire and recompense of God in another World, as he who does so the
whole; for then God would not render to men according to their works, as he
has declared he will do at the last judgment, for though he may do what he will
with his own, yet his rewards and promises are now fixed and determined by a
Covenant; and though God might bring in the Gentiles at the latter hour, and
reward them as well as the Jews, because there was nothing to the contrary in
theirs or any other Covenant, yet now as he that knows his Masters will, and
does it not, shall be beaten with more stripes, so he that has well used Ten
Talents, shall have a greater improvement, and greater gifts bestowed upon him,
and he shall have a higher reward who does more and greater Acts of Virtue in
his life, than he who does less; for Heaven, though it be a gift is a reward
too, and shall be exactly proportioned in the degrees of it to the deservings
and actions and behaviors of Men.

The main foundation then of this Doctrine of the Efficacy or Sufficiency of a
Deathbed Repentance must be the case of the Thief upon the Cross i. e. the
History or Relation of a Man who dyed as a Malefactor and yet certainly went to
Heaven, for that is the whole of it: Now I doubt not but many hundred such
Malefactors have gone to Heaven, and many Thousand Sinners that were once bad
Men, but yet had they never Repented till they came to dye, I do as verily
believe that not one of them had gone thither, but to another place where Men
shall for ever repent at the same rate that most Men do who have not done so
before that time: To Ground and Establish this Doctrine upon this Historical
Case, and it is I believe the only Doctrine that has such a foundation, we must
examine whether it certainly and exactly comes up in all the Particulars and
Circumstances of it to the case of a wicked Man's living a very ill life till he
comes to dye, and then only repenting of it: We must then enquire whether it
plainly and certainly appears from the account the Scripture gives us of it,

1. Whether he were a very ill Man in the whole or general course of his Life?

2. Whether we are sure he did not Repent long before he came to dye? for if
these two are not certainly known, nor do appear from Scripture, the case may
be very different, and no way suit or answer the late and dying Repentance of a
very wicked Man: And,

3. Supposing those two, yet how can we tell whether this might not be an
extraordinary case, and such as belongs to no other Sinner whatsoever?

1. Whether it do appear from the account Scripture gives us of him, that he
was a very ill Man in the whole or general course of his life? The reason of
which inquiry is this, that a general habit of irreligion and wickedness,
through the whole course of a Man's life puts him into a more wretched, and
dangerous, and deplorable state than any particular Act of Sin, or then any one
sin whatsoever; for that like a Leprosy spreads over and corrupts the whole
Mind, lays the whole Conscience waste, and roots up all the Principles of
Religion, and puts Men in the number of those who have no fear of God before
their eyes, and who live without God in the World; but a Man may not be so far
gone, not be a Sinner of so high a rate, but may be an imperfectly good Man,
and yet fall into a wilful sin by the suddenness or greatness of the
Temptation, by Surprise and Inconsideration, and laxness of Thoughts; by a
remissness in Religion, and not being duly upon his Guard, and by the struggle
that is in his mind between the Flesh and the Spirit, between this World and
another, which makes the one now and then get the better of the other; such an
one is a kind of borderer upon Virtue, and lives between the confines of that
and wickedness; and sometimes he is governed and brought under the power of
one, and sometimes is overcome and made a prey by the other; Now though such an
one is not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven, till he comes wholly off from every
wilful sin, and is more under the power of Religion, yet he is nearer to the
Kingdom of Heaven, and may sooner by Repentance and becoming a good Man, fit
himself for it, and so enter into it. It does not at all appear in Scripture
from the History of this Penitent Theif whether he had been a very ill Man or
no, in the general course of his Life; only that he was a Thief, which was
enough to denominate him (...), and suffered as he himself owns, justly, and
received the due reward of his deeds, Luke 23.41. But who knows what abatements
his sin might have either by extreme necessity, or some other circumstances
which God might fairly consider and allow for, though he was brought to an
infamous Death here by the severity of Humane Laws: Even a good Man who is so
in the general course and habit of his Life, may fall into a particular act of
wilful sin, as we see in David, Moses, and St. Peter, and let him that stands
take heed lest he fall, as the Apostle advises, 1 Cor. 10.12. For no Man is
perfectly out of danger whilst he is in this state of probation and infirmity;
and though every such Sin breaks a Man's good State, and puts him into an ill
one, till he recovers himself by Repentance and Amendment; for Men's States of
Grace and Damnation are no way fixed here, but are alterable in this World
according to the temper of their minds, and behavior of their lives, yet it is
more easy to recover from a single act than a long habit, as it is to cure a
green wound than an old Ulcer, or a Chronical Disease: And where there is an
habitual soundness within, where the Mind is not vitiated with habitual
Corruptions, and evil Principles, and irreligious Habits and Customs, but has a
pretty good Sense of Religion, though it happens to be over-powred with a
temptation, there it will sooner recover it self, and throw off the Disease and
the Corrupt Matter by its own inward Strength, and the assistance of the Divine
Grace; There the inward Sense and the Principles of Religion will unfold and
expand themselves by the power of Restitution, since though they have been
pressed down and overpowred, yet they have not been quite broken and destroyed;
the Religious and Virtuous Sense will revive again in the Mind which was not
wholly extinguished, though very much Damped and Choked and weakened; and thus
they plainly seem to be in thus penitent Thief by his Carriage to our Savior,
which I shall consider by and by, by his rebuking the other Thief who was
railing at Christ, with that most sober Reprimand, Do thou not fear God,
seeing thou art in the same condemnation, ver. 40. and by the firm belief and
full persuasion he had of the happyness of another State, and his Devout and
Religious Prayer to Christ to remember him when he came into his Kingdom; These
make it very probable, that he was not a very profligate or ill Man in the
general course of his Life, but rather such a good one, who lived not in the
habit of many great sins, but fell into a particular Act by a Temptation that
might greatly lessen it before God, though it made him an Example before Men:
But,

2. Whatever his Sin was, however great, and however sinful a Man he had been,
yet who knows how long he had repented, and how sincerely, and what fruits he
had shown of his Repentance? We know not when the theft was committed, and
whether he did not immediately Repent of it, and make Restitution for it, even
before he was apprehended, and before the thoughts and terrors of Death
frighted him into it; and herein may lie a mighty difference, for if a Man upon
the reflection of his Sin and a wicked Life, and the serious consideration of
the great danger he is in thereby, shall by the Grace of God, setting these
things home upon his Mind, strongly fixing and exciting these thoughts in him,
shall be brought to good purposes and resolutions of becoming better, and do
strengthen and make good these by his Actions, and thus begins to be good, and
ceases to be wicked, not from a sudden fright and fear of Death, but from the
Convictions of Religion, from the free and full persuasion of his own mind,
which is like to remain and continue with him, this puts him into a much better
State and Condition, and is more truly Repentance than that which arises in
Men when they come to dye, when they have a force put upon them, which almost
takes away the true freedom and liberty of their Wills; and therefore what they
do then is owing wholly to that, and ceases generally when that is removed: As
to the Thief, we know not what his case was, and therefore it is mere conjecture
to suppose he did not Repent till he came to dye, and it is the most groundless
thing in the World to apply his Case to that of a wicked Man, who repents not
till he finds he must quickly dye, when so far as we know his was perfectly
different, that he was neither a very wicked Man in the general Course of his
Life, and as for that single Act of Wickedness which is recorded of him, that
he might repent of it as soon as he committed it, and that might be many years
before he suffered for it. We have no certain knowledge of any of these things,
and therefore we can make no certain judgment by it, much less raise a Doctrine
from it, which supposes those two things which so far as we know may be both
false; and then who would venture his Soul upon such a mere uncertainty as that
another Man whom he knows very little of did not repent till he came to dye,
and lived very ill all the while before, neither of which may be true, but if
they were, yet

3. How can he tell but this may be an extraordinary Case, and such as no way
belongs to him, nor to any other Sinner whatsoever? What if Christ to show the
wonderful and miraculous Power of his Cross toward the Salvation of Sinners,
was pleased to give an uncommon and extraordinary instance of it at that time
such as no other Sinner should ever expect the like, unless Christ should again
come down, and dye upon the Cross with him? What if God, who will have Mercy on
whom he will have Mercy, was pleased to let this penitent Thief be a singular
Example of his unlimited Power and Prerogative to save beyond all ordinary
Rules, because of his dying at that time with Christ? This does no more make it
to be a standing and certain measure of his dealing with others, than a Princes
showing some extraordinary Act of Mercy to a few Persons when he comes first to
his Crown, and releasing all Prisoners at his Inauguration, declares that this
shall be the constant Rule of his Government, or that his Subjects shall have
reason to expect this at other times from him. Thus the Case might be
extraordinary as to God, but I rather lay it as such upon the account of the
Person himself; for it is certain he was an extraordinary Person who had the
honor not only to dye with Christ, and to bear him company upon the Cross, but
to confess and own him there in the face of all his enemies who were then
flouting and reviling him, when this good Man was owning him to be the Messiah,
calling him Lord, and praying him to remember him when he came into his
Kingdom. So that he declared the most illustrious Act of Faith in him that
could be, greater than his own Disciples then had, for they did not so clearly
believe and understand his Kingdom not to be of this World, and they all
forsook him and fled, when this Man alone bore witness to him before the
scoffing Jews and all his barbarous Crucifiers, which was being a Martyr to
him, though not for him, a confessing him in his Death though not by it. And he
that did thus confess Christ before men, and was not ashamed to do it when he
was in his lowest and most contemptible state, and who probably was for this
treated with more insulting mockery if not worser usage by Christ and his own
Crucifiers, is it any wonder that Christ according to his Promise Matthew. 10.32.
should confess such an one before his Father in Heaven? And that he who
suffered with him, and so eminently believed in him, should reign with him, and
be saved and received into his Kingdom? Can a wicked and careless Sinner who
has denied Christ by his Life, who has affronted, disobeyed and contemned him,
who in the language of Scripture has crucified to himself the Son of God
afresh, and put him to an open shame, Heb. 6.6. by Apostatizing from his
Baptism and by an unchristian Life, can such an one expect to have the same
treatment and usage from our Savior for a few dying Sorrows, and empty Vows,
and little Remorses as this Famous Convert, this Great Confessor, this Eminent
Martyr, this Apostle of Christ, as I may call him, who preached him upon the
Cross before his greatest enemies, and sealed his Illustrious Faith in him with
his dying words and his last breath? No surely, the case must be very different
between him and an ordinary and profligate Sinner, a wicked and vile Christian.

I do not think any far fetched Notion necessary to salve this matter of the
Thieves Salvation, by supposing him with a late Author, to have the benefit of
Baptism, the Baptismus Sanguinis, and then that Baptism will save a Man without
Obedience and a good Life. For I deny that Baptism has any such Grace or
Benefit, as without those to save a wicked Man, though he should be Baptized in
articulo Mortis, when he was just a dying: For if a newly Baptized Person be
not actually a good Man in such a degree as God will accept by the Terms of the
Gospel, his Baptism shall not save him, though it puts him into a state of
Salvation if he be so, but not otherwise, as is plain by Simon Magus; for the
conditions of Salvation are not specifically different before Baptism and
after, but only gradually: If they were, a Man would defer his Baptism till
near his Death as some did of old upon this mistaken Notion of such a Baptismal
Grace as saves a Man by an outward without an inward Regeneration and real
Holiness, the actual proof and signs of which the Primitive Church required in
the Adult before they admitted them to Baptism. And therefore to suppose a Man
may be saved upon Baptism, though he is not a good Man, is not allowable, but
if he dye just upon it, God will judge him according to the present temper of
his Mind, and the past course of his Actions, allowing him the Gracious Terms
of the Gospel which he has now a right to by his Baptism; but to think he can
be saved without any Actual Goodness in his Mind and in his Life, is I think
very false; though a less degree may save him that knows not Baptism or
Christianity than him that does. But as for the Baptism of Blood, or allowing
Martyrdom the privilege of Baptism, this is not founded upon ordinary right
but presumptive equity, and Salvation is allowed to them, because no Man but
must be presumed to be a very good Man, and have a high degree of actual Virtue
and Holiness who dies a Martyr, and prefers Religion before every thing in this
World, even his very Life: And without this in some higher measure than mere
Purposes and Resolutions, and mere Sorrow and Repentance for not having it, I
deny that any Baptism, or any thing else will save a Man.

This I say to prevent an Objection that it would not otherwise be easy to
Answer, which is this, That if the Grace of Baptism will send a wicked and
unqualified Soul to Heaven by virtue of a mere dying Repentance, without any
degrees of Actual Holiness, without which, the Scripture tells us, no man shall
see the Lord, why may not the Grace of the Eucharist do the same by the like
dying Repentance? Or according to the Roman Principles, the Grace of Penance
and Absolution, or of Extreme Unction, which have all the same superstitious
Error at the bottom.

SECT. II. The Pleas and Pretenses on behalf of a Deathbed Repentance Answered.
HAving showed that there is nothing in the case of the Thief upon the Cross to
support or justify the validity and efficacy of a Deathbed Repentance, I
shall now examine the other Pleas and Pretenses which are brought for it and
show how weak and ungrounded they are, so that no Man may believe such a
dangerous and mistaken Doctrine, nor venture his Soul not only upon such an
uncertain hazard, but such a certain danger and inevitable ruin as that will
bring upon him, if he presume upon it and trust to it: I shall consider and
rectify the common prejudices that are about it which are chiefly these
following, First, That at whatsoever time a Sinner repents, he shall find
Mercy. Secondly, That if a Man do so heartily and sincerely resolve upon a good
Life, that God sees if he should live he would make this good, then this Will
shall be taken for the Deed. Thirdly, That God may turn and change a Man's Heart
on a sudden. Fourthly, That by denying the efficacy of a Deathbed Repentance,
we throw Men into despair, and take away the Arguments that should persuade
them then to Repent, and limit Gods Mercy, and restrain his Grace, and the like.


First, That Expression, Whenever, or at what time soever, a Sinner repents
he shall find mercy. Now this though it be not express and in so many words in
Scripture, and therefore when the words in the Original would not fully bear
such a Translation, Ezekiel. 18.21. and some were offended at it as giving too
much encouragement to the Doctrine I am opposing, it was left out of the
Sentences beginning our Morning-Prayer, yet if we allow it to be true in the
utmost and fullest sense, and there is no great difference between when and
whenever, or at what time soever, yet it no way avails to the maintaining the
efficacy of a late or Deathbed Repentance; for all that a Man can then do,
does not come up to true Repentance, such a Repentance as has Pardon and
Salvation promised to it by the Terms of the Gospel. A Man may then be very
sorry for his Sins, and heartily troubled and concerned for them, but this
Sorrow alone, were it upon never so good Reasons, is not Repentance, but that
which may bring us to Repentance, as St. Paul says, Godly sorrow works
Repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10. and therefore it is not the thing it self. We may as
well suppose that feeling the smart of a Wound is healing it, as mere Sorrow
for Sin is true Repentance. Few Sinners and few Malefactors but are thus
sorrowful when they come near the place of Punishment and Execution: They are
sorry they must suffer for their Sins, and the terror of their Sufferings
makes Sin very bitter to them, but if that were removed, they would love them
and commit them perhaps as much as ever. If Sorrow alone for Sin though never
so deep and grievous were true Repentance, then Cain and Judas were as great
Penitents as any, and so will all the damned be to all Eternity who will thus
sorrow and thus repent for ever of their Sins, but without any amendment; and
they will wish also a thousand times that they had been wiser, and lived
better, and had not by their foolish and wicked courses brought themselves into
such a miserable and wretched condition, and would God but let them live over
their Lives again, oh how much better would they be! how much otherwise would
they live! and how heartily would they purpose and resolve to leave all their
Sins and lead a very good Life, would God but give them opportunity and space,
and try them once more! This is the language of Sinners both in this World and
the next too, when the day of Grace and the time of Trial is over, when it is
too late to do all this which they now wish they had done, but would not do it
when God gave them time, and so they have lost the only opportunity which it is
impossible to retrieve. Would God grant either the Sinner that is damned or the
Sinner that is a dying opportunity to live again, they would both be better
perhaps, but since he does not, he will judge them not according to what they
would be but what they have been, not according to what they wish and resolve
to do but what they actually have done, since the Scripture no where tells us
that Men shall receive according to their Wishes, their Purposes and
Resolutions, but according to their Works and Actions, whether they have been
good or evil. And therefore,

2ly, I believe there is no ground for that determination which has been often
given about a Deathbed Repentance: n: that if a Man's Purposes are then so
sincere that he would make them good if he lived, that then they may be
sufficient to his Salvation. Had God given him time to make them good, and from
a bad Man to have become a good one, which is the only true Notion I know of
Repentance, then indeed he had fallen under the promises and the measures of
the Gospel, where God has declared Pardon to all Men that Repent and Amend, but
no where that I know of to those who only resolve to do so, though never so
sincerely And therefore should a Man's Purposes be never so sincere at that
time, which I doubt not but they may be as to the present sense of his Mind,
that is, he may really intend at that time what otherwise could not be properly
called a Purpose or Resolution in him, yet this may not be afterward
effectual, but may go off as most of the Vows of Sick Men and Ship-wrecked
Mariners do when the Sickness and the Storm is over, and they are just as they
were before when they are well and upon dry Land; for nothing is more easy and
more sudden than to wish and purpose and resolve well, especially when Men are
under any great fear or great danger which wholly takes up their Minds, and
they consider not so much the difficulty of performing what they resolve upon,
as the necessity they see of avoiding the danger that is before them; but when
they are got free from that, their Minds and their Purposes change as well as
their Circumstances. But let us allow all that can be supposed that these
Purposes of the dying Sinner are not only sincere but would be effectual too,
if he lived, which neither he nor any other but only God can know, yet I see no
reason to think that God will deal with him for what he might or would
hereafter be, and not for what he was or is at present, or that the Rule of the
Divine Judgment at the last day shall be this, to reward Sinners because they
might have been good Men if they had lived longer, or to punish good Men
because they might have been bad perhaps if they had lived longer too, though
God had seen either of these in his Infinite Prescience, but thinks fit to
prevent them by cutting a Man off and taking him out of the World, he will not
acquit or condemn him for foreseen futurities which might or would have
happened, but for past and certain Actions which he has done, and which God
himself cannot make to be undone, though he may hinder these to be done which
are not, and so to become nothing. It Is the present Habit and Temper and Frame
of a Man's Mind, and the present Moral state of Virtue or Vice which a Man is in
when he dies shall dispose him to Happiness or Misery; so that it is not he that
was formerly or might hereafter be a good Man if he had lived, but only he that
is so at present in the disposition of his Mind and habit of his Life, is fit
for the Kingdom of Heaven, and meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light:
And it is not he that was a wicked Man heretofore, or might be such afterward
if he had lived in such trials and circumstances which it pleased God to take
him away from, and so in this sense take him from the evil to come, but he that
is a wicked Man at present in the habit of his Mind and course of his Life
shall go to Hell. Repentance is not a resolution to forsake Sin and become a
good Man, but the becoming so after we have been otherwise in any instance. And
he that has lived very carelessly and wickedly all his life, and only resolves
to live otherwise when he comes to dye, can no more be called a good Man than
he a good Scholar that has spent all his time idly in the University, but when
he is to be expelled from thence resolves to study hard: Or he a Rich Man who
has prodigally wasted all his Estate, but when it is gone almost to the last
Farthing resolves to save and become Rich. Good resolutions are good spurs to
quicken, and are necessary to carry on and put us upon any great or excellent
design, but if the design were attained as soon as it is purposed and resolved
upon, no Man would miss of his end, nor ever fail of being Wise and Learned,
and rich and Great, if a sudden resolution of being so would do the business.
Nor would any Sinner be either miserable or wicked when he comes to dye, if it
were sufficient to purpose and resolve at that time to become good and happy.
It Is a loose and a false Notion of Repentance which places it in mere Purposes,
and in good Wishes and Resolutions, and in a short transient passion and
compunction of mind and inward working of thoughts, rather than in a settled
and permanent change both of Mind and Actions, in a new Heart and a new Life,
in turning from Sin, and doing that which is lawful and right, in being renewed
in our minds, and amending and reforming our ways in which the Scripture
places it, that has given occasion to this dangerous mistake of the sufficiency
of a Deathbed Repentance; but Repentance, as I have all along showed, is a
greater thing than most imagine. It Is not a slight Remedy, but a Medicine made
up indeed of a great many parts and ingredients, such as Sorrow and Trouble,
and Fasting and Confession, and good purposing and resolving, and the like, but
till these work the Cure, and make the Mind better, purge out all the sickly
matter, free the Soul from all its Sins and restore it to a state of Virtue and
Religion, of Grace and Goodness, they all signify nothing; for true and
perfect Repentance must be like Health or a recovery after Sickness, and till
the Mind is brought off from its sick and weak state, from all its Spiritual
Maladies and Sinful Habits, to a good degree of soundness, and a Virtuous
Crasis and Constitution, so as to be free from Sin, work Righteousness, and
perform the proper acts of the Divine Life, so as the drunkard is made sober,
the unclean chaste, the unrighteous not only just but charitable, the profane
and irreligious devout and pious, and the like, it has not Repented as the
Scripture requires, nor is it qualified for Pardon or for future Happiness; for
no wicked Man in any kind shall enter into Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9. till he be made
good after he has been otherwise in any instance; for one wilful and habitual
Sin continued in will certainly damn him, and nothing but Obedience, which if
it be after Disobedience is called Repentance, is the Gospel Condition of our
Salvation, and without this, faith and trust in Christ, and hopes in Gods Mercy
and Free Grace, which are the true supports and comforts to a good Man, are
deceitful comforts and mere delusions to a bad one, for without holiness and
habits of Grace and Goodness, no man shall see the Lord, and if we will enter
into life, we must keep the Commandments. And God surely did not give us such
Commands that we should either keep them while we live, or else Repent of not
doing it when we come to dye; then a Man might break them all while he lives,
and only Repent that he had not kept them when he is a dying, and this should
be instead of keeping of them, which would defeat and destroy all the Gospel,
and all the necessity of Obedience and a Holy Life, and keeping Gods
Commandments, and God must then alter those Terms, and alter even his own
Judgment at the Last Day, and not judge us by our Works, nor by what we have
done in the flesh whether it be good or evil, but only by the sincerity of our
dying Repentance which I no where find mentioned, nor is this dis-junctive any
where in the Gospel, Leave thy sins and live well, and keep my Commands, or
else Repent and be sorry for not doing all these things at the last, and that
shall be as well. But I shall by and by give my positive Arguments more fully
against this mischievous mistake.

3ly, The next difficulty, and the next plea for a Deathbed Repentance is
this, That God may on a sudden so powerfully alter a Man's Mind, and so work
upon his Heart by his Spirit, as to change and convert him, and make him
another Man in a very little time, or just before he dies. I answer, God may do
this if he pleases to exert his utmost force and power upon us, and so he may
raise us again after we are dead, and make us live a new Life upon Earth, but
we are not I suppose ordinarily to expect this, no more are we the other, which
is as contrary to the ordinary Methods of his Grace, as the other of his
Providence; God does not use a miraculous and extraordinary power in either,
and for any Man to depend upon this, is a downright tempting of God, and by
neglecting the common means which he has put into his hands, to call for a
Miracle which God will not grant to the careless and idle when there is no need
of it. God has given us all sufficient Means, sufficient Motives, and
Arguments, sufficient Grace and Assistance to Repent and leave our Sins; and if
we will not make use of these, but abuse the Talents he has committed to us, he
will not for that reason give us a double number, when we come to dye, and
dispense the more to us for our having been idle and prodigal all our lives.
The habits of sin and wickedness which we have been contracting all our Lives
will not be changed on a sudden when we come to dye, when we have complained so
long and often of our sins, as being so hard to be overcome, and so impossible
to be left off, shall we expect all of a sudden to have it become so easy a
matter, and so sudden a business to get rid of them? when we have suffered them
to run so long upon us, and have not thought 'em curable by all the Methods of
Grace and Religion, shall we think to meet with a sudden Charm and Amulet for
them that shall cure them we know not how? Some Men talk of infused habits
without being able to reconcile them either to Sense or to Nature, and of
instantaneous Conversion, without being able to give any one example of any
such thing from all the Scripture; some indeed were suddenly and miraculously
converted to Christianity, as St. Paul, and the Jailer; and a Man may be
brought to believe otherwise than he did by such a strong Argument as a
Revelation, which shall immediately turn his Judgment and Understanding, but to
have him that has been along while accustomed to do evil, in an instant do
good, is without president in Scripture, and no way reconcilable with that
known place of Jerem. 13.23. A Man cannot suddenly step out of the ways of
Vice into those of Virtue; they do not lie near, but contrary to one another;
so that a Man must go back and undo his vicious habits, and unravel all his
sinful customs by degrees before he can attain to the contrary Virtuous ones,
which are not to be acquired without great pains and time, and long care and
watchfulness. To root out Vice and make Grace grow in the heart, is not an
easy nor a sudden work, we find how much it costs us to mortify a lust, to
conquer a passion, to master an ill inclination, and what pains we must take
with our selves to do this, and can we think all this may be done on a sudden,
by a Man who has all his days lived loosely, and given the reins to all these;
that he can be made that in a moment which he could not be made all his Life?
God may indeed give him a New Soul, and that a very Virtuous one, and
Annihilate his Old one that was so habitually vicious, but to make that good in
a moment is more difficult than the other, more contrary to Nature, and what is
as little to be expected so far as I know from God. The sum is, none but a
good Man can go to Heaven, and none can be made such on a sudden without a
Miracle; and no Man can expect to be saved by that, but by the ordinary Means
and Grace of the Gospel. Those Graces and Virtuous habits which can alone
qualify and make us meet for Heaven, cannot be brought into our Souls on a
sudden, nor can any sudden Convictions, or sudden Thoughts and sudden Passions
change and alter a Man's mind so as to renew it, and put it in another frame,
and make it inwardly Holy and Righteous when it was habitually bad before,
without so much time, and so many Acts of Obedience as shall change its
Principles, Thoughts, Inclinations, Affections, Temper, Disposition, and the
like. In vain had God commanded us so many Virtues, and so many Acts of
Obedience as Qualifications and Conditions to fit our Minds for Eternal
happyness, if without living in those, and performing them any time our Souls
might be disposed and fitted for it. There cannot be a sufficient change of the
Mind for this purpose without change of Life and Actions. To talk of inward
Principles of Grace in the heart without vital Acts of Holiness and Obedience
in the Life, and that an old Sinner by such a new Principle infused into him,
is a kind of Embrio Saint, just conceived, though not formed as he should be,
nor able to perform any Acts of Obedience, is to strain a Metaphor, and depend
upon a Similitude without rightly understanding the thing; Every Christian has
this inward Principle of Grace infused into him by virtue of his Baptism and
Christianity, and it exerts it self with his own will and endeavors all his
Life, unless hindered by him; and it is never perfectly taken away from any
perhaps, or at least only from the most Vile and Profligate of Sinners in this
World, but it will and does stir and move, even in very wicked Minds, but this
is all ineffectual, and to no purpose, unless it produce Acts of Virtue and
Obedience and a Good Life, without which it neither Sanctifies nor Regenerates,
nor makes us good Men, nor fit for Heaven, and without those which are the
Vital Motions and Effectual Operations of this Grace of the Gospel which is
given us by our Baptism, he who may be supposed to have this inward Principle
infused into him, and stirring with his fears at the time of his Death, yet for
all that is but an Abortive Christian, and has neither the new Birth or
Regeneration, nor the Divine Life in him.

4ly. The great Prejudice against this Doctrine is this, that it is too severe,
and will tend to make us judge overhardly of others, and to throw dying Sinners
into despair, as being in an hopeless State by the Gospel, and so hinder their
Repentance at that time as being insufficient, and ineffectual. To which I
answer, That it is no more severe than the Gospel is, which shuts every wilful
Sinner out of Heaven, and pronounces Damnation upon every one that does not
live a good Life, at least after a bad one, which is the true Notion of
Repentance, but we must make a new Gospel if we abate of this and come lower
than is any way consistent with the Divine Wisdom and Government, and with
securing Virtue and Religion, and not opening a wide door to Looseness and
Licentiousness, and encouraging Men in their Sins rather than bringing them off
from them; I believe indeed it is more out of pity and tenderness than any good
ground in Reason or Scripture that the other Doctrine has took place, but we
must not pervert the Gospel out of an unreasonable tenderness, and by
pretending to be more merciful than God is or has declared himself to be; and
it is I doubt the greatest cruelty to our own and others Souls thus to deceive
'em into ruin by giving them hopes contrary to the Gospel, and I account it
the greatest charity to forwarne Men of their danger, and to free them from
such a fatal mistake; It does not so much concern us to judge other Men, and
apply this Doctrine to them as to our selves, God is their proper judge to whom
we ought to leave them, and to their own Master they shall stand or fall at the
great day, but it is more dangerous to assume a sort of Power to dispense with
the Laws of God by our pretended Charity, and to give a relaxation to the rules
of the Gospel, and the conditions of Salvation out of undue Piety, and in
effect to blame and condemn God, and think he deals more hardly with Sinners
than he ought to do, or then we our selves would do, when he pronounces
Damnation upon them for their bad Lives, and will not save them for their dying
Repentance; out of this Principle of pity others have gone farther, and denied
the Eternity of Hellish Torments, and have thought it too hard that God should
punish the sins of a short Life with never-ending pains, and have therefore
thought good in their great pity to release all the Damned, and even the Devils
themselves out of Hell within so many years, but this is to understand the
Measures and Reasons of the Divine Government better than God himself, to
prescribe new ones to him contrary to what he has laid down, to set up a Court
of Equity upon him in our thoughts, and to correct the fixed Rules and declared
Measures of his Justice and Mercy with some others of our own, which surely is
not to be allowed.

As to the driving Sinners into despair by this Doctrine; this cannot be said
of those who have time before 'em to repent and live better if they make use of
it, and nothing will more strongly excite them, and more immediately put them
upon this than the faithful and open telling them the truth as I have done, and
taking them off from all hopes and trust of a dying Repentance which has
destroyed so many Souls. As for the dying Sinner himself, however I pity him, I
dare not give him hopes farther than I have warrant from God and Authority from
the Gospel, which no Minister can have to assure him of Pardon and Salvation
from a mere late and Deathbed Repentance. He can only advise such an one to do
all he can at that time, which may help, if not wholly to remit his punishment
yet in some measure, to abate and mitigate it, which is a very great thing, and
commend him to the Extraordinary and Uncovenanted Mercy of God, which is not
limited by any thing but the recitude of his own Nature, to which we must leave
some great Cases not knowing what to judge of them our selves, but as to the
ordinary and covenanted Mercy of God which he himself has limited, and which
ought not be stretched or extended any more than narrowed or confined to any
other bounds than those of the Gospel, such a Repentance has no title to it by
any promise there that I know of, and therefore I would not for all the world
venture my Soul upon it, nor would have any Man else to do so; for besides all
other hazards of a sudden Death and the like that attend such a Repentance,
it is venturing whether God will not break the Rules and Measures of the Gospel,
or at least abate them, and be more merciful than he has there promised to be,
which no Man has any reason to expect he should be, but rather a great deal to
question whether he can be.

Let none of us therefore trust to such a Late and Deathbed Repentance which
will expose us not only to infinite danger, but to inevitable and certain
ruin, nor let us believe any such Doctrine which has no foundation either from
the Thief on the Cross, or from any thing else in Scripture to be relied on,
but however severe the other Doctrine be, let us consider it is true as I shall
fully prove it is, and I know no Mischief of its severiry but this which is the
plain consequence of it, that we must not delay our Repentance, but take care
to live a good life if we hope to go to Heaven.

SECT. III. The Invalidity of a Deathbed Repentance shown from the Parable of
the Wise and Foolish Virgins.
HAving Examined and Answered the Pleas and Pretenses on behalf of a Deathbed
Repentance I shall show its Invalidity and Insufficiency by such plain and
positive Proofs as shall take away that common error and fatal mistake on the
other side and fully confirm and establish my Opinion against it, The first
whereof shall be that Excellent Parable of the Wise and Foolish Virgins, Matthew.
25. especially the latter part of it at the 10, 11, 12. verses, for I shall not
represent it entire in all the parts but only what is more full and home to my
purpose in relation to the foolish Virgins of whom it is said, That while they
went to buy the bridegroom came, and they that were ready went in with him to
the marriage and the door was shut, afterward came also the other Virgins,
saying, Lord, Lord, open to us, but he answered and said verily I know you not.

Parables were an Eastern and Jewish way of instruction very frequently used by
their wisemen, and so made customary to the people, for all forms and modes and
habits of speech like those of cloths would look odd and antic and uncouth
that were not so; as they were very ancient and very common among them and from
thence taken up by our Savior, so they were very agreeable to Nature, and a
most useful lively and familiar way of representing any Truth or Doctrine by
way of History and Similitude; They showed us the thing in an Image and
Picture, so that we saw it as it were before us and it thereby made a strong
impression upon both the fancy and the memory, and they set us a pattern and
example of it by which we might the most easily comprehend, understand and
remember it and have it as it were in a Scene drawn before our eyes and acted
before us, which are the most natural ways by which Mankind are to be taught
moved and affected; Abstracted naked Truths are many times too fine for their
gross thoughts and understandings, and they cannot conceive Spiritual things so
well as when they are dressed up in another garb, and brought down to their
Senses; Most of our thoughts and apprehensions are formed by such ideas and
images on the brain and mind as are the draughts and models of the things
themselves, and Parables have these two things in them which are apt to make
the strongest impression upon the minds of Men which are Imagery or Picture,
Acting or Representation by Example. Now in these Dramatical Composures and
Instructions there is a main Plot or one chief and Principal Design runs
through the whole, and is chiefly aimed at and carried on in all the parts and
acts of it, and that is chiefly to be minded as the Scope and Aim of the
Parable, the Air and Countenance and Eye as I may call it of this moral
Picture, which looks upon such a principal Truth, Doctrine and Instruction as
what it intends chiefly to convey and represent thereby to our minds: Now the
very Scope and Drift and Design of the Parable of the Wise and Foolish Virgins
is to show that we ought to be always prepared and provided for another World,
and that there is no hopes of entering into Heaven by any thing we can do on a
sudden when the Bridegroom is just a coming, and when Death is just upon us and
very near us and we are unprepared before for it: These three things are
plainly meant and imported and aimed at by it.

1. That we cannot enter into Heaven without Holy and Virtuous Habits and
Dispositions of Mind. 2. That these are not to be had or attained on a sudden.
3. That without those we shall be shut out of Heaven notwithstanding our most
earnest Desires, Prayers and Entreaties, and all other Applications we can make
to enter in.
1. That we cannot enter into Heaven without Holy and Virtuous Habits and
Dispositions of mind, Those are meant by the Oil which the Wise Virgins had in
their Vessels but the Foolish were without, and not sensible of the need of it
till it was too late; to think that our Soul may be happy and fit for Heaven
without those is as foolish and inconsiderate as to think that a Lamp will burn
without Oil, without that which is to feed and constitute and maintain the
flame; Virtue and holiness are the main Things in which the happyness and
Perfection of the Mind consists, the highest Improvement of all its faculties
and capacities, and the foundation of all that Peace Joy Bliss and Satisfaction
which it can have in it self or any thing else, and the only qualification to
make it capable of receiving all the happyness that can be communicated to it,
without these as we are unworthy of being received into Heaven, which is the
highest reward which God appoints to those who most faithfully serve and obey
him, and which he will never give to such vile and undeserving Wretches as have
contemned it all their lives and not thought it worth any of their pains and
endeavors, and therefore he has barred and excluded all wilful Sinners out of
it of what kind soever, by a positive Decree and Declaration, 1 Cor. 6.10.
Galat. 5.19, 20. So they shut out themselves by a Natural Incapacity and
Unfitness, for Heaven is the Place and Region of the purest Virtue and the most
perfect and God-like Holiness, and nothing else can dwell there or be capable
of the pleasures and enjoyments that are to be met with in it. An old Sinner
with his corrupt Habits, and depraved and vicious Inclinations about him, would
find nothing there to entertain him, no suitable objects or proper actions to
delight and please him, but would be as unfit to be took from his Vices and put
into Heaven, as a Swine from wallowing in the mire to be placed on a Throne. As
God will not suffer any such impurity to appraoch that holy place nor any
unclean thing to enter into it, so it could not be supposed capable of enjoying
the proper and Spiritual Happiness of it, till it was very much changed and
altered and brought off from the love of Vice to the love of God and Goodness,
and so fitted to partake both of the favor of one, and the good and happiness
of the other.

It Is certain none but good Men shall enter into Heaven, and partake of the
Joys and Glories above, which God has laid up for those that love him, all
others are both unworthy and incapable to enjoy them, and shall never taste of
any part of them; as I shall show by a few Considerations.

1. From the Nature of God. 2. From the Nature of Heaven as a Gift and Reward.
3. From the Nature of its Happiness. 4. From the Nature of our Minds which are
to be the subjects of it.
1. From the Nature of God, which is the standard and measure both of all
Holiness and Happiness too, so that the more any Being approaches to that, the
nearer it is to Happiness, and the more contrary it is to that the more
miserable it must necessarily be. Now Holiness and Virtue is the only thing by
which we can be like God, and become partakers of the Divine Nature, and are
changed into the same image, and the greatest resemblance of his Glorious
Perfection, 2 Cor. 3.18. and therefore it is the only thing that can advance us
to the highest degrees of Happiness. That which makes the Devils themselves
such miserable wretches, nay hell it self so wretched a state, is their
contrariety and repugnancy to God and Goodness, their being so directly
opposite to the Divine Nature, their not having the least Ray of Divine
Goodness and Holiness to dwell in that place of darkness, the sink and center
of all Sin and Wickedness. And Heaven it self is therefore so happy so blissful
a place, because it is the Region of all Divine Virtue and Holiness, because it
advances us to a God-like State and Perfection, and transforms us into the
nearest likeness of God himself, and is the fullest participation of him and
his Perfections. All Virtue and Holiness is an efflux or irradiation of the
Divine Nature communicated to the Humane, Gods Essential Holiness transfused
into our Nature, his Image imprinted upon our Minds, and therefore it makes us
the Children of God in the Scripture language, and so naturally and necessarily
beloved by him, even in some degree as he loves himself and takes infinite
complacency and delight in his own Essential Perfections and Original Holiness.
The righteous Lord loves righteousness, Psalm. 11.7. from his own Righteous
Nature, and for the same reason, The wicked his Soul hates, for he cannot love
any Being so contrary to himself, and so repugnant to his own Righteous and
Holy Nature; for we may as well suppose him to hate himself or to love the
Devils, the most opposite to himself, and therefore the most accursed Beings,
as to love a very wicked and impure Soul which does truly partake of the
Diabolical Nature and is most repugnant to the Divine. He cannot take such an
one into his special Love and Favor, and communicate any of his own Happiness
to it and admit it into Heaven, which is the highest degree and fullest
participation of his Love and of his Happiness, upon the account of its
unlikeness and contrariety to the Essential Perfections and Holiness of the
Divine Nature.

2. God cannot bestow Heaven upon any but those who are Good and Virtuous, as
it is a Gift and Reward proposed and promised by him only to such as are so. God
as he is a Just Judge and an Impartial Distributer of Rewards and Punishments,
and will render to every man at the last day according to his works, he cannot
without injury to that Character, and the plain charge and imputation of
Partiality and Injustice, bestow and confer so great a Reward as Heaven is to
be upon those who are wholly unworthy and undeserving of it, who have lived
wickedly and disobediently all their Lives, had no regard to the Honor and
Glory of God, nor doing him any service in the World, nor made Heaven and
Religion and Virtue their great end, but gratified their Vices and enjoyed
their Lusts, and allowed themselves in all the undue liberties of Sensual
Pleasures, and broken the Divine Commands, and lived in a direct and open
opposition to God and Religion. If such Men shall be at last rewarded by God as
well as those who have faithfully served him, and sincerely obeyed him, and
made it their business to promote his Honor and promote Religion, and do all
the good they could in the World, who have denied themselves all unlawful
pleasures and vicious gratifications, and have took great pains with
themselves, to conquer their sensual inclinations, and overcome the Temptations
of this World, and to live up to the strict rules and answer the great ends and
designs of Religion, if the reward of Heaven and the Crown of Glory be not laid
up for these, and they alone partakers of it, and not the other, then God will
be thought at that great day when he says he will judge the world in
righteousness, not to have done right to his Creatures, nor to have had a due
regard to their Actions, not to have loved and rewarded Virtue, punished and
hated Vice as they deserved, and not to have dealt with Mankind according to
the known measures of Justice among themselves, and the certain rules of
distributing rewards and punishments. The whole Scripture assures us the
contrary to this, and the reason of the thing makes it impossible to be
otherwise, for though Heaven is the Gift of God infinitely beyond what is due to
any of our Virtues, yet it is a Reward too, and shall be given in a way of
Justice, and in such a manner as is agreeable to the rules of Righteousness.

3. Such is the Nature of this Heavenly Happiness that none but good Men can
partake of it, for none but they can love God and delight in him, and take any
complacency and satisfaction in the enjoyment of him. The wicked whilst he
continues such is an enemy to God and a hater of him, and whilst he is so were
he carried to Heaven, he would be only like a Traitor taken captive and brought
in Chains to his Princes Court, where it would be no pleasure to see him upon
his Throne in all his greatness whom he hated, against whom he had been a
Rebel, and from whom he could never expect any favor; and therefore the being
thus brought into his Presence and seeing all his Glory would be only a greater
vexation to him, and an adding to his misery; and only more torment him as it
does the Devils, to see and know there is such a Being above them whom they can
never have their friend or be reconciled to. No Man while he is wicked can have
any more hopes of this than those wretched Spirits, and therefore can never
have any, or be capable of any happy communion or fruition of God in Heaven.
And as to the spiritual pleasures and noble enjoyments there, they are no more
suited and adapted to him than any other pleasures are to one that has lost the
proper Faculties to which they should be agreeable, and by which he should have
the perception of them, than Music to one that is deaf, or Light and Beauty to
one that is blind, and therefore such a vicious wretch cannot be imagined to be
in any other condition in Heaven, were he to go thither with his sinful Habits,
than all other Animals are when they are taken out of their proper Elements;
for Heaven is no place, nor has no suitable pleasures and entertainments but
for those who love God and Goodness, and delight in the exercises and
enjoyments of Religion.

4. From the Nature of our own Minds it is impossible we can enter into Heaven
or be capable of Happiness, without Holiness and Virtue. Our Happiness there
must be suited to those Faculties and Capacities which belong to us; it must
lie in the highest perfection and improvement of the several powers of our
Minds, and the most proper sense and enjoyment resulting from thence, when our
Understandings are advanced to the highest knowledge especially of God and the
Divine Nature, which is that Beatifick Vision, that seeing of God as he is, in
which the Scripture places the chiefest part of Heavenly Happiness, when the
Will chooses the chiefest and supreme good with the greatest vigor and ardour,
and enjoys it with the highest rapture and ecstasy of fruition. When our Souls
are thus improved with the brightest understanding of Truth, and the strongest
love and willing of Good. When our Powers and Faculties are the most raised and
perfected, the most enlarged and opened, and filled up with the fullest
enjoyment of those their proper Objects, then they are in the most happy and
pleasurable state imaginable. Now nothing can do this but Religion and Wisdom
and Virtue, which are the highest accomplishment and improvement of our Minds,
without which we can never enjoy the true Happiness we were made for, and to
which our Minds are fitted. Virtue alone can give that, and all the Pleasure,
Peace and Joy that result from it, whereas Wickedness will necessarily not only
corrupt and impair the Mind and spoil its Faculties, but disorder and wound and
corrode it, and make it very painful and uneasy, and a Hell and Torment to it
self.

2. As none but good Men shall enter into Heaven, so none can be made good on a
sudden. Those Virtuous and Holy Habits and Dispositions of Mind are not to be
had or attained immediately, in a little time and on a sudden hurry; as is
intimated here by the Virgins wanting Oil, and not being able to procure or buy
it in their present distress when the Bridegroom was a coming. We must be
prepared and provided with those things that are necessary for our Future
Happiness before Death comes and puts us on a sudden hurry, and alarums us with
its unexpected approach, or else we shall be sadly disappointed and unprovided
if we expect to procure or attain them then. If we think to borrow of another
Virtues and Merits to help out our own defects and wants at that time, as they
of the Church of Rome imagine something like these foolish Virgins; or as
others, that the Bridegroom himself shall supply them in an extraordinary
manner out of his stock, though they have no Oil at all in their own Vessels,
no Righteousness of their own: All these vain hopes and expectations of idle
and careless and foolish Sinners, will then deceive and disappoint them and
make them miserable. If Men have not attained to the Virtues and Graces of
Religion nor any degrees of Holiness and Goodness all their Lives, and think to
acquire them now on a sudden when they are near dying, they may as well hope
that a Tree that has bore no Fruit all the Year, should on a sudden, when it is
just to be cut down, and the Axe is laid to the root of it, sprout and bud, and
blossom and bring forth Fruit. This would be a strange Miracle, and it must be
as great and unaccountable to have a wicked Man on a sudden become a good one,
and bring forth the Fruits of Virtue and Repentance. All our Virtues are owing
to the Grace of God, as the growth of all Plants and Trees is to the Rain, and
warmth and influence of the Heavens, but to think that Gods Grace which could
not work upon a Man all his Life before, will now in such an extraordinary
manner change and convert him on a sudden as to make him immediately become a
good Man, is to suppose a Saint made, as Adam was in full growth and perfect
flature the first day he lived, without passing through the degrees of Youth
and Childhood; as God thinks not fit to make Mankind so now, but produces them
by the ordinary and appointed way of his Providence, so he makes good Men by
the ordinary methods of his Grace and influences of Religion, and the New
Creature is formed by degrees, and grows into a perfect Man, and increases in
Wisdom and Goodness till it comes to the measure of the stature of the fullness
in Christ Jesus. The Spirit works upon our Mind agreably to their Nature in a
manner indiscernable from its own proper operation, enlighteneth the
Understanding, and inclines the will gently and kindly by the thoughts and
considerations of Religion, offering them clearly and imprinting them strongly
upon the Soul, and so in a rational way begetting right apprehensions and
affections in it, and so altering the temper and disposition of the Mind, and
by frequent acts and repeated practices bringing a Man to new habits, and thus
converting him from bad to good, not in an instant but by long strivings and
gradual operations upon him. No very bad Man was ever made a good one on a
sudden, nor can any more be so by the Grace of the Gospel, than a Child over
night become a Man the next morning by the course of Nature and Providence, or
Seed sown in the ground spring up and ripen and bear Fruit in a few hours. Such
Mushroon Converts and Penitents have no good root but dye away, and wither as
suddenly and instantaneously as they came up with the first heat and trial of a
Temptation; till Religion shoots deeper into their Hearts and gets better
rooting in their Souls, like the Seed that fell on stony ground, it is quickly
gone and does not grow at all, nor bring forth fruit with patience, as the
Scripture emphatically speaks, i. e. with due continuance. Good Purposes and
Resolutions and such like good Principles of Action must continue some time
upon the Mind, and exert their power and efficacy upon it by proper acts and
trials and experiments, or else they are but like false conceptions that
produce nothing, like Clouds without Rain, Blossoms without Fruit, and abortive
causes without any effects.

A sudden Sorrow upon a wicked Mind will no more make it good, nor bring forth
the worthy fruits of Repentance, than a sudden shower upon the Sands of Arabia,
or Rocks of Caucasus will make them become fertile and good ground; there must
be long cultivation, and great labor and pains taken with such barren ground
before it will be a fruitful Soil, and bring forth any thing by all the showers
and influences of Heaven upon it. A hardened Sinner who has lived many years
in the wretched courses and habits of Wickedness, must by long time, and great
care, and many methods of Gods Grace and Goodness have his Heart changed, and
his Life mended, and his old Vicious Habits plucked up and new Virtuous ones
planted in their place, and these take root, and grow up, and bear Fruit in his
Life, before he can become such a good Man as is fitted for Heaven: Such an one
can never be made so in a little time just before Death, but it must require at
least a good part of his Life to become such, and it should be indeed the
business of our whole Lives to make our selves such as shall be thus fit for
Heaven. To think that great work can be done at the latter end when we are just
a dying, and may be dispatched in a very little time, all on a sudden, is as
idle and unreasonable, as for a Man that has a good days journey to take to
lie loytering, and never mind it till the Sun is near down and night is coming
upon him, and then to set out and think to reach it by a sudden start, or by
some unaccountable ways to fly thither, or be Magically transported and set
down he knows not how at his journeys end: Or rather to make the Case more
exactly parallel to an old Sinner, like one who has traveled almost all the
day in a wrong way, and spurred and driven on very furiously in his vicious
courses, and is now to turn back and begin to take the right way when the day
is far spent, and night is at hand and just upon him. So is it with a Man who
has been all his Life following his Vices, driving on in a full career of
Wickedness, and galloping in the way to Hell and the broad road of Damnation,
and yet thinks by a Deathbed Repentance and a short stop at the last to come
to Heaven. Good God! What thoughts have such Men of the great work and business
of Religion, which ought to be the great work and employment of our Lives, who
think to dispatch it all in a few moments; as if God gave us not our Lives to
spend them in his Service and to his Glory, and to work out our Salvation and
fit our selves for Heaven, and do good, and grow in Grace, and the like great
ends of Life, but we might pass by all those and wallow in our Lusts and spend
almost all our days in the gratifications of Vice and Wickedness, and in the
Devils service, and think it enough to put off God with a very small part at
the last, and devote our dying hours, or a short time when we know we must live
no longer to Religion and Repentance. This is to think God a very easy Master,
and Religion a very easy work, and Heaven a reward very easily to be attained
and come at, and that none of them are to be so much minded and regarded but
that a little time will serve the turn, and that all may be done and taken care
of at the last, though not quite so well indeed, yet upon a forced-put the
whole business may be dispatched in a very little time so as to secure the main
chance and not fail of the great end of Religion which is to save a Man's Soul
and go to Heaven; If this can be done a sudden, few Men will care to spend much
time, more time than needs about it, and this very Mistake and Opinion is the
reason why they do not, but generally neglect and cast off Religion, and go on
i'their Sins and live carelessly and wickedly and can never he persuaded to a
strictly Virtuous and holy Life, though they believe Religion and are very far
from any Atheistical Doubts and Denyals of it, but they think to do all the
great work at the last, something that shall serve instead of all the rest, i.
e. to Repent and be sorrowful for their sins, for they account this sufficient
Repentance, and that the dying thus penitent shall be as well as if they had
minded Religion all their lives and discharged the great ends of it. If it will
by the fixed terms and standing provision of the Gospel save their Souls and
carry them to Heaven, it is as well and will serve their purpose as well and
the great purpose of Religion and God designed and appointed it should do all
this, which we no where find in Scripture, and which to suppose would destroy
all Religion.

3. Without those holy Habits and Dispositions, Graces or Virtues of Mind we
shall be shut out of Heaven notwithstanding all we can do at the last,
notwithstanding our most earnest Desires Prayers and Entreaties, and all other
applications we can make to enter in; this the Foolish Virgins found, though
they begged hard, and prayed earnestly, and knocked loud and cry d Lord Lord, and
were never so importunate with the Bridegroom to let them in, and presumed no
doubt upon having a peculiar Interest in him, if not some Relation to him, as
many do to Christ, yet all would not do without timely preparation and having
Oil in their Lamps, i.e. Grace and Virtue in their hearts; The door was shut,
and all their cries would not open it and though they called the Bridegroom
Lord Lord, and had some pretended Acquaintance or Friendship with him, and
reposed some Trust and Confidence in him, yet all was in vain and to no
purpose, without due qualifications in themselves; His Answer was, I know you
not, as Christ's will be at the last day to those wicked Men who yet put mighty
hopes in him, and trust and rely very strongly upon him for Salvation, and
think they have some claim and pretense to his special love and favor, and
call him Lord Lord Savior Savior and the like; but yet if they have not done
the will of his heavenly Father in their lives, done their Duty, and made
themselves fit for Heaven, he will profess unto them, I never knew you, depart
from me ye that work iniquity. Matthew. 7.22, 23.

Earnest and importunate Prayers are very prevailing Applications to God when
the thing is fit to be granted and we fit to receive it, and when God can with
consistency to his Wisdom and Justice and other Attributes bestow the favor we
ask of him, and it is according to the promises he has made to us so that we
can ask in Faith, and have good reason to believe it shall not be denied,
because there is no bar or just cause either in God or our selves to hinder it,
then we shall be certainly sure of it, and God will always give to those who
thus ask him, but it is not our unreasonable though never so importunate Prayers
that will make God do an unfit or unreasonable thing, or prevail with him to
break the Rules of his Wisdom and Justice, or out of pity and tenderness
violate the standing wise Methods of his Providence and Government: Pity and
Compassion is not a weak passion in God as it is in Men, who are in pain to see
another fall into such a misery as they are subject to themselves, and which
may as well fall upon them, and therefore they have a fellow-feeling of it,
because it touches them with the quick thought of their own frailty and
liableness to it, but God is subject to no such weakness and uneasiness, and
therefore pity in him is but a wise Exercise or Effect of his Goodness whereby
he is inclined to inflict as little evil and do as much good to his Creatures
as the Capacities of their Nature, and the Perfections of his own will admit:

Should a Wise and Good Governor out of weak pity and commiseration to the
cries and lamentations of condemned Prisoners and dying Malefactors stop the
course of Justice and suspend the Execution of wholesome and necessary Laws, He
would destroy his Government by his easiness, and bring a thousand times more
Mischief to the Public, and so his Pity instead of a Virtue would become both
imprudence and cruelty in the highest degree.

God as he is Pityful and Mercyful, so he is Wise and Just too, and will not
break the standing Rules of the Gospel nor the wise measures of his Divine
Government by which he impartially distributes Rewards and Punishments
according to Men's Works, out of any fond consideration to any Man's particular
case, He will not, he cannot act contrary to the unalterable Rules of Justice
either in punishing the Innocent, or clearing and letting the guilty go free,
He must lay down his Government of the World if he were merciful contrary to
those, and should not so far regard his own Honor, and assert his Power and
Authority, and Justify the goodness of his Laws as to revenge all open
affronts against them, and punish all great and notorious and habitual Sinners
notwithstanding all their Prayers and Entreaties to the contrary; If the cries
and lamentations of a dying Sinner should make God forgive him out of mere pity
and tenderness though he had broke all the Laws of Heaven in his life and lived
in direct opposition against them and never took any care to keep them, this
must alter the Rule of God's Government, the Rule of the Gospel, and the Rule
of his last Judgment, and he must for his sake break and act contrary to all
those; If notwithstanding those, Gods Pity and Mercy to a poor Wretch could
suffer or incline him to do this, we might then as reasonably hope that this
his pity might reach even to the damned in Hell, their Case is very pitiable
and very lamentable as well as the others, and their cries and howlings and
lamentations are very loud and importunate, but they are unreasonable and too
late, and therefore God is deaf to them; one would think if Pity could so
overruled Justice as to prevail with it to dispense with the severe and
righteous Rules laid down by the great God, it would put out the flames of
Hell, or let the tears and cries of the damned quench those dreadful and
Everlasting burnings, and not suffer so many poor and miserable Creatures to
lie tortured for ever in the utmost Extremity, but God's Justice and Judgment
is as deep and bottomless as Hell it self, and though we cannot search into all
the reasons of it, yet we know by his word that it shall take place and be
duly executed notwithstanding his own greatest Pity and Mercy, or his
Creatures greatest Cries and Lamentations.

A groundless presumption of God's Mercy and Pity has ruined many Souls; The
Gospel declares the highest instances and degrees of it in the Redemption of
the World by Jesus Christ, and in pardoning our sins upon our Repentance, and
to show this required a wonderful Method and most Stupendous Expedient, thus to
find out a way to reconcile Gods Justice and Mercy together by the Sacrifice of
Christ, now this utmost Grace and Mercy of Heaven neither does nor could go
farther than past Sins upon Repentance and Amendment Obedience and a good Life
afterward; to expect any Mercy from God beyond this, beyond the Gospel and the
Rules and measures of Mercy there laid down is the most vain and groundless and
presumptuous thing in the World, and so it is for a dying unprepared Sinner to
think he can do any thing then by which he may hope to prevail with Christ, and
to enter into Heaven:

For alas what can he then do? He can use strong Crying and Tears and Prayers
to God, so did the Virgins and so may the Damned; but alas for what can he
pray? That God would save him without Obedience and a good Life, which he has
declared he never will; that he would not now punish him for a wicked and
impenitent and disobedient life, which he assuredly will do, that he may not
now be shut out when the Bridegroom is coming, though he is no way prepared for
it and has no Oil in his Lamp, no virtuous habits and Dispositions of mind to
fit him to go in, and now it is too late to get them all on a sudden, and in
vain to expect to borrow this Oil of others, or to have it given by the
Bridegroom himself; would he pray now to God to give him Grace when he has
despised and rejected it all his Life, would he now have it grow up into
virtuous habits and the frults of Obedience and a good life all on a sudden,
would he now become a new Man and a new Creature in a few hours, and from a
wicked Man all his life become a good one in a few days: He may almost as well
hope that God should make him young again now he is old, and turn his old and
weak and dying Body into a young and lusty and healthful one and work those
mighty Miracles upon his Body as well as his Mind by his Prayers; God can do
the one by an Almighty Irresistible power as well as the other if he pleases,
but it is very vain and groundless to depend upon the utmost of what God's power
is able to do in any thing, and therefore that is never to be brought in for or
against any thing of this Nature.

The only question is not what God, but what such a wicked Man and dying Sinner
can then do, can he have all his old habits of vice and wickedness rooted out
and his Nature changed, and a virtuous and holy disposition of mind planted in
their stead? Can that lust or sinful Inclination which was so hard to be
conquered before, that he pretended it was impossible for him almost to leave
it can this now be so soon and so easily overcome? All those Corruptions and
Diseases of Soul which have been so long upon him that they are become
chronical and habitual, and which were before incurable by all the means of
Grace and methods of Providence, by all the advices and exhortations of his own
Friends and God's Ministers are these now to be perfectly got off and cured on
a sudden and the Mind restored to Soundness and Holiness? Is that now to be
done so easily and so quickly which he found so hard to do all his life, and
which is one of the hardest and most difficult things in the World to make a
Bad Man a Good one? No this is Unnatural and Impossible and cannot be in the
Nature of the thing, but a Man may be very sorrowful and heartily troubled that
he was not so, and have great trouble and remorse of Mind for his sins, and so
be heartily penitent for them, This is all he can be and he cannot well be
otherwise if he be in his Senses and has the use of his Reason, and sees such
Terrible danger before him as is now unavoidable, he must be greatly troubled
that he has brought himself to that, that is, that he must suffer for his Sin,
for he was never troubled at the Sin before nor would be now but like it and
live in it still if that were all, but he cannot but be concerned at the
dreadful punishment of it, and he must be very hardy indeed if he go not thus
Shivering and Contrite and Penitent as they call it to his Execution, this is
only a Natural abhorring of pain or what is evil to us from a principle of
Self-preservation, not an abhorrence of Sin from Choice and Reason and free
apprehension of Mind, for all this is from a force and violence offered to the
mind by a sense of present danger, and from that Fear, Terror and Confusion
that a Sinner is then in, when Hell and Eternity are just presented before him,
then he parts with his Sins as a Man does with his Money when he has a Sword or
a Pistol held to his Breast, out of mere fear not out of free choice: No Man
but must be afraid of Hell who believes it and has any sense of it, and all
this dying sorrow and Repentance arises only from hence; some I know make a
mighty difference both as to the Cause and the Virtue and Efficacy of this
sorrow, if it arise only from the fear of Hell it is Attrition, if from the
Love of God joined with it is Contrition and so will be more effectual, Now I
am afraid the first is the chief spring if not only cause of it in dying
Sinners, and that there is no real difference between these two sorts of
sorrows in the Nature of the thing but only an over nice distinction in words
and thoughts and in considering the same thing by several mental conceptions,
when the passion is the same in it self and the causes of it are not to be so
nicely distinguished, but whatever be the principle of this sorrow, and however
strong and sincere it be, and whatever purposes and resolutions it may be
joined with, yet that this mere Mental Repentance is not true and Perfect
Repentance, such as the Gospel promises pardon to, I have shown before in
giving the Notion and describing the Nature of Repentance, and particularly
proved how short and imperfect this is in the fourth Section of the first
Chapter, so that a Dying Sinner cannot then perform such a full Repentance as
has a certain title to Pardon and Salvation by the promises of the Gospel: But
to show further that a foolish unprepared Dying Sinner can have no hopes of
entering into Heaven by all he can then do, and that his most earnest Prayers
and Entreaties, his Cries and Sorrows, his Wishes and Purposes and Resolutions,
and all the parts of his dying Repentance put together are not sufficient to do
this, as the Parable here supposes, I shall produce some more Positive and
Express Proofs and as I think convincing Arguments against this Efficacy and
Validity of a Deathbed Repentance.

SECT. IV. More Positive Proofs and Arguments against the validity of a
Deathbed Repentance.
FIrst, It does no way come up to the plain and indispensable Conditions of
Salvation required by the Gospel, for those are no other than Faith and
Obedience, believing the Gospel and living according to it, which are the plain
and only pathway to Heaven by Christianity, and he that thinks of Christ's
bringing him thither any other way, abuses his Savior and his Religion, and
puts a wretched cheat upon himself. I know Faith and Repentance and Faith alone
are often set down as the only Terms and Conditions of Salvation by the Gospel,
but then they are to be taken not in a strict and narrow sense, but in a large
one, as they include all that belongs and is consequent to them, all that
Obedience and new Christian Life which is made as plain a Condition of
Salvation by the Gospel as Faith it self, and Repentance I have shown plainly
takes those in, so that the whole Practical Condition of the Gospel is meant by
them. Faith is the first Principle and Foundation of Repentance, Obedience and
all Christian Virtues, and therefore as including and containing those is made
the Condition of our being saved by a Metonymy, whereby the Cause comprehends
also the Effect. Faith does so plainly in Scripture mean not only an assent to
another words, or a trust and affiance in them, but that which works by
love, Gal. 5.5. and that which produces good Works and is dead without them,
that it is a strange mistake to make that the Condition of our being justified
and saved without Obedience, It Is to be observed, and I think it may help to
clear this matter, that when Faith and Believing is made the only Condition of
being saved and nothing else is mentioned, this is always spoken to those Jews
or Heathens who were not yet Christians and Believers, and the only way for
them to be saved was to believe and embrace Christianity and become Disciples
of Christ: As when Christ says, John 3.15. Whosoever believes on the Son of
Man shall not perish but have everlasting life: This is spoken to Nicodemus who
then expressed his disbelief of Christ's words, and was not brought fully to
believe in him though he was disposed to it. So John 6.40. when Christ says,
This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son and
believes on him may have everlasting life: This is spoken to the Jews who
murmured at Christ and were far from believing in him. And so Christ bid the
Apostles preach this to the unbelieving World, Whosoever believes and is
baptized shall be saved, Matthew. 16.16. i.e. believing and professing
Christianity puts them into a salvable state, and if they live according to
this Faith they shall certainly be saved. As if we should say to a Person who
desires to know how he may be a Scholar, Go to School or to the University;
This would put him into a certain way to Learning, but he must not only be
entered and enrolled and matriculated there, but must study and read and do
such things as belong to a Scholar. When St. Peter advised the Jews who were
pricked to the heart, Acts 2.37. and St. Paul the Jailer when he asked what
must I do to be saved, that they should believe in Christ and repent, They
meant thereby turn Christians, which would put them into a salvable state, but
then they must perform all the other things which belong to Christians as well
as have this Faith, or else they would lose and forfeit this their good state.
When Christ therefore speaks to his Disciples who already believed in him, and
St. Paul writes to those who were Christians and Believers, they tell them not
only of Faith, which is the first Christian Virtue and the root of all the
rest, but of Obedience and of all good Works, of living as becomes the Gospel,
and adorning their Profession with all manner of Virtues which they make as
necessary to Salvation as Faith it self: Thus if ye keep my commandments says
Christ, ye shall abide in my love, John 15.20. And ye are my friends if ye do
whatsoever I command you, ver. 14. And not every one that says unto me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my
Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 7.21. If ye know these things happy are ye if
ye do them, John 13.17. So St. Paul to the Corinthians, Circumcision is
nothing, nor uncircumcision, but keeping the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7.19.
and to the Galatians, In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing,
nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, Gal. 6.15. For by the gospel the wrath
of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. And when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels he will take vengeance on
all them that obey not his gospel, who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. And those
Christians who do any such works of the Flesh as are mentioned Gal. 5.19, 21.
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, but for the sake of those the wrath of
God comes on the children of disobedience, Colos. 3.6. These things are as
clear as if they were writ with a Sunbeam, so that none, one would think, who
reads the Gospel should suppose Faith alone without Obedience should justify
and save us, or that Christ is a Savior to any but those who obey him, Heb.
5.9. since blessed are they who do his commandments, for they only have right
to the tree of life, Rev. 22.14. From all which it is plain, that Obedience to
the Laws of the Gospel is the only and the indispensable Condition of our
Salvation.

And indeed this is the very design of Christ's giving us such excellent Laws,
that we should obey them and be happy for ever by doing so, and if we do not,
but live wickedly, we must be eternally miserable. It had been in vain for God
to have given us any Laws, or commanded us any thing, if he had not given them
such a Sanction, and obliged us to them by such Rewards and Penalties; and
therefore if Men's heads were not bewildred with odd schemes and disputes about
decrees and strange methods of Salvation, this would be the first and plainest
Principle in all Religion as it is the truest, and there would never be any
dispute about it, that if Men live well here they shall be for ever happy, if
ill for ever miserable. However ignorant Men call this a Legal Condition of
Salvation, and would have no such in the Gospel, yet as I have shown
Christianity requires it, so does also the very Nature of Religion and of
Divine Government, and the belief of a Future Judgment and of Rewards and
Punishments in another World do all suppose it: For what are those Rewards for
but for those who live Virtuously, and those Punishments but for those who live
Wickedly? And what is a Future Judgment but to reward all Men according to
their works? where God as a Just and Impartial Judge shall without respect of
persons judge according to every man's work, 1 Pet. 1.17. And every one shall
receive the things done in his body according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. For when the Son of Man shall come in the glory of
his Father with his Angels, then he shall reward every man according to his
works, Matthew. 16.27. In the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God, he will render to every man according to his deeds, Romans 2.6.
To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory, and honor,
and immortality; eternal life: But unto them that obey not the truth but obey
unrighteousness, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil,
ver. 8, 9. Nothing can be plainer than this in the whole Gospel, that Men must
expect to receive hereafter according to the goodness or badness of their Lives
here, and that the only Condition of their Salvation is Obedience to the Laws
of the Gospel. It Is a wretched misunderstanding and a total destroying of
Christianity, to set up any loose Principles of Faith and Free Grace or the
like, which are not consistent with this, and to delude our selves with hopes
of Salvation by Christ upon any other Condition or by any other Means than this
of Obedience.

God indeed has granted us this favor and privilege by the Gospel, that
though we have disobeyed him sometime and some part of our lives, yet if we
come off from this Disobedience and return to our Duty in time, and perform
Obedience to him for the future, that then he will forgive our former
Disobedience and not charge it upon us nor punish us for it, but graciously
pardon it for the sake of Christ and his meritorious sufferings, and that he
will receive us again into his favor and reward us for our new Obedience as if
we had never done otherwise, but had been always obedient and never transgrest
his Commandments; This is the great grace and favor and privilege of the
Gospel, and this is what we call Repentance, for Repentance is the same thing
with Obedience, only it comes after Disobedience, it is a Man's living well after
he has lived otherwise, which takes in Obedience and a good Life, though after
a bad one, it is like a Man's setting up again after he had once broke, when
after his kind Creditor has been pleased to compound with him and instead of
his whole Debt, to wit, an entire and Universal Obedience all his Life to
accept of such a partial and broken one, he may again thrive and grow rich and
so get free from his former poverty; or as I have often represented the Nature
of Repentance, it is like a Man's recovering health and strength and soundness of
body after he has been weak and ill or distempered in the whole or any part;
Health and Strength is the same to him that it was before, though he had once
lost it, as Riches is to the other now he has got them again after he was
broke; so it is the same virtue of Mind which we ought always to have have had
that Repentance restores us to, and it is the same Obedience to God's Laws which
a Penitent performs upon his return to his duty that he should have performed
before, and it is this only that commends him to God and gives him a title to
the promises of the Gospel and procures Pardon and Salvation to him.

It Is God's infinite Mercy in and through Christ to allow and accept of this
After Obedience as the Condition of our Salvation when it is so broken and
interrupted whereas the whole Obedience of our Lives is due to God, and he
might refuse to accept of this lame and after and imperfect one, but still it is
Obedience to Gods Laws after we have broken them by our sins, it is this
Obedience renewed, ex postliminio as I may call it, that recommends us to his
favor, obtains our pardon for what is past, and entitles us again to the
reward we had forfeited, and without this we can never be reconciled to God nor
received into Heaven, for none shall go thither but the Virtuous and Obedient
whither they have always been so, or only after they have been otherwise, but
still they must be Virtuous, and they must be Obedient, or else they can never
come thither, for it is certain Obedience, which if after Disobedience in any
instance is called Repentance, is by the Gospel the absolute and indispensable
Condition of our Happyness and Salvation:

Now no Man can in any sense call the Sorrows and Remorses and Repentance of
dying Sinners Gospel Obedience, but only a trouble and concern for the want of
it and for the disobedience of their whole lives; There would be no difference
between Obedience and Disobedience if this were so, No Master or Father would
account him an Obedient Servant or Obedient Son who should only confess and be
sorry that he had always disobeyed him until upon this his sorrow he showed
himself Obedient for the future and did him some faithful Service. How long a
Man must be Obedient after he has been Disobedient or how long time is
required for a Sinner who repents to come off from his Sins and become a good
Man is hard to determine exactly, but there must be so much time as shall make
a Drunkard sober, a Whoremonger chaste, an unjust Man Righteous, a Swearer and
Profane Person Devout and Pious, the Covetous Man Just and Charitable, and the
like, for we are assured that whilst Men are such Sinners as any of those, they
have no inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God, Ephesians. 5.5. and
therefore they must so long obey the Laws of God till they are truly become and
may be denominated Sober Just Charitable Pure Holy Religious and the like, for
Heaven is a place only for such Men and such Souls as are thus qualified and
who have obeyed Gods Laws so long till they are become thus; It shall never be
given to those who have been disobedient to God all their lives and can now
perform no acts of Obedience to him, such can never perform that Indispensable
Condition of Salvation required by the Gospel, and nothing less then this will
do, there is no such disjunctive any where in the Bible that I know of, to this
sense, Be Holy and Obedient and lead a Good Life in order to be Fternally
happy, or else Repent and be Sorry for not doing it when you come to dye, but
only thus where you have sinned and been disobedient for the time past, Repent
and be Obedient for the time to come, and this shall be accepted, as in that
known place, when the wicked man turns away from his wickedness which he has
committed, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul
alive, Ezekiel. 18.27. It Is his doing that which is lawful and right, i. e. his
Obedience for the future, shall save his soul alive; all his transgressions
that he has committed they shall not be mentioned unto him upon his new
Obedience or Repentance, in his Righteousness that he has done shall he live,
ver. 22. it must be Righteousness afterward, or his obeying God after his
former disobedience shall entitle him to Life and Happyness, and be the
Condition of it.

2. As Obedience is the only term and condition of our Salvation by the Gospel,
so there is no just reason or good ground to hope that God will in any case
abate of the terms of Salvation he has there laid down, or be mercyful
beyond those, for two reasons.

1. Because this would be neither consistent with the Holiness of his Nature,
nor the wisdom of his Government, for as he is a Holy and Righteous God he
cannot love any but a righteous and good Soul, and so cannot make any other
happy because a wicked and impure Soul is contrary to his Nature and what he
hates and abominates and what can never see or enjoy God; neither is it
consistent with the Wisdom of God as Governor of the World to reward any but
the obedient and the righteous, for it would reflect upon his Justice and his
Authority if he should suffer Men to go on in their Wickedness and Disobedience
all their lives, and not punish them for it; Mercy indeed and Clemency is the
Honor of any Prince and that which commends him to the love and esteem of all,
but then it must be shown wisely to proper and fit Objects and for good
Reasons, to bring Men in to their Duty, and draw them off from their
Disobedience with the promise of a Pardon upon their doing so, and returning to
their Allegiance. But if a Prince shall grant this to all sort of Offenders out
of the weakness and softness of his Temper, he will loosen his Government, and
weaken his Authority, and make himself cheap and contemptible, and as he will
encourage Rogues and Rebels, so he will injure the Public, and not take due
care as becomes a wise Governor of the Common good; should God grant a full
and absolute pardon to Sinners who have lived never so long in their sins
because they are very sorry for them when they come to dye and they can live in
them no longer, this would encourage Men who love their Sins to continue in 'em
all their lives and then Repent at last, and so save themselves the trouble, as
they think it, of living a very good life. God indeed has promised pardon to
all who repent and turn from their sins, and live good and holy lives after
they have lived bad ones, and this is sufficient encouragement to make a wicked
Man become a good one with the certain hopes that when he does so God will
receive him, but to go farther and suppose God to pardon a long wicked life
spent altogether in Sin and Disobedience merely for a little sorrow and remorse
and trouble when Men come to dye is to open a wide Door to vice and wickedness,
and to supersede the necessity of Obedience and a good life and therefore
should God grant this, it would destroy Religion, and take off the Obligations
to Virtue, and make all his Motives to Obedience and Threatenings against Sin to
be void, empty and ineffectual.

2. There is no Reason to think God will abate of the terms of the Gospel, and
be more merciful than he has there promised to be because as the Gospel seems
to contain the utmost Grace and Mercy that God can show to Men, so it shall
certainly be the Rule of the last judgment, and God will then proceed and
pronounce judgment according to the Rules and Measures of that; it is the most
vain and impudent thing in the World to expect any further Mercy than God has
revealed to us by Jesus Christ, He has in all probability shown the utmost
kindness and favor that is possible to Mankind for his sake, he has opened the
bowels of his Mercy and the Riches of his Grace as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians.
1.7. and has exhausted all the treasures of love and compassion to poor Sinners
that a Wise and Just God can possibly show with consistence to his own honor
and the honor of his Laws and Government to expect therefore that God should
be gracious beyond the Gospel, and make farther and greater abatements to us,
and be more merciful than he has promised to be by his Son whom he sent with
the most full and gracious Message of loving kindness that we could reasonably
desire or God in wisdom grant is a most groundless and unreasonable presumption
which makes void all Gods threatenings and is a direct disbelief of his word,
and expressly contrary to what is plainly delared by the Gospel it self, for in
that Christ assures us that the word which he has there spoken, the same shall
judge men at the last day, John 12.48. and therefore he will judge us by no
other rule, nor use any other measures in disposing his Mercy or his Justice to
his Creatures than what he has laid down, and made known to us by the Gospel;
God shall judge the world, says St. Paul, in that day according to my Gospel,
Romans 2.16. It Is not therefore to be expected that God should use any other
Judgment or show any other Mercy to Sinners than what is according to the
terms of the Gospel and the Conditions of Salvation there laid down, and a
Deathbed Repentance does not as I have shown come up to those.

3. I have showed all along this Discourse that it is not such a True and
Perfect Repentance as the Scripture promises Pardon and Salvation to, for that
consists not only in sorrow and trouble of Mind, conviction of Soul, and
Compunction of heart, but in actual Reformation and new Obedience, and indeed
it is this alone is a Man's retracting his past folly and wickedness and being
wiser for the future, undoing all the evil he has done as much as he can and
doing all the good he can for the time to come, and so making all possible
amends to the honor of Religion, and the honor of God which have been highly
injured and violated by him, and though he can never make perfect reparation
and satisfaction to them, and therefore Christ alone did this by his Death and
Sufferings, yet he is to do all that he is able and that is in his power to do,
that he may thereby vindicate the Divine Authority and Government which he has
opposed and resisted and Justify the wisdom and goodness, justice and holiness
of the Laws of Heaven which he has broken and contemned, and so make all the
compensation he is able to repair the sad Mischief he has done by his Sins. We
truly say, that no injury to another person will be forgiven but upon
Restitution and making all the reparation for it that can be, because 'till
this is done the sin remains and the evil effects of it continue and till a Man
is willing to undo that as far as he is able, to take away and destroy all the
effects of it, he keeps the sin and does not truly Repent of it, nor wish it
undone, now surely we owe as much to God and Religion in Justice as we do to
our Equals and where we have done any thing to injure those, as our sins are
the greatest injury to them we can be guilty of, there also we must make as
much restitution and reparation as we are able, and undo the sins we have
committed by a more zealous and hearty and new Obedience, and making up, if it
were possible, the past failures and defects of our Sinful Lives by greater
care and zeal and diligence for the future. We may do this by a timely
Repentance, but by a late and a dying one we cannot.

4. A Sinner cannot be then freed at his Death from what will necessarily make
him miserable, his Sinful Habits, which will sink his Soul into Hell by a
Natural Causality as well as Divine Judgment: God has expressly declared that
neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, nor such like shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10. And who are such but they who have lived in the habit of any of
those Sins? And are therefore to be denominated and accounted such from the
general practice of their Lives, and have not been washed and sanctified, or
made better, but only are now sorry for being so when they are dying; If Sorrow
would make Men to be otherwise and their Tears alone would blot out this black
Character without a contrary Practice, there would hardly be any such to be
found, though it is plain the World is too full of them. There would be no Thief
or Felon or Traitor at any Assizes or Court of Judicature, if when they came to
be tried and were found guilty, and were to be condemned, their mere sorrow and
trouble would set them right, and change their character, and make them to be
accounted otherwise in the eye of the Law. But besides this Sentence and
Judgment of God upon all kind of Sinners whereby he bars any such from Heaven,
and adjudges them to Hell, their Sins Naturally sink them thither, for that is
the true place and center of Wickedness, and therefore of Misery. Filthy and
impure Minds fall into it by a kind of Spiritual Gravitation, or by such a
Constitution of the Spiritual and Intellectual World, which as necessarily
carries them thither as the Mechanism of this material World carries a stone
downward. So that it is as unavoidable for a Sinner loaded with his wicked
Habits to fall into Hell and Misery in another World, as if here he had a
Millstone tied about his neck, and were cast into the Sea to fall to the bottom
of it. The weight of his Sins will of it self press and sink him down into the
utmost gulf of Misery; and when he is quite taken away from the diversions and
pleasures and bodily enjoyments of this World, and is left wholly to the
reflections and agonies and dismal apprehensions of his own Mind, his
Conscience which is now stupefied and amused with other imaginary pleasures of
Body and this World will then awaken and fall upon him with all its rage, and
torment his Soul and make it unexpressibly miserable were there no other
sentence or judgment upon him. The dreadful horrors and apprehensions of his
own Mind let loose upon him would always be a very great torment and Hell to
him, if he had nothing to relieve or divert him, but was left naked and open to
the full stroke of his Conscience, and his thoughts were whollytaken up with
the frightful Images and Ideas of his own Guilt, and overwhelmed with all the
bitter Passions of Fear, Sorrow and Despair, as they will hereafter. Sin will
as certainly fill him with those in another World and cause such painful
sensations or perceptions within his Soul as he now feels in his Body upon a
torturing Disease, or any instrument of Cruelty applied to it; for that is as
contrary to the Nature and Frame of the one as those are to the other, and they
would be always felt here if the Body did not drown and stifle and choke the
free and natural thoughts of the Mind, which it cannot hereafter. If the Mind
therefore be not freed from its Sins and Evil Habits it will necessarily be
miserable with them in another World. It can sometimes avoid those inward pains
and torments here because it has the gratifications of its Sins, and other
enjoyments and entertainments to bear it up, and yet they will often get in and
disturb it even amidst all its pleasures and jollities, but in its separate
Estate hereafter it will be wholly without those and so for ever subject to the
inward misery and uneasiness which Sin ever causes in its own thoughts.

5 Allowing Salvation to a mere dying Repentance, as it seems contrary to all
plain Notions and certain Principles in Religion, namely, that none but
Virtuous and good Men can go to Heaven, and that Obedience and a good Life is
the only way thither, and that Vice while it continues upon the Mind will
necessarily make it miserable, and the like, which I have largely insisted
upon. So,

Lastly, The consequences of it seem plainly to destroy all Religion. For,

1. It sets by all those general commands which are often given to Christians,
of Walking worthy of their vocation, adorning their profession, and letting
their conversation be as it becomes the gospel. Letting their light so shine
before men that others may see their good works, and so glorify their Father
which is in Heaven. Doing all to the Glory of God, and promoting that and
Religion as much and as far as they can in the World, Learning of Christ and
following his Example, and showing they are his Disciples by bearing much
fruit, Doing all the good they can to others, and being useful in their places,
improving their Talents, and not being unprofitable Servants, Redeeming the
time, and taking all opportunities of serving the great ends of Religion,
Growing in Grace and being perfect, as their Father which is in Heaven is
perfect. These are general Commands given to Christians, and such as they are
all obliged to, though not in the highest degrees yet in such measures as God
who knows our frame and our circumstances intended we should come up to. They
are not only Counsels of Perfection, and Romantic unpracticable Directions of
some Acts of Supererogation, but they are strict Rules of necessary Duty and
Christian practice which every good Christian is bound to live up to, and if
they wholly fail in doing so, and do no way make them good in their Lives but
act contrary to them, they are not good Christians at present nor shall be
rewarded as such hereafter, but shall be condemned and punished eternally for
being otherwise. Now a notorious wretched Sinner who has been so far from
having any regard to these Christian obligations that he has lived all his
Life in direct opposition against them, and now only Repents when he is a
dying, he must be wholly excused from all these, they must be all set aside and
signify nothing in his case if he can go to Heaven not only without observing
them in any sort or any tolerable manner, but living wholly opposite and
reverse to them; for He instead of adorning his Profession, and letting his
Conversation be such as becomes the Gospel, has been the greatest shame and
reproach to it, and been unworthy the name of it, and shall he now then share
in the noblest rewards of it? Instead of letting his Light shine before Men he
has been an example of the greatest Wickedness, and dishonored God in the
highest manner all his days, and shall he now be rewarded and honored by him?
Instead of learning of Christ and living up to the example he set us, he has
learned of the Devil, and lived like a Bruit, and practiced all sort of
Diabolical and Bestial Wickedness, and shall he now reign with Christ and be
taken up into Paradise with him? Instead of doing any good, he has done all
the mischief imaginable in corrupting and debauching others, and tempting them
to all manner of lewdness, and instead of promoting Religion he has served the
cause of Atheism and Irreligion, and done all he can to make others disbelieve
the truth of all Religion, if not by lewd Principles yet by lewd Practices that
are the greatest contradiction to it, and shall he now partake of its Glorious
Promises which he hardly believed and would never seek after all his Life?
Instead of improving his Talents in his Masters Service he has wholly wasted
and consumed them in Luxury and Prodigality, and spent all the Blessings God
had entrusted him with to quite other purposes than he gave them. Instead of
growing in Grace he has grown to the utmost perfection almost of Sin and
Wickedness, and is become a Sinner of the highest rate, and has daily improved
in it. Instead of redeeming the time he has squandered it all away in folly
and madness, and took all opportunities to gratify his Lusts, and spent his
whole Life in the persuit of sinful pleasures, and now indeed he would redeem
the time in a wonderful manner, and do all the business of Life very
compendiously and very concisely in a few days or hours before he is to dye:
And when he has followed none of these Christian Rules and Directions, but
acted altogether against them, yet he would have God set them all by, and make
them all have no meaning or be to no purpose, but only a little dying Sorrow
and Repentance to serve instead of all of them.

2. As those general Commands must be set aside by this privilege of a dying
Repentance, so must also those particular Commands which oblige us to the
practice of several Virtues, such as Piety and Devotion, Sobriety and
Temperance, Purity and Chastity, Self-denial, Heavenlymindedness, overcoming
the World, governing our Passions and Appetites, mortifying the Flesh with the
Affections and Lusts, and the like: For it is too late sure to begin to practice
those when a Man is just upon dying if he has neglected it all his Life? Shall
he begin then to mortify the Flesh which he has gratified always before with
the most unlawful Lusts and forbidden Pleasures, but now Sickness mortifies it
indeed, and Death will do so something more, and he would have this Virtue as
much in his Coffin or his Grave, when he lies cold there, as he can pretend to
it now; his Lusts do then dye with his Body, as a Candle goes out when all the
nourishment is spent that should maintain it. Is he now to govern his Passions
and Appetites when both the causes and the objects of them are removed? Is he
to provide against the heat of the Sun when it is just Night or Winter with
him, and make a bank to stop the current when the water is all dried up? Is he
to overcome the World when he is leaving it, with an odd sort of Parthian
victory? Is he then to be Heavenly minded when he never minded Heaven before,
but now it is the next thing when he can mind the Earth no longer? Is he then to
practice Self-denial when he never denied himself any Worldly Interest or
Sensual Pleasure before on the score of Religion, and now he denies those and
his Life both alike, because he cannot keep them? Is he now to begin to
practice the Virtues of Chastity and Temperance and Sobriety, which he never
did before? then he has put them off to a very convenient season when his
Vices have quite left him, and so if Virtues will come of themselves like
guests uninvited, there is no other company to hinder them, but he was as
virtuous and sober almost half his Life, I mean when he was asleep, as he can
be now when he is as incapable of the contrary acts as he was then; and is only
like the Enthusiast cured of seeing vanity when he lost his Eyes, but perhaps
not of being vain, for the ghosts and spirits of his departed Sins may still
haunt and possess him. If these Christian Virtues are necessary to be practiced
in order to our Eternal Salvation, a dying Repentance cannot be sufficient
without them; if it be, then those particular Precepts and Commands must be set
aside by it, as well as the other general ones I mentioned, for it is certain he
can no more practice these Virtues now than he could in his Mothers Womb, and
they might be as well infused into him then as they can be now without any
practice, and something better, because there were then no contrary Habits to
hinder them: But the Doctrine of infused Habits is like the Hypothesis of
Transfusion of Blood contrary to Nature and Experience; and the dying Man may
as well depend upon one for his Body as the other for his Soul.

3. The salvability and sufficiency of a mere dying Repentance as it sets by
and discharges us from all those general and particular Commands of
Christianity, so also from the whole Christian engagement and Baptismal
Covenant: For can that then be any way made good or performed in any measure
when a Man has violated it all his Life, and notoriously broken it in all the
parts that belong to it? Can he then sufficiently renounce the Devil and all
his works when he has hitherto complied with them? the pomps and vanities of
this wicked World when he has minded nothing else? and the sinful Lufts of the
Flesh when he has followed them and been led by them all his days? Can he then
keep Gods Commandments who has broken most of them? and walk in the same all
the days of his Life who has walked all his days in the ways of Sin and the
paths of Unrighteousness, and never left them till just now he is at his
journeys end and can live no longer? Surely this Baptismal Covenant is made
only pro forma and is but a modish and mannerly Ceremony at our entering into
Christianity if we are not more obliged to stand to it and make it good, and
expect the benefits of Christianity upon our so doing, in some further and
better manner of performance than a wicked Christian can do when he comes to
dye? If his mere Sorrows and Purposes and Resolutions will serve instead of all
that is expressly or implicitly meant by it, it is void and null in all the
other parts of it, and the Church has unfaithfully and unsincerely drawn it up
in other words of a different sense and meaning that signify nothing, and the
Scripture has expressed it as odly and unfitly, when it speaks of our dying to
Sin and rising unto Righteousness by our Baptism, That we are symbolically
buried with Christ by baptism unto death, that like as Christ was raised up by
the glory of the Father even so we also should walk in newness of life, Romans
6.4. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we
shall be also in the likness of his resurrection, Knowing this, that our old
man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed that
henceforth we should not serve sin; for he that is dead is free from sin, ver.
5, 6, 7. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord, ver. 11. Let not sin therefore
reign in your mortal body that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof: Neither
yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but yield
your selves unto God as those that are alive from the dead, and your members as
instruments of righteousness unto God, ver. 12.13. Here is enough to give us
the plain meaning of Baptism, and the great obligation of it to renounce Sin
and live a good and holy Life. And we are then said to put on Christ and to put
on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness,
Ephesians. 4.24. and to put off concerning the former conversation the old man which
is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, ver. 22. and to be regenerated and
born again, and have a Spiritual Principle of Life and Holiness communicated to
our Souls, and we then voluntarily consent to the terms of Christianity. and
solemnly engage and undertake to live according to them, now all this which is
very great and very obliging, one would think, is made very little, and very
easily took off and abated and dispensed with if when it has been utterly
neglected and disregarded, violated and broken all our lives a mere short and
Dying Repentance will make it up and supply all the failures and the whole
nonperformance of it; I own that true and timely Repentance will relieve us
against the many failures and breaches of it by bringing us to perform it
better afterward, sincerely endeavoring to make it good when we have broken
it by any wilful sin, and upon our performance of it though not with perfect
exactness yet with sincere integrity depends our Title to all the Privileges
of Christianity, But now to have no regard to it or take any care to observe it
nor make it any way good in our lives but to live loosely and wickedly as if we
had no such strict Engagement and Obligation upon us and to allow our selves in
notorious Sins and unlawful Liberties expressly contrary to our Baptismal
Covenant, and yet think to salve all and have the whole benefit of it by a
short Sorrow and Repentance when we come to dye this is either to make it have
no meaning at all, or that we are not obliged to the performance of it; but let
us not deceive our selves whosoever does not make good his Baptismal Covenant
in his Life which a wicked Man cannot at his Death, as he is false to Christ
and breaks his own most solemn and voluntary engagements, so he forfeits all
the benefits of his Christianity, all that Pardon and Salvation which Christ
has purchased and proposed to him.

Thus all the Obligations to Christian Holiness and Obedience laid upon us
either by our own Baptismal Vows and Promises or by the particular or general
Commands of God and our Savior are all taken away and dissolved by this loose
Doctrine of a Deathbed Regentance being sufficient for Salvation, so far as
this is allowed in the case of one who has been a great Sinner all his life,
so far there must be an exception to all those, and they must all stand by and
be set aside to make room for his going to Heaven. All the Laws of Religion and
the whole Constitution of Christianity, and all the ordinary Rules and the
standing Method of Salvation by the Gospel must be past by and overruled to
make way for such an Extraordinary President, and whether God will do this is
to me no more a question than whether he will release the Devils and the Damned
out of Hell, I think there is scarce any more ground or more reason to hope for
one than the other, and that it is as much a limiting the Divine Grace and Mercy
and Confining Gods Extraordinary Power of showing Mercy where he pleases, and
denying his Infinite Pity and Compassion to his Creatures and entering into his
unsearchable Councils, and diving into his unfathomable Judgment to deny the
latter as the former.

If God in one case may act contrary to all Rules and to his own Threatenings
Judgment and Sentence pronounced against Sinners he may do so, so far as I know
by the same Extraordinary Mercy and unbounded Prerogative in the other.

But what shall we say then to such a wretched Sinner when he is a dying, and
never repented till he was so, is his case hopeless and desperate? Is there no
comfort to be given him, is this hard and cruel Sentence to be pronounced upon
him? And is he to be thus tormented before his time? Can nothing be done or
said to him to give him any manner of hopes and comfort. and is he to be cast
into the deepest gulf of despair? What a Miserable Comforter must a Minister
whom he then sends for be to him who is of this Opinion, and talks at this
rate? What will all his Prayers and Tears and strong Cries then signify if
they can do him no good to the saving of his Soul?

I Answer, the case is I confess very sad and I know not what to say to it, I
dare not pervert the Gospel to give him false comfort, I must not be unfaithful
to the great God and my blessed Redeemer whose Minister I am in saying, Peace
Peace when there is no Peace, in loosing what is bound in Heaven, and by a
false Key or Picklock rather pretend to open the Kingdom of Heaven when God has
shut it, I must not by any sweet and poisonous Opiates give a short and
stupifying ease to his mind, and put him into a secure sleep till he awakes in
his sad mistake and lifts up his eyes being in torments, I must not corrupt
Religion and sow Pillows under his Arm-holes to put him into a state of false
ease and quiet, and by some drops of Spiritual Laudanum, some comfortable false
Doctrines and Narcotick Principles of Divinity take away his pains for a
moment, and give him hopes contrary to the Gospel; I must not lie for God much
less against him and bring a pretended Message from him to such a poor Wretch
which he never sent me with, and forge a Counterfeit Pardon for him which
Christ or the Gospel has not signed only to cheer and delude him for a few
hours. I must not I dare not then say any thing contrary to the Truth or to
this Doctrine, which I believe to be such, to deceive him or others. It may not
be then so seasonable, nor am I bound at that time to preach this to him as I
do now to the living that they may never come to this sad Condition, but may
take care to prevent it by a timely Repentance and a good Life, I would not for
Ten Thousand Worlds be in that lamentable Case, and I here warn every one that
Reads this, in the Name of God to avoid it:

But what then shall such an one do, shall he not pray shall he not cry
mightily to God, shall he not lament and mourn and be deeply sorrowful and
penitent? Yes by all means as much as is possible, and should be directed
advised and assisted to do this by the Minister and his Friends and all about
him; but what will it signify according to the former Doctrine? 'Twill not
save his Soul or get him Heaven; I answer I cannot say it will nor can any
Minister assure him of this, but it will abate his misery and lessen his
torments and be a great mitigation to his future punishment, it will though not
obtain a pardon for all the sins of his wicked life, yet lighten his Sentence
in some measure and make his sufferings to be something less than they would
otherwise be.

There are many degrees of Torment and Punishment even in Hell it self, as
there are of Glory and Happyness in Heaven, as there are many Mansions above in
our Fathers House, so there are many Cells in the Infernal Prison, and some are
beaten there with more stripes and more intense torments than others. The fire
of Hell is kindled seven times hotter for some more profligate and daring and
presumptuous Sinners, and especially for those who defy Heaven and with their
last breath deny or affront God and openly scorn and disown Religion, such bold
Hectors against Heaven who stand out to the last against it and show no signs
of Sorrow or Religion, but brave Hell and Death these provoke God to the utmost
and challenge him as it were to do his worst, and they shall terribly feel the
weight of his Power, and the force of his Almighty Arm and the Effects of his
most incensed and provoked Anger, but now a Penitent and fearful and sorrowful
Sinner who trembles at Gods Judgments, and is afraid of his indignation, and
laments over his Sins, and humbles himself under his hand, and Repents as well
as he can and bitterly grieves for his Sins and owns God is just and righteous
in punishing him and that it is the due desert of his ways and confesses them
before Men and warns others from them, and does all he can to undo them and
make reparation for them, and thus owns Religion though he has before denied
and opposed it and gives Glory to God though he before dishonored and
disobeyed him in his life, such an one though for the reasons before given he
has not a sufficient Title nor sufficient Qualifications for Heaven because he
has not performed the Condition on which it is promised nor can acquire the
Virtuous Habits that can alone fit him for it, nor can come up to the full
terms on which God has promised Pardon and Salvation, and all this dying
Repentance is not enough to make him a truly good Man nor beget in him that
holiness without which he shall never see God, nor root out those old sinful
Acts and Habits that will condemn and make him miserable, yet he shall have a
very great Abatement and Mitigation to his future Misery and his Punishment
shall be much lessened by it: This is a very great thing if we duly consider
it and worth all his most earnest Prayers and deepest Sorrow and Compunction
and all he can do to save him from those highest and extremest degrees of
Misery.

Hell indeed is a general word for future Misery in Scripture as Heaven is for
Happyness, but they consist not in one and the same indivisible thing but are
Two States of very various and different and unequal degrees according to the
Deserts and Capacities of those who are in them; As there are several degrees
of Good and Bad Men here upon Earth, so there will be of happy and miserable
Souls in Heaven and Hell, some are very imperfectly but yet sincerely good and
are far from such Obedience and perfection as Human Nature might come up to and
those being without any wilful and deliberate and great Sin shall be in the
lowest place in Heaven, and lower than this the Scripture allows none to go
thither; they who live in any such one known and habitual sin and wickedness
are such Sinners as are expressly excluded from thence, They have another place
and state allotted to them in the other World, for there being no third or
middle state revealed by Scripture but only those two of Heaven and Hell, they
must necessarily go to the latter, and there according to the Nature or Quality
or Degrees of their Sin be punished with many or fewer stripes, and be in a
state of greater or lesser Misery according as their Lives and their Deserts
have been:

The Valley of Hinnom from whence comes Gehenna, which we translate Hell, was a
deep Valley near Jerusalem where the Canaanites burnt their Children alive to
Moloch and used all direful noises to hinder their cries and lamentations from
being heard, and afterward the Jews say that Josias turned it into the place
of public Executions and that all Carcasses and Dung and filthy things were
thrown there, to prevent the noysomness of which there was a perpetual fire
always burning in that place that was never put out at any time: The Scripture
has made this the chiefest image and representation of Hell and from thence
describes the Misery of it by fire and burnings, which give one of the most
general and sensible ideas of Pain and torment; Both the Spiritual Happyness of
Heaven and Misery of Hell must be thus represented to the gross Thoughts of
Mankind by the most delightful and most painful things known to their Senses,
that they are best acquainted with in this World, and which will make the
strongest impression upon them, though they may be in themselves of another
Nature fitted chiefly to the Souls and Spirits and Rational faculties of Men in
their separate state, and the happyness or misery of those is chiefly designed
by them; God we know is a Consuming fire to the wicked, but he will very
differently punish them, though fire seems to carry one equal idea of pain and
torment yet as our Savior says that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, (and they are set forth for an example in
Scripture, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, Jude 7.) then for that City
who rejected the Gospel, Matthew. 10.15. so it shall be more tolerable for such
wicked Men who have been so in a lesser degree in their Lives and at their
Deaths have been as penitent as they could be then for Sinners of an higher
order and a more daring and impenitent sort,

Heaven and Hell being taken for Places rather than States seem to our
Imaginations to imply and signify one equal and indivisible perfect and
complete and same idea of Happyness or Misery that shall belong to all alike
who are sentenced to either of those, but there are very great Differences and
Degrees in them, a thousand times more than there is in the different States of
Happiness or Misery among Men in this World, where in the same place and upon
the same Globe we see some in very happy circumstances and mighty enjoyments,
others in great Pain and Misery and a most pitiable Condition, this here is
only a Trial of them, and not according to their deserts, but it shall be so
exactly in another Would, the great day of Recompense and Retribution; Then they
who have done most Evil and committed most sins and not repented of them in
time but gone on to provoke and disobey God and despise and neglect Religion all
their lives, these shall suffer the sad and utmost Vengeance of God's Anger and
of Eternal fire, All other wicked Men of what sort soever, whether they were
Sinners above others, or only lived in some sins without Repentance and
Amendment, these shall be for ever in a very bad state, a state of Misery and
loss of true happiness, and their Misery shall be exactly proportioned to their
sins, and be in the same degrees and measures that those were which are all
known to the infinitely wise and Just God who without respect of persons will
then render to all according to their works, and with an equal and impartial
Justice distribute-those Rewards and Punishments to them.

They then who have served God best in their lives shall be best rewarded by
him, they who have suffered with Christ shall then reign with him, they who
endured any afflictions for his sake and the Gospels shall have the greater
Glory which those are not to be compared to, they shall receive a hundred fold
for all they have done or suffered for Christ, not only for suffering
Persecution though Martyrdom has always had a brighter and a weightier Crown
assigned to it, but for denying any present Interest or worldly gain, or
unlawful pleasure and sensual Inclination for the sake of Virtue and Religion;
then those who have best improved their Talents to Gods Glory, and the good of
others, and the Service of Religion shall have more gifts and rewards from
their great Lord, they who have turned many unto Righteousness shall shine as
the stars in Glory, in several Orbs and different degrees of Light and Luster,
for as the Apostle says one star differs from another in glory, 1 Cor. 15.41.
and So likewise shall it be at the Resurrection and in another World, there
shall be different degrees of happyness and glory for Good Men both in their
Bodies and Souls according to their different degrees of Goodness, Service and
Obedience to God in this life.

There being but two places or rather two States in another World appointed for
all rational beings that ever were created, as seems plain by the Scripture
Revelation, where so far as it describes or gives us a Map of that Invisible
and unknown World it divides it only into two Mighty Kingdoms or vast Regions
an upper and a lower parted from one another by unknown bounds and inhabited by
Good and Bad Spirits, where the one are very happy and the other very
miserable, there being but two such Receptacles for the Souls of all Men and
Angels to spend an Eternity in, (for the fixed continuance and Eternal Duration
of their state is more plainly revealed then their particular State and
Condition) so that all Rational Souls must be consigned to one of those States
and Places, (for they who have made a Third or Fourth have made it only out of
their own brains and imaginations not out of any Scriptural foundation or
Authority) there must be allowed to be very great differences and unequal
degrees of happiness or misery in those two places or else neither the Justice
of God nor the different Cases of Men can be accounted for with any tolerable
ease and satisfaction to our thoughts or be any way reconciled to the
principles either of Reason or Religion.

God the Just and All-knowing Judge will give all allowances to the hard
circumstances, the invincible ignorance, the unavoidable failures, the powerful
temptations, the particular cases and several disadvantages that any of Mankind
have been under, and with the fairest and most impartial equity will adjudge
all their Conditions and proportion their future Rewards and Punishments
according to what is due to them, all things considered, according to the right
or wrong use of that freedom and liberty which he gave them and the faults or
virtues under that light and knowledge they had, of their own wills and
choices, by which alone they can either be or be denominated good or bad Men;
Some of Mankind seem not to have either virtues enough to qualify them for
Heaven or to be so wilfully vicious as to deserve Hell, but to be in a kind of
middle state here between Virtue and Vice whatever they shall be in hereafter,
and many who are guilty of some Vices which the Scripture declares damnable and
exclusive of Heaven yet are not of such downright Irreligion and General
Profligacy and Debauchery as others, Thus also many have some real sense of
Religion but yet are but weakly moved and influenced by it and do but just live
in a very low way of Grace and Virtue and are not so Rich in good works nor do
so abound in Acts of Piety, Zeal, Usefulness and Charity as others. Therefore
one Equal Complete Perfect Entire State either of Happiness or Misery cannot
belong to all these alike, but Heaven or Hell are proportionable unequal
different conditions of both exactly suited and fitted to the Moral and
Religious Deserts, Capacities and Qualifications of all Rational Beings in
which they shall be fixed to all Eternity without alteration, though perhaps not
without further improvements and gradual risings and fallings, according to the
Nature of either of those States.

These Thoughts have been a great ease and satisfaction to my self in the
Conception of the great and amazing things of another World; and I therefore
communicate them not only on the forementioned account, but because they may
be so to others who consider those greatest Objects of Meditation with any
penetration of thought, according to the best helps we have of Philosophy and
Scripture, and I am persuaded it would be good Service to Religion if it were
thus fairly reconciled in all the revealed Truths and Articles of it to the
thoughts of inquisitive Men as I doubt not but it may be, but this is a subject
of another Nature which I am not now to meddle withal.

CHAP. VI. Practical Rules and Directions concerning the Particular Exercise of
Repentance.
I Shall now consider the Particular Exercise of Repentance taken as a single
Duty distinct from all others of Obedience, which are in the largest sense
involved in it, and without which it is not effectual to Pardon and Salvation,
as I have all along shown; but Repentance taken singly for a particular act of
a Sinner just struck and affected with a sense of his Sins, and exercising at
set times Penitential Reflections and proper Actions upon the thoughts and
remembrance of them; this which is often called Repentance, and is so in some
sense, but not sufficient to complete this Duty and to entitle us to all the
effects of Repentance as they are promised to it in Scripture, in a more large
and comprehensive Notion, as including a good Life and all manner of Obedience
after we have failed and come short in any point: This which I would call
Penitence or Penance, as being a Penal Exercise or Penitential Course and
Discipline fit for a Sinner to go through, after he has committed any great
Sin, or whenever he seriously remembers and considers and recollects as he
ought often to do with himself, the most considerable miscarriages of his Life:
This consists in these following things.

1. In confessing of his Sin. 2. In inward and outward Sorrow for it. 3. In
Humiliations, Bodily Austerities and Mortifications, and especially Fasting as
the chief of them.
In these the Scripture and the Church and the custom of good Men in all Ages
have placed this Exercise of Repentance as consisting of such Penitential Acts,
not as a permanent Habit of renewed Obedience and recovered Virtue, nor as if
the Essence or the formal Virtue and proper fruits of it lay in these but in
Reformation of Heart and Life, Conversion and Obedience to God; but these are
the buds and blossoms of those fruits of Repentance, the seeds and the signs of
it, or at least the outward concomitants and attendants of it, and such a
retinue as are proper to go along with it, for the solemnity at least and
decent performance of it if not as absolutely necessary to the thing it self.
Necessary generally in private but always in public Acts or Expressions of
Repentance, wherein a public reparation and satisfaction is to be given to
Gods Honor and Authority, his Judgments to be averted and his Anger
deprecated, and a common sense and apprehension of all this to be promoted and
inculcated among others as in public Penances and National Repentances, and
therefore we read chiefly of these upon such occasions, both in Scripture and
Ecclesiastical Writers. Open Sins are a dishonouring of God, an affronting and
despising his Power and Authority, a setting up our Wills against his, a
gratifying and indulging our selves in undue liberties and unlawful
inclinations of Body: Now it is fit therefore in our Repentance for them wherein
we make what amends we can to God and repair the injury we have done him, and
undo the Sin as far as we are able, and show our utmost displeasure against it,
that we should fall down before him and confess it, and be sorry for it, and
humble our selves to him, and own our vileness and wretchedness and
unworthiness, and express the deepest resentments of it, and show our anger
against our selves, and revenge it very severely, and afflict our Souls and our
Bodies with something that shall not be very grateful to them, nor pleasant and
acceptable to our Senses.

The design of all this is to beget in our Mind such thoughts of our Sins, and
such passions and aversations against them, or at least to let those inward
thoughts and passions which are supposed to arise in it from the reflection
upon them to have such outward vent and expressions as Naturally belong to
them, and as other objects of grief and trouble are apt to excite in them; for
without those inward thoughts and passions which are the springs of these
outward actions they are all but feigned and hypocritical, and so a mocking of
God who knows the Heart; and then these outward penitences are like rains and
showers to make the springs rise higher, and to feed and increase those inward
aversions and passions and displeasures against our Sins; and thus they are
instruments and helps to promote Repentance as well as acts and exercises of
it: But I shall consider them all singly, and the particular Rules belonging to
each of them.

1. Then Confession of Sins is a necessary part of this Repentance; If we
confess our sins God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1.9.
i. e. this Confession with its due effects will procure forgiveness, as it is
Prove. 28.13. He that confesses and forsakes his sin shall have mercy. This is
very necessary and fit to be observed concerning Repentance, and other Duties
in Scripture, as Faith and the like, that when Pardon or Salvation is promised
or ascribed to any of them, they are to be taken not singly and by themselves
but with all their consequences and effects, so that it is a Metonymy of a part
for the whole, when it is said, He that believes shall be saved; i. e. he that
believes and obeys the Gospel; and he that repents or he that confesses
his Sin shall be forgiven, i. e. if he so repent of it or confess it as to
forsake and amend it; and therefore though the Gospel promises often
Blessedness to single Virtues, as in our Saviors Sermon on the Mount, yet it
means to those Virtues joined with the others, and not separate from them, for
they are all necessary to our true Blessedness; and when some particular Duties
have the promise of Salvation it is in conjunction with all the rest, for
universal Obedience to all the Laws of the Gospel is the only full Condition of
our Salvation, and neither Faith or Repentance or any one single Virtue or Duty
without that will make us happy or save us, as is plain by the whole tenor of
it, which yet some are not so willing to understand.

This Confession of Sin which is the first part of Repentance to own we have
done amiss, is an acknowledging the folly and evil of our Sins, that we are
sensible they were acts of imprudence as to our selves, of unbecomingness and
unworthiness to God, and very impudent breaches and violations of the Laws of
Heaven, for our Confessions are not to instruct God or to inform him of what he
already knows as well as our selves, nor is he pleased with a long roll or
catalogue of our Sins recited before him, but they are Inditements brought
against our selves, a charge and pleading guilty upon it of our many Treasons
and Misdemeanors against Heaven, and the reading or repeating of it is to
strike us with an inward sense of the sad and dreadful state we are in by
reason of them, and how like notorious Criminals we stand convicted by our own
Consciences, and condemned by our own Confession, and so without infinite Mercy
justly obnoxious to the severest Punishment and Judgment of God. Our Confession
is to quicken and enliven and strike the sense of our Sins more deeply and
keenly into our Souls, to make our Hearts bleed afresh upon every remembrance
of them, and to renew the Passions of Grief and Trouble upon the thoughts of
them. Like those who brought Caesar's bloody Coat into the Forum, and showed the
People the holes through which his Murderers had stabbed him, that so they might
move their highest rage and indignation; so we are to set our Sins before us
that so we may stir up our anger and hatred and displeasure the more highly
against them.

Though they are never so long past yet we should remember them with
bitterness, and sigh whenever we think of them, and whatever brings them to our
Mind should bring such Passions along with them as show we do not like them,
nor are pleased with them. When they rise up in our Consciences or our Memories
it should be cum ructu acido, with a sowerness and loathing as things most
unagreeable and offensive to us, and our Confession should be a discharging and
casting them from us.

The Soul may be loaded and oppressed with them till it has thus eased it self by
Confession, which may be like lancing an Ulcer, letting out the painful and
purulent matter, and laying open the Wound in order to the healing of it. We
ought to search our Hearts and Consciences to the bottom, and to own and
confess all our Sins, that so we may be duly affected with the grievousness of
them, and may excite such penitential resentments as are fit often to be
stirred up in our Souls. He that is senseless and stupefied under his Sins is in
a grievous and lamentable case. The Soul is then under the height of the
Disease, and has the most incurable Symptoms upon it when it is thus under a
Spiritual Lethargy, and its ill Habit and Crasis is like to bring it to an
Apoplexy of which it will dye more certainly and unavoidably. If it be possible
it must be brought to pain in order to cure it, and the most smarting Remedies
must be used to awaken it and bring it to it self; it must be burned and cup'd
and scarified to bring some feeling to its seared Conscience, and the sharp
sting of its Sins must prick it to the quick to make its brawny and callous
Heart have any sense of them. They must therefore be offered to its thoughts
and memory with all their aggravations and bitter circumstances, and the most
rouzing and awakening reflections and considerations. And this is the design of
Confession, to keep a lively and quick and due sense of our manifold Sins upon
our Minds, that we neither forget them nor become insensible of them.

God will not forget them nor does he need to be reminded of them, but we must
remind our selves and say with David, My sin is ever before me, Psalm. 51.3. and
mine iniquity have I not hid, Psalm. 32.5. that is, not from my self and my own
thoughts and remembrance, for to hide it from God is impossible, but I will
always have a sorrowful sense and bitter remembrance of it.

2. This is to be joined with inward sorrow and contrition, and with our
outward weeping and lamenting, as Peter upon denying his Master went out and
wept bitterly, Matthew. 26. and his Penitents in the Acts were pricked to the
heart, Acts 2.37. and were under great sorrow and compunction of Mind, and
David watered his couch with his tears, Psalm. 6.6. and rivers of water run down
his eyes, Psalm. 119.136. And the Scripture describes Repentance by a broken and
a contrite heart, Psalm. 51.17. in opposition to a hard and impenitent one. All
Penitents are drawn with a sad and mournful look, with tears in their eyes and
sorrow in their hearts, smiting their breasts and wringing their hands, and all
the figures of Grief and Lamentation, and covered with a veil of sadness and
disconsolateness. For Grief and Sorrow are Passions of Soul upon the presence
of any evil that is afflicting and uneasy to us; and Sin being the greatest of
those evils should cause the highest of those passions, and we have more reason
to be sorry and lament for it than a Widow over her lost Husband, or a Mother
over her firstborn that is dead, or a Friend over another that is murdered
ruined and undone; for our Souls ought to be dearer to us than any thing else,
and Sin kills, ruins and murders them. But here I must interpose a Caution;
Sin is a Spiritual Evil, and works not upon our Bodily Passions so strongly and
deeply as those other objects may which are more suited to them, and more fit
to excite such animal sensations and impressions as Naturally rise from them.
Thus sensible Beauty may charm our Animal Spirits more than the Intellectual
Pulchritude of Virtue and Music may more ravish us than the harmony of Reason,
or then the thoughts of the Heavenly singing and Hallelujah; and these and the
tastes of some sensible dainties may more affect us with a sensible pleasure
than the very joys and pleasures of Heaven as we can now conceive them, for
they are more suited to our Animal Nature, and more agreeable to the mixed
Faculties arising from the union of our Souls and Bodies, and so there may be
more pain and sorrow felt for a Wound in a Man's Body than for a Sin in his
Soul, and more tears shed for the misfortune of a Friend or the loss of a Child
or a near Relation than for the miscarriage of our Lives or the commission of a
Sin, for the one is a sorrow of another nature and another kind, raised not by
Sense but by Reason, not Natural but Religious, not from Mechanism of Body but
Consideration of Mind, and therefore the greatness or the sincerity of our
Repentance is not to be measured by the quantity of our Tears, or the number of
our Sighs, or the degrees always of Animal Sorrow, but rather by the sincerity
of our Wills and the actual performance of our good Purposes of forsaking and
amending our Sins, which are the only sure marks of our disliking them, and
being sorry for them, and having a true hatred and aversion to them; for those
secret and inward Passions of Mind are not to be known often either by our
selves or others but by the effects, and we can only know we love Virtue and
hate Sin by following the one, and forsaking the other; for no Man loves a
thing heartily but if it be in his power he will attain it, and no Man
otherwise loves Virtue or Heaven: No Man hates any thing or is heartily sorry
for any evil, but if it be in his power he will remove it if present, and avoid
it if absent. No Man can know he has the love of God but by this in which the
Scripture places it, by keeping his Commandments, 1 John 5.3. and therefore I
am afraid that School distinction between Contrition and Attrition, that the
one is a Sorrow from the Love of God, and the other from the Fear of Hell, and
so the one is sufficient, and the other is not has little or nothing in it but
words, by which Men may easily cheat and deceive themselves; for the secret
springs and principles of Men's Passions lie too deep to be discerned, and they
run into one another and are so mixed and confounded that they cannot be
distinguished, neither is there any great difference between them, and only the
effects of them are taken notice of in the account of God and the concerns of
Religion. It is a mere Nicety to distinguish such Principles in the first
forming of Repentance, like looking for the colors of Flowers or taste of
Fruit in the several Seeds of them, whereas he that from true Religious
Principles, be they either Love Hope or Fear, (and they generally are mixed and
combined together, and we cannot divide the force or weight of each of them
severally upon the Mind) whoever I say from these, or any or all of these is so
concerned for his past Sins that he leaves them and forsakes them and becomes a
good Man he has undoubtedly true Repentance; and whatever the Principle of it
was, whether Love or Fear, and whatever degree there was in the sorrow and
trouble and concern for it, it is that fruit and effect and permanent issue and
result of it that constitutes and denominates it true and perfect Repentance.

Let not therefore any Man doubt his Repentance who has this evidence and
demonstration of it, and let no Man deceive himself without this, and think
that the Keys of the Church any thing the Minister can do for him, or any thing
that Christ has done for him, or the Merit of his Blood, or any Free Grace, or
any Faith in him, or any thing that a deluded and impenitent Sinner is willing
to catch hold off, can turn his Sorrow be it never so great, and be it from
what Principle soever either of Love or Fear, into perfect and sufficient
Repentance without the effect of Reformation and a good Life, and performing
the Conditions of the Gospel necessary to Salvation.

Godly Sorrow is an excellent means and a good beginning of Repentance; it is
sowing in tears those seeds of Religion which may grow up to maturity of
goodness and amendment of Life, and if those penitential tears wash away the
filth of our Sins, and cleanse the hands and purify the heart of a Sinner,
they are then true Repentance. If the Salt that is in them eat out our
Corruption and preserve us from all impurities afterward, and the bitterness
of the Sorrow makes us disrelish and dislike our Sins ever after, and wean and
turn away our Affections from them; and like the Waters of Siloam work upon us
and perform the Cure, when they are thus stirred and impregnated with a Divine
Virtue by the moving of Heaven upon them, then they are of great Virtue, and
ought to be frequently used and cherished and indulged as they were of old for
this purpose by the devout and tender Penitents: But all Constitutions can no
more weep and shed tears alike than they can make the Hairs of their Head white
or black; and though all should be sorry for their Sins, as being convinced in
their Minds of the evil of them, yet the passionate degrees and the outward
expressions of this Sorrow fall not under any rules or measures, but are best
judged and known by the effect, which is leaving them as what we do not like
but hate. Without this our Tears run wast, and our Sorrow is but as an empty
Cloud, or Rain upon barren Ground without any Fruit, and all our bitter Cries
and Lamentations are but as the mournings of the Ephesian Matron when we can
strike up again immediately with our Sins, and take the causes of our Sorrow
and the murderers of our beloved Joy immediately into our Hearts and our
Embraces.

3. Humiliations, Bodily Austerities and Mortifications, and especially
Fasting, make up this Duty of Penitence or Exercise of Repentance. For thus the
Penitents of old put on Sackcloth and spread Ashes upon their Heads, lay
prostrate upon the ground and rent their Clothes in the Eastern Countries, and
fasted and denied themselves their ordinary Food, and afflicted their Souls
with these severities upon their Bodies. For Sin being committed chiefly by the
Body, as not only the Instrument but the Tempter to it, and the Flesh and its
Carnal gratifications being the strongest and commonest allurements to it,
therefore to show their anger and displeasure against it, they revenged it upon
their Bodies, and chastized those servants of unrighteousness, and used such a
discipline upon them as might punish them for what was past and be a means to
prevent their sinning for the future: And to show the sense they had of their
own vileness and unworthiness for having offended God, they expressed and
testified it by all acts of humiliation and lowly submission to his Power and
Greatness which they had formerly opposed, withstood and disobeyed Now these
Acts or Exercises of Repentance were so acceptable to God, when they were the
signs and effects of a true penitent Heart, that we find in Scripture how it
prevailed with God so far to pardon Sin as to remove the Temporal Judgments he
had denounced against it. Thus Niniveh was saved from destruction, Jonah 3.
when they proclaimed a fast and put on sackcloth, and decreed that neither man
nor beast should taste any thing, but be covered with sackcloth and ashes, ver.
7.8. And Josiah when he thus humbled himself and rent his Clothes upon his
hearing the destruction of Jerusalem denounced by the Prophetess, had it
deferred till after his Death, 2 Kings 22.19 And even wicked Ahab had Gods
Judgment respited and took off from himself, because when he heard it, He rent
his clothes and put sackcloth upon his flesh and fasted, 1 Kin. 21.27. God
himself assigning this as a Reason to the Prophet, See thou how Ahab humbles
himself before me, because he humbles himself before me I will not bring the
evil in his days, ver. 29. And we find these Acts of Humiliation and this
Discipline of Fasting joined with Repentance not only in the Jewish Church but
also in the Christian, in the first and best Ages when this Penitential
Discipline was most strictly observed by all Penitents. Now the Question is, 1.
Whether these are necessary as proper acts or parts of Repentance, or whether
internal Repentance without these outward Exercises of it may not be
sufficient? 2. Whether if they be not necessary they are not useful and proper
to promote or at least to express it?


Now as to the first Question, The necessity of these we must make a difference
between public and private Repentance.

In public Repentance, as that of a Nation or City when they would remove or
avert a Judgment, and deprecate Gods Anger due to their Sins, and exercise a
solemn and public Repentance for them, this ought to be done by outward
Humiliations and Fastings, and such signs and expressions as are proper and
usual to testify great concern and trouble and mourning and humiliation, that
so they may make the best acknowledgment and satisfaction to God for their
Sins, and the best reparation to his injured Honor and Authority, and may
beget in others, and propagate over the whole Kingdom or Nation the same
penitential sense and concern for their Sins, in order to avoid the danger and
the judgment due upon them. And thus in the public Exercises of Penitence in
the Christian Church when any had by a notorious and scandalous Sin brought a
reproach and infamy upon the Church and their Religion, the Governors were
concerned for its Honor and Credit to take notice and turn them out of their
Communion, and put them in a state of public Penitence for their grievous
faults. And here it was necessary for such Persons to satisfy the Church by
their outward Acts of Repentance, Mourning and humiliation that they were truly
and inwardly penitent and were likely to live better and become other Men
before they received them again into their Communion, and this though it was
but a Prudential Method and an External Discipline of the Church yet was
excellently fitted for the reclaiming and reforming great and open Offenders,
by thus shaming them out of their sins and keeping the Rod over them and
shutting them out of the Church by the power of the Keys till they were fit to
be admitted and received in again upon the probable signs of a True Repentance,
and this our Church has good reason to wish for again and ought to restore it,
did not the state and circumstances we are in unavoidably hinder it, but it is
utterly impracticable under great Schisms and Divisions from the Church and
great Looseness and Contempt of Religion, which make it impossible for the
Church to exercise this Discipline which were otherwise its Duty, but this is
at most but an Useful Discipline not a necessary or Essential part of
Repentance to go through those penitential courses of Humiliation and
Mortification which the ancient Penitents did, all that is strictly necessary
and all that the Scripture commands as a duty is an Internal Penitence toward
God transacted between him and our own Souls wherein we humble our selves
before him under a sense of our own vileness and unworthiness and with the
greatest submission of our Souls bow down our selves, and own his Power and
Right to punish us and beseech him for Christ's sake not to use it i. e. to
pardon and forgive us; Now this I doubt not with sincerity of mind at present
and Amendment of Life afterward is a sufficient Exercise of this Duty to
private and particular persons without all the other Solemnities and
performaces of a public Penitence, for the design of those is hereby fully
attained as to the Person himself which was to amend him and to recover him and
to make him more careful not to offend for the future by his shame and
sufferings for what is past.

The Church of Rome has turned this Discipline of Public Penitence used in the
Primitive Church into Auricular Confession and Private Penance which besides
the folly of giving Absolution first and supposing some of the guilt and
punishment remaining after the Sin is pardoned, and making the Eternal
Punishment easier to be got off than than the Temporal, and imposing trifling
and ridiculous penances and making them properly satisfactory, is a shameful
corrupting an ancient Practice and using the Keys of the Church only to unlock
the Consciences first, and then the Purses of the Laity, and is a wretched
Corruption of the true Notion of Repentance by making it a light and transient
thing, and that the least degree of Sorrow by the Power of the Keys is
sufficient for Pardon and Salvation.

From them I doubt not came the first loose and wretched Mistakes about
Repentance, and these being joined with the false and unwary Doctrines of
others about Justifying and Saving Faith, its being a mere fiduciary Relyance
upon Christ and his Merits, and that we were to be saved by the free Grace of
the Gospel without Obedience to its Commands or Performing its Conditions and
that God's Grace was so powerful and miraculous in the Conversion of a Sinner
that it did its work Instantaneously and Irresistibly, these hindered Men from
performing that Duty, that true Repentance and Obedience which they thought
upon some accounts not so necessary, or that they expected could be done for
them in an instant, and so they need not trouble themselves about it all their
lives, by these Reserves and false Principles and comfortable as they call 'em,
but deceitful Doctrines they shifted off the difficult task of leaving all
their Sins and leading a good life which otherwise must be owned to be the only
true way to Salvation and Happiness, and when this appears clearly to us as it
will if we rightly understand Religion, nothing but downright Atheism and
disbelieving it will hinder the Power and Efficacy of it upon our lives.

But as to the Usefulness of those Penitential Austerities and Mortifications
and Acts of Humiliation though private Repentance may be without them yet they
may be of some good Use and Advantage both as means to promote it and as signs
fit to express it, Thus fasting especially and abstinence from food is a proper
way both of afflicting the Soul and of bringing the body into subjection, and
as feasting in the Nature of the thing is improper for one Sorrowing, Mourning,
and Repenting, as we ought often to be upon serious and sad Reflections made
upon our Sins, so for many Sins pampering and indulging the Carcass, is adding
fuel to them, and to abate and substract from our Meat and drink is to cut off
those Recruits and Nourishments which usually make provision for the flesh, and
maintain the lusts thereof, Now then private prudence and discretion will
advise every good Man to make use of that which he finds may be so useful and
instrumental to the purposes of Virtue, and to the designs of Religion, but to
enjoin it further, and lay an absolute necessity of it to all Persons and
Tempers as of Prayer, giving Alms and other Christian Duties this is more than
either the Church or the Scripture does ever warrant, I speak as to private
Repentance which is effectual to every Man's Pardon and Salvation, as to
public, such as the Public Fasts commanded by Authority either in the Jewish
or Christian Church, there the Nature of the thing and Obedience to those who
were lawful Governors made it a Duty to comply with their Religious Commands
and Designs and to Express our Public and Solemn Repentance by such signs as
are fit and usual on such an occasion, and not to keep a Festival when our
Governors and our Christian Neighbors and our Sins and the fear of some
Judgment call upon us for Fasting and Humiliation, but bow long we are then to
fast and whether to eat nothing till the Evening, and what kind of Meat, is
what our Health and Constitution and a little degree of Prudence joined with a
good sense of Religion will direct us in without a Confessor; He is a Slave to
his Appetite, and makes a God of his Belly who cannot deny himself a meal now
and then upon such an account, and he is a weak and Superstitious Creature who
thinks Religion lies in some strict and little niceties of performing this
without regard to his Health and the more true and proper designs of it.

Fasting has been always observed by Devout and Pious Penitents in all Ages as
an Exercise of penitence and a help to Devotion and Religion, and Lent or the
Antepaschal Fast is especially of great Usage and Antiquity in the Christian
Church but not observed alike in all places as is plain from Irenaeus and
others, but it was chiefly designed for Public Penitence of notorious Sinners
who were to be restored to the Communion of the Church and Receiving the
Sacrament at Easter, but it may be of good Use to the private Repentance of
every particular Christian who ought to set aside some time for the Examining
of himself and the Reflecting upon his past Sins and as long as he lives he
ought to Exercise a particular Repentance for all the wilful Sins he ever
committed, and to have some appointed times to offer up the Sacrifice of a
broken and contrite heart and to let his heart bleed afresh and pierce it self
very deeply with the remembrance of its past Sins, which though God has
forgotten so as not to punish yet he ought never to forget so as not to Repent
of them.

I mention not other Bodily penances such as putting on Sackcloth and Ashes
which were Eastern Modes of Mourning, but do no more oblige us than rending our
Garments and pouring out Water which were used by them, and as to whipping and
going barefoot which one calls the penance of a Goose, Some of those which are
in use in the Roman Church are rather Heathenish than Christian Customs, like
Baals Priests Cutting and Lancing themselves and they are no more proper to
Cure Men of their Sins, or be Helps to Repentance than the taking a Purge or
Vomit, which would work as effectually upon their Minds and expel their Vices
and Corruptions as well as any of those Penitential Rods and Disciplines upon
the backs of Fools who understand not what true Repentance is.

All such Bodily Exercise profits nothing to the freeing from their sins but
is only a commuting with God for them and makes them believe that repentance
lies only in such an opus operatum which however severe it seems yet is much
easier than to leave their Sins and their beloved Lusts, as we find many of our
Lovers of Wine rather choose to take Physic now and then to cure their
Headache than to become sober which would do it much better.

But true Repentance is not to be known or judged of by such unnatural follies
which they call the fruits but are not so much as the shadows of true
Repentance, nor by any of these External Symptoms or Acts of Penitence which
are the most proper Exercises or Attendants of it but by the Change wrought
upon our Hearts and Lives and the Effectual Amendment and Reformation of both,
as we are to judge of the Soundness and Goodness of our Health not by the
strength or bitterness of the Physic we took in order to it, or by the Ragimen
and Rules we observed in taking it though they might be necessary and of good
use, nor by its manner of working upon us but by the effect of it which is its
Curing us, when that is done by whatever ways it was so the work is done and
the end attained, and till it be, nothing is done to any purpose, which brings
me to the last head of Discourse, Namely the Marks and Signs of True Repentance.

CHAP. VII. How we may know we have Repented and are in a Pardoned and Good
State.
NOthing is of greater importance to us than to make a right judgment of our
selves as to our Spiritual State, to know whether we are in a State of Grace
and Pardon with God, whether our Condition be such that we may reasonably hope
we are in his Favor at present, and have a Title to Heaven and Happiness
hereafter. No Man that believes Religion, and is not perfectly thoughtless and
stupid, but must upon the account of these things have the greatest Peace and
Comfort of Mind or the greatest uneasiness and disturbance: For nothing is so
great an object of our Hopes and Fears, and does so highly affect us as these
will or ought to do. No Man should one would think, enjoy himself one moment,
or be at quiet in his thoughts who is in a state of enmity with the great God,
and lives under his anger and displeasure, and however he may escape here yet
lies under the dread and terror and amazing danger of another World.

To know and examine and be able to judge of this should one would think be
very plain, because the Rule is so by which we are to judge our selves, and by
which God will judge us. The Terms and Conditions of our Salvation are laid
down very clearly in Scripture, sincere and constant Obedience to Gods Laws, or
where we fail of performing that, true Repentance, which is to be in the place,
and will be accepted instead of Perfect Obedience. But many are willing to
cheat themselves, and be deluded with false hopes and mistaken grounds of
Comfort, and to say, Peace, Peace, where there is no Peace, and to deceive
themselves with false marks and signs of Grace, and without any good reason to
believe themselves to have an Interest in Christ and be the Favorites of
Heaven.

There were some in the Apostles time as well as ours who had this Opinion of
themselves, and made great pretenses to the most mysterious knowledge (calling
themselves Gnostics) and to the most intimate Communion with Heaven, and to be
Christians of the highest form and order, who yet wallowed in all manner of
Wickedness, and lived in very great Sins and unlawful Liberties expressly
forbidden by the Gospel. They abused some of the Doctrines of Christianity, and
perverted the very Design and Constitution of it, and by making a false Scheme
of it to themselves altered its Nature, turning it like our latter Antinomians
into a mere Notional Superstition instead of an Institution of Virtue and
Holiness, and judged of themselves not by its Rules and standing Terms and
Conditions, but by some ungrounded and imaginary Privileges that no way
belonged to them. St. John in his first Epistle lays down several Cautions
against such as these, and warns the Christians to beware of their loose and
pernicious though pretendedly Christian Doctrines, such as St. James also
speaks very openly against when he corrects their mistakes who would be
justified by faith without works, i. e. put into a Righteous and Good State by
Christianity without Obedience and Virtue. Little Children, says St. John, let
no man deceive you, he that does righteousness is righteous even as he is
righteous, 1 John 3.7. He that commits sin is of the Devil, ver. 8.
Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, ver. 9. In this the children of
God are manifest and the children of the Devil, ver. 10. Where in opposition to
all the false Opinions by which those wicked Men believed themselves in a good
State, notwithstanding their Wickedness or their not being Righteous, and made
false marks and signs of Grace to themselves, and accounted themselves the
special Favorites of God and of Christ by some conceited and peculiar
Privileges, though they were wicked and impenitent, and lived in a state of
plain and notorious Sin, he lays down a clear and certain, a plain and obvious
Mark and Criterion by which we may judge of our selves, and by which alone we
can judge aright of our Spiritual Condition, and know whether we are in a
Pardoned and Good State, and that is this, that we do not commit sin, or live
in the practice of any known and wilful Sin whatsoever, till we bring our
selves to this, we can never by any means whatever, by any privilege of
Christianity, or by all that Christ has or could do for us, be free from a
state of guilt and danger, till we get rid of every Sin and break off every
evil way, then we shall recover our good State however dangerous and deplorable
it was before, and shall be as sure of Gods Favor and a Title to Heaven as if
we had been always innocent, and never had sinned. Many are inclined to judge
of themselves by some other and kinder measures, and are willing to believe
well of themselves, and hope they have an Interest in Christ, and a Title to
Gods Favor and hopes of Heaven without leaving every Sin, and living such a
strict and holy Life as the Gospel requires, they have some Reserves, and some
false Notions and Principles in Religion whereby they comfort themselves
against this severe Doctrine, and think by some way or other to reconcile their
Sins with the hopes of Heaven and their Eternal Salvation. There have been
other Schemes of Religion laid down, and such Whimsical Hypotheses made of it
by some Men, from the unwary stating and misunderstanding the Scripture Notions
of Election, Justification, Faith, Free Grace, and the like, that they at last
come to assert these comfortable Doctrines as they call them to a Sinner, and
so they were if they were true, that their Sins can do them no harm, nor
endanger their Salvation, and that Sanctification and Holiness is not necessary
as the way or means to Heaven, and that a Sinner may come to Christ, and be
Justified by him, and put in a good State before he Repents, even with all his
Sins and Filth about him, which are so far from being Saving and Gospel Truths,
as they are lewdly and ignorantly called, that they are certainly the most
damnable Heresies, and the most contrary and destructive to Christianity that
ever were in the World. I am not to enter into any Controversies here, nor show
the Mistakes too many run into about those matters, all those false and
abominable Principles will be removed, and all false Judgments and wrong
Opinions of our selves and our Spiritual State taken away and prevented by this
undoubted Mark and Criterion of our being in a good State or a State of Grace,
which is the surest Touchstone by which every Christian may safely try himself,
and every Sinner know whether he is in a Pardoned and good State, namely, that
they do not live in any known and wilful Sin whatever. I shall, I. Show the
Truth of this. II. Consider what other Sins are consistent with a good State.
III. Represent the Benefits and Effects of Repentance, or the Happiness of
being in such a good State.


SECT. I. Not committing Sin the only sure Mark of a good State.
TO show this Mark given by the Apostle to be the true Test and Criterion by
which we may make Judgment of our Spiritual Condition and know we are in a good
State, I shall offer these following Considerations to prove the Truth of it

1. Then, those other Marks which come short of this by which too many are apt
to deceive themselves are not safe and sufficient. Many are apt to make some
inward and secret things wrought upon their Minds the Marks of Grace to them,
and the signs and evidences of their good State, whereby they may be sadly
cheated and deluded unless these inward Marks are made more certain and evident
by outward and visible Actions. None can know they have any inward Principle of
Spiritual Life in their Souls, or the root of the matter in them, as some love
to speak, but by such vital operations and visible effects of it in their
Lives; as we cannot know the Tree is alive at the root but by the sprouts and
branches that shoot from it and show it to be so, but we conclude it to be dead
without those in their proper time, and so we may our selves in a Spiritual
sense without the Fruits of Repentance and Holiness in our Lives. A Christian
cannot know he has Faith but by his Works, nor be sure of Grace in the Heart
but by the efficacy of it in restraining him from Sin and the visible effects
of it in a Holy Conversation. We cannot so perfectly feel and discern this
secret and inward principle in our selves so as to be any way assured of it
unless the force and power of it appear in our Actions, and in reforming and
bettering our Lives, and to judge of our being in a state of Grace any
otherwise from any voice or testimony within, is very precarious and ungrounded
and very liable to error and delusion, for the Spirit bears witness to none but
those whose Consciences at the same time bear witness that they are the
children of God by not committing sin, and it seals none but those who have
this Mark, and bear the Marks of Virtue and Holiness upon their Souls and in
their Lives. The presumptuous and conceited Enthusiast is very confident and
assured of himself and his good state, though he is evidently guilty of very
great and notorious Sins, and therefore he is forced to that lewd Principle
that God sees no Sin in his Children, and that he may be a Child of God
notwithstanding those, whereas this according to St. John is the only Mark of a
Child of God, that he does not commit Sin. To pretend to inward Marks of Grace
when we are guilty of sinful Actions, is as if a Man should judge himself to be
sound at Heart and healthful within when the Plague is broke out upon him, and
the Spots appear and his Sores run, to talk then of the goodness of his Pulse
and other secret and uncertain signs within himself, whereby he feels himself
to be well, is evident cheat and wretched delusion, and so it is to judge of
our Spiritual good State by any inward marks and tokens when our Lives are bad,
and we commit Sin in the Apostles sense, i. e. live in the practice of any
wilful Wickedness. But further, there are other imperfect signs not quite so
deceitful and Enthusiastic as these, by which many think they are in a good
State though they are not brought off actually from every Sin, as that they are
troubled and concerned at their Sins, and commit them with great reluctance and
uneasiness of Mind, so that they do the things which they would not, and that
they often wish they were better, and have a mind to leave their Sins and some
purposes to do so, though their Sins are so strong and powerful that they still
prevail upon them, and they cannot wholly get rid of them, this they take to be
good signs of Grace, that they have some good motions and stirrings in their
Souls, some desires and wishes, and this desire of Grace they take to be Grace
it self, and though they do not the good they would, yet that they have some
mind and inclination to do it. Now all this may be in such as are truly Sinners
and Unregenerate Persons, that are still in an impenitent state and under the
power and dominion of their Sins, but are not quite senseless and stupefied, nor
are come to what the Apostle calls a seared Conscience, without sense of their
Sins, nor to a reprobate Mind void of all judgment about them, which is the
utmost degree of profligate wickedness, till they are brought to those, their
Sins will be uneasy to them, and fill them with trouble whenever they think
and reflect upon them, as they cannot avoid to do sometimes, and they will feel
sharp twitches and vellications of Conscience as long as they have any
Conscience remaining, and have not quite wasted and destroyed it, and worn off
all the Natural sense of Good and Evil upon their Minds, but if they will still
sin notwithstanding this, and will not hearken to the secret calls or loud
clamours of their own Consciences, but will still follow their Lusts and Vices,
and be drawn away by the strong and alluring Temptations of them, all this
Regret and Trouble which they sometimes bring upon them is only a
self-conviction and self-condemnation, and is so far from giving any abatement
to their Sins that it adds this highest aggravation to them, that they are
committed all the while against Conscience and against the inward sense of
their own Minds. And though now and then in a good mood and a melancholy fit
when they are thus troubled for their Sins they have a mind to leave them, and
come to some faint Wishes Purposes and Resolutions to do so, yet if these prove
ineffectual, and the next Temptation overcomes them, and they commit the Sin
again when it is offered again and the company or the charms invite again to
it, it is certain whosoever thus commits sin is the servant of sin, as our
Savior says, John 8.34. and it is a sign he is such a slave to it and it has
got such power over him that it leads him captive at its will, and is so far
Master of him that he cannot throw it off notwithstanding his frequent Wishes
and imperfect Desires that he could; but how short all this is of Perfect
Repentance, and therefore of putting us into a good State, I have shown more
largely before, Chap. 1. Sect. 4.

2. The Scripture not only forbids every wilful Sin but excludes it out of
Heaven, and declares that every wilful Sinner of what kind soever shall not
enter into it, as neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards,
nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9,
10. i. e. whoever are to be denominated such by the practice of their Lives and
habit of their Minds, by their living and dying in any of those Sins
whatsoever, or in any one of them. This is plainly adjudged by the Gospel,
which is the Rule God will judge us by at the last day, and by that Rule we may
judge our selves now, and all other judgments of our selves are false and
deceitful. Whatever Sinner finds himself in the number of that black Catalogue,
may see his Name as it were in the dead Warrant, and nothing but timely
Repentance and Amendment before he dies can blot it out. The Sentence of
Damnation is as positive and express against all or any such Sinners, as the
Sentence of Death is against Treason or Felony by the Civil Law, and no hopes
to escape the Knowledge or Justice of infinite Wisdom and infinite Power, and
therefore whoever is cast by any one such Indictment and found guilty of any
such Capital and Mortal Crime can never escape before the Divine Tribunal, the
process of which is laid open to us by the Gospel, and by that we should judge
our selves now as impartially as we know God will hereafter.

3. The Reason of this is plain, namely, of Gods forbidding every wilful Sin
upon pain of Damnation, and excluding every such Sinner out of Heaven, for
otherwise he could have forbidden no Sin, but must have laid open all his Laws
to be broken and trampled on by the disobedience and unruliness of his
Creatures; for had he suffered every one of Mankind to live in impunity under
any one wilful though single Sin, such as his particular inclination or his
interest would most incline to, by this means he would have opened a gap for
the breach of all his Laws, so that none of them should have been duly
observed but all of them broken by parts and by piecemeal by some Sinner or
other, one would have chosen to have gratified his Revenge, another his Lust,
one would have wallowed in Drunkenness another have persued his Gain by all the
methods of Fraud and Unrighteousness, and according as Men's inward tempers and
outward temptations had been so they would have chosen or indulged every one of
them their beloved Sin, and so God must have given up all his Authority and his
Government to some or other of the vicious inclinations of his Creatures if he
had not forbid all Sin whatever upon pain of Damnation and excluded it without
exception out of Heaven.

4. One such wilful Sin is such an Affront Contempt and Disobedience to the
Divine Authority in general as involves in it an Universal guilt and breach of
the whole Law of God, thus St. James says, He that shall keep the whole law
besides and yet offend in one point is guilty of all, James 2.10. for this
reason, for he that said Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill, now if
thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill thou art become a Transgressor of the
law, ver. 11. i. e. the same Power and Authority of God gives Sanction to all
his Laws, and it is a vertual disowning and disclaimer of that wilfully to
disobey it and rebel against it and openly oppose it in any case, which he does
who lives in any one known and wilful Sin and is to be accounted an Enemy and
Traitor to Heaven and punished as such, who renounces its absolute Power and
Right to Govern him in all things and subverts the whole foundation of
Obedience and Submission to it.

5. One such wilful Sin or vile Lust if it be suffered to prevail upon the Mind
expels all true Principles of Virtue and Religion out of it or shows it to be
devoy'd of any such as being utterly inconsistent with them, for he that
allows himself in any sinful liberty or unlawful practice contrary to the
plain Rules of Religion can never have a due and just sense of that upon his
Mind, nor be supposed in any other things to be governed by such considerations
of God and Heaven and Religion as are the true principles of all Virtue and
Goodness, where those are not in the heart, all seeming Acts of Virtue and
Religion lose their form and worth and excellency and are but the spurious
Offspring of Chance Humor or Interest, for he that does any good action or
abstains from any bad one out of Regard to Religion and the Considerations of
God and another World would for the same reasons act uniformly and not allow
himself to live contrary to those in any other instances nor comply with the
most darling lust or strongest temptation when contrary to those, but if he
does so in any case he may as well do it in others, for this shows that he is
swayed and governed by some other Principles than those of Religion; A sense of
Honor as it is called, or not doing a thing base and scandalous in the opinion
of others, or a prudent Caution and Discretion in serving our present Interest,
these may keep many Men from some Vices that would destroy their Credit or
their present Advantage but if there be no other foundation for them, it is not
Virtue and Religion, but only Art and Managery which may have its reward here,
but will never be rewarded in Heaven, and this is what some commonly mean by a
Moral Man, but it is a mistake, for this is only a Man of Conduct and Cunning,
whereas Morality is founded upon true and certain and Eternal Principles and
Reasons of Virtue but he that acts not by those nor any Principles of Religion
will be a Knave for his Interest and a Secret Sinner for his Lusts and make his
Conscience give way as often as there is occasion to his Convenience or
Inclination, for in other sins which the Custom and Opinion of the World have
not made so infamous or so disadvantagious there he can be notoriously guilty
and break the plain Rules of Virtue and Religion; He that can do so by
indulging himself in any wilful Sin as he corrupts and spoils all his other
seeming Virtues by making them to be base born, and not to proceed from a
Religious and Virtuous Stock, so he throws off all true Principles of Religion,
and shows that he has no true Root or genuine Seed of it in his heart.

6. Such an one lies open to all other Sins and may for the same reason commit
any that he allows himself in one, when the mind is thus prostituted and
debaucht by consenting to any one particular unlawful Lust, it would grow
common to all others if it had the same temptation to invite and the same
opportunity to commit them, and it is only for want of those that it is not
universally lewd and wicked, and given up to commit all uncleanness with
greediness, what should hinder or restrain him from all other Sins who gives
way to any one plain and great one, if he were assaulted by the like temptation
in any other place he would yield to it and comply with it even in the grossest
manner, for he has lost his guard and the security of his Virtue, and by such a
wide and open breach made in his Conscience all other sins might enter and the
whole Legion take possession of him, There can be no true Reason to preserve
him from any or from all sins, who knowingly and wilfully allows himself in any
one.

7. Any such sin is utterly inconsistent with true sincerity, and this we know
is absolutely necessary to our good state though perfection of Obedience is
not, it is truly and commonly said that God requires not absolute perfection of
us but only true sincerity because the best Men cannot attain to the one and he
must be a very bad one who has not the other, but there is a perfection of
parts and degrees, we are not bound to the highest degrees of every Virtue in
order to a State of Grace and Goodness, but we are to have such a perfection of
parts as to perform every Duty and every Virtue required of us and to be
without every willful Sin contrary to the Divine Law, for less than this will
not amount to true sincerity that shall commend us to God and approve us to him
who knows our hearts, for whilst he sees there any one sin that we love more
than we do him, which we prize and value above his favor and all that he can
give us even Heaven it self, he cannot think our hearts are upright toward him
or that we sincerely love him; for can he sincerely love God who does any
wilful thing that he knows is infinitely displeasing to him? And can it be
consistent with the faithfulness and integrity of friendship to do the most
injurious and the most disobliging thing imaginable? Can he love his Prince or
the Government where he lives who endeavors in any thing to subvert and
destroy that Authority by an open standing out and breaking their Laws? There
may be indeed a Personal Love to an Earthly Prince distinct from Obedience to
his Laws, (and so some would have to God and Christ) for he may be capable of
receiving other Pledges and Testimonies of it and may be many other ways
obliged by us, because he may have a Distinct Interest or Inclination different
from his laws, but this cannot be in God whose Laws are always agreeable to his
Nature and the result of his own infinite Wisdom and Reason, and he can never
be pleased with any that act contrary to them nor is capable of receiving any
other grateful or acceptable thing from us but only Obedience to his Commands,
so that by this only we that are his Creatures can oblige him, and testify the
sincerity of our Love to him, as St. John says, This is the love of God that we
keep his commandments, 1 John 5.3. There is no other certain sign or expression
of our Loving God but obeying him, and no sign of Loving him with all our heart
and soul and mind, but obeying him Universally, and not dividing and sharing
out our Love to him and our sins, and suffering any of our vile Lusts to be his
Rivals and Competitors in our Affections; Whilst we allow our selves in any
known and wilful sin we take part with that which is an Enemy to God, we
harbor and nourish a known Traitor to him in our breasts and if we will not
give it up we break with God and Declare open Enmity against him, and will
rather part with him and his friendship than part with a Paltry and a Vile
Lust, whilst we thus indulge any darling Sin and secret Wickedness in our heart
as God cannot love us so neither can we sincerely love him, but whatever shows
and pretenses of kindness and respect we may show to him otherways, whatever
Courtship and Honor we may give to him by the Ceremonies of Worship, and the
External Rights and Offices of Religion, yet he will account us only false and
treacherous and hypocritical Wretches, and not accept of any thing else we
offer to him: For,

8, Allowing our selves in one such darling Sin or beloved Lust spoils all our
Religious Duties and makes them both unacceptable to God and us unfit to
perform them as we ought; He that allows himself in any secret Sin and
unlawful Lust how must he be sunk into a sensual State that will keep him from
rising to Spiritual Thoughts and Exercises, his Mind is taken up with other
apprehensions and idea's of different objects, which he prefers to all the
things of Religion and these sink down his mind and bemire it in flesh and
sense that it cannot use its wings or rational faculties and mount upwards to
the purer objects of Faith and Religion: Those vicious inclinations must quench
and put out the fire of Devotion and make the mind move sluggishly and heavily
in such an improper work, and damp all its Religious Ardors and Affections;
When a Man out of a Natural Sense of God cannot excuse himself wholly from
worshipping and praying to him, (for I speak not of such as have cast off all
Religion, but only such as allow themselves in one wicked Lust or unlawful
Liberty) how must it be a violence to him to pray against a Sin and beg pardon
of it and Grace to forsake it, when he secretly resolves to keep it and has no
true and full design in his mind to leave it? What a struggle must there be
between his Conscience that is awakened by his Devotion and his sensual
Appetite which is so fond of the Sin that nothing can keep him from it, and who
when he is deploring himself in the holy Offices yet intends to commit it the
next opportunity? What horrid Mockery and impudent Banter is this with the
great and awful Majesty of God? And what wretched Hypocrisy to make shows of
great Honor and Address to him when our hearts are not right with him, and we
must know that he well knows they are not so? No Man could have the face to be
so impudent to another as to come and make great court to him and express great
Respect and Reverence and Kindness for him, when he knew at the same time that
the other also knew that this was all false and hypocritical, and that he took
all occasions at other times to affront and contemn and disoblige him? And yet
thus every Man does who under all his Devotion and seeming Piety nourishes a
secret sin and an unlawful Lust and demurely covers a vile fraud or injustice
or any immorality: So that either a Man must throw off all Religion or throw
off every secret and beloved Sin; for either his Sin will spoil his Religion or
his Religion must cure him of his Sin, or he must have great Mistakes and false
Apprehensions of Religion who thinks to compound with Heaven and to pay
External Homage to it and that God will accept of that instead of inward Virtue
and sincere Obedience. One would think no Man could ever heartily perform one
act of Devotion who has any such sin in reserve that he will not part with, but
I am sure whoever does so his Devotion will never be accepted by God, and it
will be in vain to worship him openly while we secretly disobey him, such a
blemish spoils all our Sacrifices and desecrates and pollutes the most sacred
oblations, and as the Prophet expressed it to the Jews makes him that kills an
ox as if he slew a man, he that sacrifices a lamb as if he cut off a dogs
neck, he that offers an oblation as if he offered swines blood, he that
burns incense as if he blessed an idol, Isa. 6.3. and he gives the reason at
the latter part of the verse, They have chosen their own ways and their soul
delights in their abominations, and these turn their very Prayers into sin
and make them an abomination to God, as Scripture assures us, Psalm. 109.7.
Prove. 28.9. It Is strange and unaccountable to consider that a Man should have
some sense of Religion and be governed by it in a great many things and live up
to the Rules of it in several instances and yet be so besotted and infatuated
as to let one darling sin overcome and enslave him when he knows that this by
the Principles of his Religion is as damnable and destructive as any of the
rest, which is just as if he should be careful to preserve his Health and avoid
a great many Diseases and live by regular Methods to that purpose and yet give
himself a mortal stab and a wound that will certainly dispatch him; for one Sin
like one Wound may be Mortal and bring Death along with it as well as many, and
one drop of Poison may kill, and one wilful sin damn us as well as more.

God will not judge of our sins as the Custom and Opinion of the World does,
nor abate of the Measures of our Duty and Conditions of our Salvation as we
madly and unreasonably do our selves, but whatever sin stands condemned by the
Divine Law however Modish or Common and Customary it be, that will not alter
its Nature, nor take off its guilt and danger; one Man's Temper carries him to
such Sins that he thinks Flesh and Blood cannot resist anothes Trade or
Business tempts him to others that he thinks it is impossible to get a
Livelihood without them, he cannot drive his Bargains with his Customers
without immoderate drinking nor Sell and Trade in the World without Customary
Lying and perhaps Swearing, and to persuade Men out of those that their
Convenience and Condition or their Temper or Complexion do so strongly dispose
'em to, is to pluck out a right eye and cut off a right hand, I confess it is
so in our Saviors sense, but it is also very necessary to do this, to Cut off
even the most pleasant or advantageous Sin and deny even the most darling and
beloved Lust if we would not be cast into Hell hereafter and into a Bad State
at present, our Saviors words there suppose and imply that, but as he says
it is more profitable, more for our good Interest and Advantage to forego any
pleasure and part with any Advantage then for the sake of them to expose our
selves to such a miserable state.

He that is truly afraid of Hell will not dare to live in any such sin as he
knows will bring him thither, he must be strangely thoughtless and
inconsiderate or else a downright Atheist Infidel or Sceptick who can allow
himself in any such sinful Liberties and undue Practices as are directly
contrary to Religion and inconsistent with all the fears and the hopes of it
and as one would think with all true Faith and belief of another World, but let
every one that has those and any serious sense of Religion remaining upon his
Mind not venture to indulge himself in any secret or known Sin nor harbor any
beloved vice or wickedness in his Soul, but let him though with the greatest
Self-denial to his Temper or difficulty to his Circumstances and Condition in
the World break it off and tear it from his heart though it stick by never so
many strings and fibers and be like a second Nature grown to it, like a Cancer
it will certainly kill us if it be not thus torn from the breast and so
perfectly cut off, that none of its spreading Venom or Poison remain behind. He
that has had any such mortal illness growing upon his Mind or been guilty of
any such wilful Sin as puts him into an ill state, must thus Repent of it so
as never again to commit it nor live in the practice of it afterward or else
till he do this he can have no hopes that he is recovered or got out of it, nor
any reasonable grounds to believe that he is in a Condition any way hopeful or
comfortable, for

Lastly, It Is only this mark of not committing any known and wilful sin that
distinguishes good Men who are born of God from those who are wicked and the
children of the Devil and Enemies to God, and to be sure there must be some
very great and notorious difference between them and some plain and evident
marks by which they may be known from one another, now those are plainly given
us by St. John, 1 Ep. 3. c. 8, 9. ver. He that commits sin is of the Devil
and whosoever is born of God does not commit sin. Where nothing less can be
meant by committing sin then living in the practice of any known sin or wilful
wickedness which destroys the image of God upon the mind and so defiles and
depraves our Souls that they are unlike to the pure and holy and unspotted
Nature of God, and when any Vice of Pride, Lust Malice or the like abides upon
them they bear these Marks and Signatures and likeness of accursed Fiends and
of their Father the Devil upon them in Scripture phrase: There are none such
great Sinners as to break all the Divine Laws, some sins are contrary to one
another, and some may be contrary to our Inclinations, Complexions, or
Conditions and Employments, but he that will violate any one Law as it suits
with any of those and will gratify any Lust or Temptation as it is offered to
him, he is one whom the Scripture denominates a Sinner in the high sense, i. e.
one who stands condemned by it to an ill state here, and to Eternal Misery
hereafter, We are all Sinners in a low sense as I shall show presently when I
come to state the difference of Men's sins, and enquire what are and what are
not consistent with a good state, but no Judgment could be made between a Good
and a Bad Man if this did not distinguish them that the one though he may be
encompast with a great many frailties and infirmities yet never allows himself
in one wilful known and deliberate wickedness which the other does; There may
be degrees both of Sinners and of Good Men, some have attained to greater
improvements and perfections both in Vice and Virtue and are more the Children
of God or the Children of the Devil but that which divides their States and
cuts the Line of difference between them must be this that the one allows
himself in the practice of some known sin or sins which the other does not but
carefully avoyds, and never commits any such wilful Wickedness.

Though this seems very plain and undeniable and I have endeavored to convince
every one of the truth of it by the several Arguments I have brought to prove
it, it being of great use to them to Judge and Examine themselves by this plain
and certain Mark and Criterion instead of the many false and uncertain ones
that are given out as signs of Grace, and to judge thereby of their Spiritual
Condition, and know whether they are in a Good or Bad State, yet there are two
seemingly great objections against it, The one is the quite other Character and
Account which St. Paul gives of himself in the Seventh Chapter to the Romans
who was undoubtedly in a good state and a Regenerate Man and yet speaks of sin
dwelling in him, ver. 17. and that the good which he would he did not, but the
evil which he would not, that he did; ver. 19. and that there was a war in his
members warring against the law of his mind and bringing him into captivity to
the law of sin which is in his members, ver. 23. etc. The other is that no Man
lives without sin, and that it is impossible he should, for in many things we
offend all, and if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves as the Apostle
says, and therefore to exclude all from a state of Grace who live in any sin
and to make the not committing sin the only true Mark and Sign of Grace is a
very hard saying and a very severe thing and in effect is an excluding all
Mankind since all are Sinners some way or other and none are so perfect as to
live wholly without Sin: Now the first of these I shall answer very briefly
because I would not enter into any long dispute about the sense of that
Chapter, and the other I shall more largely consider in a distinct Section
because it will occasion my giving an account of the difference of sins, what
are and what are not consistent with a Good State which is a very material
point in the right stating and understanding the Nature of Repentance and the
Nature of Sin.

First then as to St. Paul's description of himself, Romans 7. One of these two
things must be allowed by all Sober and Understanding Men.

1. That if he speaks in the Person of a Regenerate Man, as some would have it,
then all the Phrases and Expressions of sin dwelling in him, and the like must
relate only to those sins of Frailty and Infirmity which a good Man is liable
to and cannot be wholly free from and which are therefore consistent with a
good State, as I shall particularly show in the next Section; A Good Man, who
is especially under a state of imperfect goodness and not arrived to any great
degree of Christian perfection may say of himself in many Cases, that which I
do I allow not I am guilty of many a hasty word, and undue passion and
unreasonable desire and foolish imagination and the like which I do not approve
of with my reason, but dislike and wish I could be perfectly free from, and so
in many cases may say what I would that I do not many degrees of Charity and
Devotion and other Virtues which I willingly would yet I do not perform, nor
come up to such a pitch of goodness as I gladly would but fall short in many
things of my Duty, and such seize as I would propose and come up to, such
an one may be very sensible of the body of death and the bondage of Corruption
he is in and of the strength of Concupiscence and the Law in his Members
warring against the Law of his Mind, Chap. 4. Sect. 3. But these may only
relate to such Imperfections and Infirmities and sins of Frailty and Infirmity
as may consist with a Good State and belong to a Good Man, but they are by no
means to be applied further to the committing any wilful and known and
presumptuous sin which cannot be said of a Regenerate Man or one in a good
state, and therefore,

2. Some of those Expressions in that Chapter seem to be such as cannot belong
to a Good Man such as those ver. 14. I am carnal sold under sin, ver. 23. That
the law of his members brought him into captivity to the law of sin, ver. 25.
That with his flesh he served the law of sin, So that St. Paul seems to speak
here not of himself as a good Christian but of an Unregenerate Person under the
Convictions of the Law, and though he uses his own name yet it is by a
Metaschematism a Figure usual to him in other places, as Gal. 2.17, 18. If I
build again the things which I destroy I make my self a transgressor, and we
our selves are still found sinners, Romans 3.7. If the truth of God has more
abounded through my lie, why yet am I judged as a sinner; where though he uses
his own Name yet it is under the Person of a Blasphemous Objector, and 1 Cor.
13.2. If I have all faith and no charity what does it profit me; which is an
inoffensive way of transferring odious things to our selves when we would
describe and reprove them; Thus St. Paul here only personates an unregenerate
Man, for in other places he gives a quite other Character of a Regenerate one
directly contrary to what is here, as that He has crucified the flesh with the
affections and lust, Gal. 5.24. and crucified the old man, Romans 6.6. and that
he is dead to sin, Romans 16.11. and free from sin and the servant of
Righteousness; Whereas here it is said, that sin dwelt in him, that he was
carnal sold under sin, that the law of his members led him into captivity to
the law of sin, and that with his flesh he served the law of sin, this must be
the state not of a good Christian, but of a Man at least under the Law and
therefore the Apostle in opposition to this immediately describes the other
more happy state of a Christian under the Gospel in the next Chapter and in
answer to the grievous Exclamation, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of death, he comfortably replies to himself, I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord, ver. 25. i. e. there is a remedy for it by
Christ and Christianity, and the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has
made me free from the law of sin and death, ver. 2. chap. 8.

The Answer to the other Objection will be fully given in the next Section.

SECT. II. The Differences of Sins, what are and what are not consistent with a
good State.
THAT all Men are Sinners not only Experience but the Scriptures do in many
places assure us, that there is not a righteous man upon earth who sins not;
that in many things we offend all; and that if we say we have no sin we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us; by which is not only meant that no Man
is wholly free from all manner of Sin in the whole course of his Life, or can
pass all his days without falling into some Sin or other, but that no part of
his Life, even when he is come to his best State, a State of Grace and Virtue,
is so perfect as to be quite sinless, and without any Sin of what kind soever,
so that he should not be obliged to beg Pardon of God, and say daily, Forgive
us our Trespasses. Now this as it is matter of Humiliation to the best Men, so
it is turned to another use and quite different purpose by the worst; they
comfort themselves in all their greatest Sins that all Men are Sinners as well
as themselves, that none are free from all Sins, and let them that are so cast
the first stone at them, they plainly confound hereby the different states of
good and bad Men, and are not willing to distinguish or make such a true
judgment as the Scripture does plainly between them, for the same Scripture
that tells us all are Sinners and has concluded all under Sin, yet declare
that every wilful Sin is damnable, and that they who commit it and live in the
practice of it shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and that he who
shall keep all the law besides and yet offend in any one point is guilty of
all, and shall be punished as truly though not so fully for one wilful
unrepented Sin as for more.

There is no way to reconcile this, and take off any seeming difficulty about
it, but by that plain difference which both Scripture and Reason allow between
Sins, that some of them are Sins of Frailty and Infirmity which are unavoidable
to us in our present state, and which are consistent with a good one, and which
the best of Men cannot live wholly without whilst they are in this Body of
Flesh and Blood, and that others are wilful and presumptuous, known and
deliberate Sins which are committed with full consent of the Mind, and against
a plain Law of God, and with that presumption and disobedience that makes them
unpardonable without a particular Repentance and a perfect Amendment. It
concerns us very carefully to distinguish and know the difference between those
and not to err to be sure, on the wrong side by judging too kindly of our
Sins, and calling those Infirmities and Weaknesses which are Sins of Wilfulness
and Presumption; nor can we without judging right and avoiding Mistakes on
either hand judge truly and comfortably of our selves, and know what our
Spiritual state is, or what condition we are in as to God and another World.
The only way to be safe is to avoid every Sin, at least every wilful Sin, and
to grow up to as high a degree of Virtue and Goodness as we can, and to get as
much mastery over all our Imperfections and Infirmities as is possible; but
since some Sins and Frailties will cleave to us whilst we carry this body of
Sin and of Death about us, we may use the Psalmists excellent Prayer both for
our Instruction and our Devotion, Psalm. 19.12, 13. Who can understand his
errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults, keep back thy servant also from
presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me, then shall I be upright,
and I shall be innocent from the great transgression; where he gives us an
account of several sorts of Sins: 1. Such as he calls Errors and secret Faults,
by which are meant Sins of Ignorance and Infirmity, which we are to pray God to
forgive and free us from as well as from others. 2. Presumptuous Sins which
implye such as are both known and wilful, and those 3. such as have dominion
over one, a reigning habitual prevailing power; now if we be kept free from
these latter though not the former, we are safe and out of danger, in a state
of sincerity and favor with God, and shall be treated as Righteous and Good
Men notwithstanding those lesser Faults. Then shall I be upright, and I shall
be innocent from the great transgression; i. e. from any such Sin as shall
endanger my Soul, and expose it to Misery and Damnation. I shall consider and
explain these several sorts of Sins.

1. Errors and secret Faults, Sins of Ignorance and Infirmity, such as we knew
not to be Sins when we committed them, either by a downright ignorance and not
knowing any Law of God that forbad them, or by thoughtlesness surprise and
inconsideration, being unawares engaged in them before we could think or
consider.

As to Sins of Ignorance our Savior told the Pharisees, John 9.41. If ye were
blind ye should have no sin; i. e. If ye had been perfectly ignorant of the
Messiahs coming into the World, and had had no knowledge of this by the
Prophesies of old, and by the Miracles which ye see me do, then your Infidelity
and Unbelief had been excusable and without Sin. Where Christianity is not
revealed, as to the Heathen World, where Faith is not proposed to Men with
those Arguments and Reasons which should persuade to it, there God will not
condemn them for their Ignorance which they could no way help, and which was
only their misfortune and not their fault.

Our Blessed Savior says of the Jews, If I had not come and spoken unto them
they had not had sin, Joh. 15.22. i. e. the Sin of Disbelieving and Rejecting
him; as to other Sins known by their own Law, those they had been answerable
for to God, as St. Paul says, As many as have sinned in the law shall be
judged by the law, Romans 2.12. and as many as have sinned without law shall
perish without law; i. e. the Gentiles who had not the Law of Moses shall be
condemned for their Sins by the Law of Nature.

It has been an uncharitable Question whether any of the Gentiles should be
saved? Now though they cannot be saved in an ordinary way, by Virtue of the
Christian Covenant to which they have no title or claim, yet God may in
extraordinary Mercy let all Mankind have the benefit of it, and save them by
Christ though they know him not; but I am sure he will never condemn them for
not knowing Christianity or the Gospel which was not promulged or revealed to
them.

There are many others whose Ignorance will no doubt excuse them before God at
the last day, such who have lived under the darkness of Popery, and had no
opportunity to know the gross Corruptions of it; and others who by their
unhappy Circumstances, and want of Education have had no means of instruction
in the things of Religion, God will make gracious abatements to all those for
this and the consequent ignorance thereupon it which they could not help, and
which was all things considered unavoidable to them, and they will obtain Mercy
like St. Paul for a great many faults because they did them ignorantly, 1 Timothy
1.13.

There can be no plea or pretense for this in any of the plain and great Duties
of Morality, because those are all known by the Light of Nature which God has
set up in every Man's Mind, and which is the great security of all Religion: But
in matters purely positive and which have not that clear evidence for them, but
there may be occasion for mistakes and misunderstandings in things that are not
so clearly Good and Evil in themselves, but are of another Nature, of a
positive and arbitrary Institution, there Men's Errors and Ignorances and
Prejudices may excuse in great measure, though they act not according to the
Rules of Christianity and those Orders which Christ and his Apostles have set
up in the Church; and this is all the ground of Charity I can have for the
deluded and ignorant Sectaries of all sorts, many of which with honest
well-meaning Minds may have great weakness of Judgment and want of
Understanding, but God will judge Men at the last day rather by the probity and
sincerity and honesty of their Wills than by the truth and rightness of their
Understandings. Indeed if Men's Ignorance be affected and wilful and such as
they might easily help if they would use means of instruction and information,
and fairly consider and examine things with such helps as they have, then this
Ignorance becomes a chosen fault of the Will, and so much as there is of that
in it so far it is criminal and blamable, and this is its condemnation that it
loves darkness rather than light, and refuses knowledge and instruction, and
hates the light neither comes to the light lest its deeds should be reproved,
Joh. 3.20.

There is an Ignorance of the Law and of the Fact, we may either not know that
there is such a Command given by God, or though there be such a Law that such
an action comes not under it or is forbidden by it, as many are not sensible
there is such a Law concerning Church Union and Communion as forbids all Schism
and Separation, unless the terms of Communion are sinful and unlawful, or they
do not think that worshipping God in their own way falls under the crime of
sinful Schism or breach of Charity, but think it a very indifferent thing, and
that there is no harm in it. Very many I doubt not do this, and it is only their
Ignorance can excuse them from a Sin that is very contrary to the great
Commands of Christian Peace and Unity. So others think there is no Idolatry in
worshipping God before an Image, or Christ in the Host or Eucharist, or praying
to the Virgin Mary and Saints and Angels, and giving them a lesser worship than
they do to God himself, and how far their Ignorance shall excuse them God only
can judge, but so far as it is no fault of their Wills, and is consistent with
the honesty and sincerity of their Minds, and is Morally unavoidable to them,
so far it will be excused.

Next to Sins of Ignorance are Sins of Surprise and Inadvertency, when though
we are not ignorant that such actions are sinful and against a Divine Law, yet
we do not consider it at that time nor are aware that they are so. As on a
sudden Passion when we have not time to think, when Fear or Anger does so
suddenly arrest our thoughts that we have not time to consider that what we do
is blamable and faulty, though we know it is upon reflection and consideration.
Thus St. Paul when he called the High Priest whited wall, Acts 23.3. being
provoked by his unreasonable command that they should smite him on the mouth
for saying only, that he had lived in all good Conscience before God to this
day, ver. 1. when he was reproved for this by some who stood by and said,
Revilest thou Gods high priest, He returned this Answer, I wist not brethren
that it was the high priest. I did not consider it, I was not aware of it, it
was done inadvertently, for I know it is written in Gods Law, Thou shall not
speak evil of the ruler of thy people.

Thus even St. Peter's denial of Christ was out of a sudden fright and a fear
that he should be so used as he saw his Master was, and he considered not all
his warnings, nor heard or minded the Cock crowing twice till Christ reminded
him and looked upon him, and the Cock crew again, and then he went out and wept
bitterly, for it was a grievous Sin though it had something of surprise and
inadvertency in it, and therefore found Pardon sooner than those deliberate
Apostasies and Denyings of Christ, which the Epistle to the Hebrews speaks of
as more unpardonable than the Gospel represents this.

Thus Moses in a Passion threw down the Tables of the Divine Law, and brake
them beneath the mount, Exodus 32.19. though the Tables were the work of God,
and the Writing was the Writing of God graven upon the Tables, as it is said
there, and so 'twas a great disrespect to God, ver. 16. he being suddenly and
extremely provoked with the sight of the Golden Calf, and the Idolatrous
dancing of the People about it.

Thus a good Man may be surprised with a sudden Passion, an undue Anger, hasty
and rash words, and speaking unadvisedly with his Lips, and he may before he is
aware be surprised with a Temptation that shall make him have an undue Desire,
an unreasonable Wish, a Lustful or Covetous Thought or Look, though he would
not when he considers and bethinks himself commit any unlawful act persuant or
consequent to any of those, but the suddenness of the thing gives him not time
to recollect or use his Reason as he would do, and this proceeds from an
unavoidable infirmity of Mind which cannot always be upon its guard and
provided against sudden surprises, but must think of a great many other things
besides those of Religion.

3. Those Natural Inclinations and first Motions of Concupiscence that are in
us to things forbidden and unlawful are only Sins of Infirmity, if they go no
further than those first Motions Thoughts and Desires, and the Mind does not
give any consent to them, nor indulge or approve them, nor would gratify them
unduly and unlawfully had it power and opportunity; for those first Motions and
Inclinations are necessary and unavoidable arising from the frame and
constitution of our Nature, and the Mechanism of our Body, Blood and Spirits,
so that we can no more help or prevent them than we can the senses of Pain and
Pleasure, or the Appetites of Thirst or Hunger, or the Motions and Impressions
of outward Objects made upon our Senses, and therefore they are not simply evil
but good in themselves so far as they are Natural, and intended by God to serve
the good of the World and of particular Persons and the wise ends of
Providence, but as they are irregular and inordinate, excessive and immoderate,
and destroy those ends for which God intended them so far they are sinful, and
when any of those Natural Appetites or Sensual Inclinations grow too strong and
unruly, and are not kept under the government of Reason or within the bounds of
Virtue and Religion, then they carry Men to all looseness and wickedness, and
make them commit Sin and Uncleanness with greediness

A good Man may with St. Paul be very sensible and complain of this body of sin
and of death, and of the law of sin that is in his members, of many irregular
Appetites and undue Passions, and weak and foolish imaginations and
unreasonable desires and inclinations, of too quick gusts of Sensual things,
and too much deadness of Spiritual, of having too many thoughts and designs for
Earthly and present things and too little zeal and affection for things
Heavenly that are a thousand times more valuable. These are imperfections that
are in the best of us, and we see that they are so, and are very sensible and
complain of them, but yet we cannot wholly avoid them, but after all our
thoughts and all our care they still return upon us, and the Flesh will lust
against the Spirit, and there will be a perpetual war and struggle between
them; but if the Spirit do so far prevail by the helps of Grace and
considerations of Religion, that it do never yield to any wilful Sin, it shall
then be rewarded as a Conqueror, which though it did not wholly subdue and
drive out that homebred enemy, yet kept it always under, and made it submit to
its Government and not keep up an open Rebellion against it. Of this I have
largely discoursed in the Third Section of the Third Chapter.

I proceed now to those Sins which are known wilful and presumptuous, habitual
and reigning in us, any one of which is inconsistent with a good State, and
excludes us out of Gods Favor here and Heaven hereafter; such as the Psalmist
in the forequoted place prays against, Keep back thy servant also from
presumptuous sins lest they get the dominion over me.

All known and wilful Sins are presumptuous, as being done in defiance of a
Divine Authority that we know has forbid them, and in contempt of God and his
Laws to whom we owe all Honor and Obedience, and notwithstanding all those
threatenings and severe punishments that God has denounced against them, He that
sins wilfully after he has received the knowledge of the truth of these things
there remains nothing for him but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and
fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries.

This is despising the Law of God, thus wittingly and wilfully to break it, and
is sinning with a high hand and a most presumptuous boldness, when we choose to
do that which we know is most highly displeasing to Heaven, and which God has
laid all the obligations he possibly can upon us not to do.

When any such Sin gets dominion over us so that it becomes customary and
habitual to us, it makes us the Devils slaves and captives at his Will, and
shows that he is our Master and that we are the Servants of Sin, and overcome
by that and brought in bondage to it, that it prevails upon our Minds above all
the Power of Reason and Principles of Religion, and that we choose it above all
the great things of Heaven and another World that Religion offers to us, and
think it more desirable than any of those and had rather gratify a paltry Lust
and a foolish Inclination than save our Souls and have all the favor of God,
that we prefer it before any other good, and let it have the ascendant in our
Love and Affections above all other things; for it is utterly inconsistent with
any Love of God or any due regard to him, and banishes all Principles of
Religion out of our Minds and destroys all sincerity and uprightness of Heart
toward God, and abandons us to a state of enmity with him and everlasting
destruction hereafter.

This I have shown is true of every wilful and chosen and known Sin.

I shall now from the distinction I have given you of these Sins from those of
Infirmity, Ignorance and Inadvertency, make the following Inferences and
Remarks.

1. That those Sins of Infirmity are to be Repented of, i. e. we are to be
sorry for them, and pray God to forgive them: Though they do not destroy our
good state, nor deprive us of Gods Favor here or Heaven hereafter, yet they
are such as are to be matter of Trouble and Sorrow and Humiliation to us, and
we are daily to pray God to forgive us our Trespasses as Christ has taught us
in the Lords Prayer; and the Psalmist in the place before mentioned prays God
to cleanse him from his secret faults as well as to keep him back from
presumptuous Sins. For

2. These are true and proper Sins, and though they are not charged upon us to
our Condemnation, yet this is by the great Favor and Mercy of God, and by
Virtue of the Gracious Covenant made in Christ with Mankind, for otherwise God
in Rigor and Justice might punish and condemn us for them. The Papists hold a
distinction between Sins Mortal and Venial in their own Nature, i. e. that some
Sins are in themselves damnable and others not, which the Protestants have
generally opposed for this Reason, because all Sin is in it self Mortal, and in
its own Nature deserves Death, as being (...), a breach and transgression of a
Divine Law whose sanction is Death, but it is pardonable only by Gods Mercy on
the account of its circumstances which make it more excusable with a good and
merciful God, but that it is not of it self venial or so little as not to
deserve Punishment, they prove from hence that we are bound to pray God to
forgive it. Now it is pure Grace and Favor for God to forgive, and what he is
not obliged to; and if he is not obliged to pardon it, he may punish it were it
not for his Mercy and Goodness, and the Gracious Covenant he has made with us
in the Gospel. This should therefore,

3. Make us very sensible of Gods infinite Mercy and kind dealing with us by
the Covenant of Grace. How many innumerable Sins and Frailties are we guilty of
in our Lives which are in strictness deviations from the Divine Law? How many
secret Sins are we to be cleansed and freed from which we might be ignorant of
when we committed or not remember afterward, and which are forgotten by us and
blotted out of our memories, though they are not out of Gods, but he might impute
and charge them to us would he enter into strict Judgment with us? How many
foolish Thoughts, rash Words, irregular Passions, unreasonable Desires are we
daily guilty of, and how many defects and omissions of doing our Duty with less
degrees of ardency frequency and perfection then we ought to do; these all
stand in need of Divine Mercy, and this we shall be sure of for Christ's sake if
we are sincere and hearty and upright in our Obedience, but this is a mighty
Favor of God and of the New Covenant, and calls for a great sense of
Thankfulness and Gratitude.

To say we sin daily, and that the best things we do have Sin mixed with them is
true in a certain sense as there is some defect and imperfection in our most
Holy Duties, and that we have some Infirmities that we ought daily to confess
and beg forgiveness of at Gods hands, but this is by no means true of any such
wilful Sin as every good Man must be free from whilst he is in a good state,
and has a title to Heaven.

Under the Law God had provided a standing Expiation for the lesser Sins of
Ignorance and Infirmity by the daily and other Sacrifices, but there was none
for presumptuous Sins, but he that was guilty of them was to be cut off and dye
without Mercy by the Law of Moses. Christianity is a more Gracious
Dispensation, and allows Pardon for the greatest Sin upon Repentance and
Amendment, and the Blood of Christ is a standing Expiation for those and all
the lesser and daily Sins we commit, and Christ is our daily Advocate and
Intercessor with God for them.

4. When the Scripture says that we are all Sinners, and that if we say we
have no Sin we deceive our selves, and that there is not a Righteous Man who
lives and sins not, and we by our daily Confessions own our selves to be
daily Sinners; this is meant only of those lesser Sins of Frailty and
Infirmity, Ignorance and Inconsideration which I have explained to you, which
are consistent with a good State, which regenerate and holy Men are not quite
free from, which neither destroy our own sincerity nor Gods love to us nor our
reasonable hopes of Heaven, but any other Sins that are of a wilful and
presumptuous Nature, those a good Man must be wholly free from, or else he
loses his Goodness and becomes a Child of Wrath and Damnation, till he recovers
himself by Repentance; and if he ever falls into any such, he must exercise a
most bitter and particular course of Repentance, and put himself into a state
of great Penitence, and bring himself to an entire amendment and forsaking of
it till he can have any well grounded hopes of Pardon and Salvation.

There have been a great many Disputes about attaining Perfection of Obedience
and Virtue in this Life; some holding Erroneously that they could absolutely
and fully come up to it and live wholly without Sin; others as Erroneously that
they were such daily Sinners as deserved daily Gods Wrath and Damnation, and
that they sinned in every thing they did. Now these extremes of Errors are
easily reconciled and cleared this way, that no one can come up to absolute
Perfection so as to live without the lesser Sins of Frailty and Infirmity, but
every good Man ought to be so perfect as to live without any wilful chosen and
known Sin.

5. Even those lesser Sins we must strive against and endeavor to overcome and
master, and pray for the Divine Grace, and use all care and watchfulness
against them, else they become wilful and voluntary by our neglect of them, and
not using a due diligence to prevent and hinder them. Smaller Sins like lesser
and smaller Diseases may affect and indispose the most sound and healthful
Constitution, but if they are neglected and suffered to grow too much upon it,
they may become great and mortal. The first motions of Concupiscence are not
strict Sins or at most but Sins of Infirmity, but if those first sparks are not
put out as soon as they are kindled but are suffered to glow and kindle within
by morose thoughts and indulged fancies and imaginations, they will break out
into some undue acts and outward effects. If the Passions and Appetites that
are Natural to us are not mortified by due care exercise and thoughtfulness
they will grow masterless and ungovernable, and be at the beck of every
Temptation that invites them, and run greedily after every Lust that lays a
proper object in their way or sets it before them. A hasty fit of Anger if it
be not put out may not go off in a sudden blaze and expire in its own sudden
heats and Passion, but the Choleric humor may concoct into malice and revenge
and habitual spite and ill will, and so may a fretful peevishness and sharpness
of Temper spread like a Tetter, and grow incurable, and eat out all that
sweetness and meekness, kindness love and good Nature, which are to be the
Virtues of a Christian in all the proper acts of them, however sower be their
Blood or predominant their Spleen. God may abate in great measure for an
unhappy Constitution, but he will never allow any wilful Sin as the effect of
it. We must guard our selves with greater care and watchfulness where we know
we lie open to any such weakness, and call in all the helps of Religion to
fortify and defend us against any such enemy that we are so much in danger of,
else an impure an angry a covetous an ambitious thought and inclination
nourished in our Hearts and not watched over and corrected, may like a
poisonous seed or root of bitterness if suffered to grow up, bring forth all
the fruits that proceed from it, and make all those sinful corruptions in the
Heart become wilful Sins, and produce actual Transgressions in our Lives.

We must not allow our selves in any Sins whatever upon pretense of their being
little, for if we do they become wilful and chosen; and as the Wise Man says,
He that sins by little and little shall perish by little and little. A small
leak in a Ship may if it be not stopped let in Water enough in time to sink it,
and a small breach in the banks of a Sea-wall may cause a general inundation.

Some little Sins will adhere to the best of Men, but they must not be
voluntary or consented to but brought upon them by ignorance surprise or
inadvertency, and some unavoidable cause or necessity, which Morally speaking
is so to them, and they can never perfectly help it, for so much of will as
there is in any Sin, so much there is of guilt, and whatever abatements there
are in our willing it, by the Minds not knowing or not thinking of it, or being
unawares engaged in it, and not having the full use of its powers of choice or
understanding, so much there is of excuse for it, and so far its circumstances
make it pardonable by a good God who will not condemn us for any thing we
cannot help, and which it was not in our power to avoid, and all Sins of
Infirmity are such some way or other, for who can help being ignorant and
mistaken after he has used the best ways he can to inform himself of his Duty,
and if he then commit a Sin ignorantly, and through the mere error and weakness
of his Understanding, God will forgive it him.

So who can be always so much upon his guard and have his thoughts so much
about him as not to say a rash and unfit word or do a some way blameable
action, or not have some inward motions and sensual desires rising up in his
Mind contrary to strict Reason and Religion. If God should for every one of
these enter into Judgment with us or condemn us, no Man could be saved, and no
Flesh living could be justified: But he who considers our frame and knows that
we are but dust, weak, imperfect, blind, ignorant, inconsiderate, heedless
Creatures, made up of Sensual Passions, Appetites and Inclinations that are a
part of our Nature, he will deal very graciously and favorably with us, and
not punish us for any unavoidable weaknesses of our Nature but only for the
wilful faults and presumptuous miscarriages that we wittingly and willingly
commit against him and his Laws.

God alone can perfectly judge and exactly distinguish between all the faults
of weakness and wilfulness, and tell what degrees of voluntary and involuntary,
and so of blame and guilt are in them, he knows our Hearts and searches our
Reins, and can better judge of our Actions and the secret springs of them than
our selves.

In great and notorious cases every Man's Conscience can judge for him, but God
is greater than our Consciences and knows all things, and if we sincerely
avoid every wilful and great and notorious Sin, and would not for any
Temptation in the World commit it, if as the Psalmist says, We be upright and
innocent from the great transgression, it is to be hoped all our other Sins and
Miscarriages are Sins of pardonable Weakness and excusable Infirmity, that do
no way endanger our good State; and whatever wilful Sins we have been guilty of
through the whole course of our Lives, our having left them and truly Repented
of them, as I have directed, frees us from all the dangers of them, and puts us
into the Blessed State of Pardon and Forgiveness, notwithstanding the lesser
Sins of Frailty and Infirmity which we cannot live wholly without.

SECT. III. The Benefits of Repentance or the happiness of being in such a good
state.
THE Effects and Benefits of true Repentance such as I have described and such
as I have given the sure Marks and Criteria of are Pardon and Forgiveness,
which are very great things and very comfortable words to a poor Sinner to whom
nothing can be said more reviving than those few words which Christ pronounced
to the Paralytick, Matthew. 9.2. and which he pronounces by the Gospel to every
true Penitent, Son be of good cheer thy sins be forgiven thee; these are words
as powerful and effectual as tose of Lazarus come forth and let there be light,
they will raise a drooping dead Soul out of the Grave and restore Life and
Comfort to him, they will make light spring out of darkness and dispel the
doleful black State he was in and make lightsome joy and gladness arise in his
Soul, nothing can be said so chearing and refreshing so ravishing and
transporting to him unless those other words which will follow upon it, Go ye
blessed, receive the Kingdom prepared for you, it is a very blessed and a very
happy state at present next to Heaven it self to have our sins pardoned and
forgiven and to be freed from that miserable and wretched state into which they
put us, if we are but duly sensible of it as we ought to be, How would a
Criminal that was before condemned and lay under the Sentence of Death, be
affected do we think and his Spirit cheared and his Heart leap within him and a
new Life be put into him when a Pardon is brought him from his Prince and he is
discharged from his condemned state and took off from the Cart or the Ladder, A
Thousand times more reason has a poor Sinner to be raised and comforted when by
the Mercy of God and the Love of Christ his past sins and guilt are taken away
upon his true and sincere Repentance, The Scripture has pronounced such an one
blessed in an especial manner by the Mouth of David, Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is the
Man whose transgression is forgiven and whose sin is covered; and St. Paul
could not find out any thing better to describe the blessedness of a Christian
by the Gospel then by borrowing the same words as he tells us of David, Romans
4.6. the Holy Ghost inspiring both of them with the same Words and Idea's of
Blessedness to Sinners, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven and
whose sins are covered, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.

I shall show the Blessedness of this State and Condition which Repentance puts
a Sinner into upon these accounts.

1. As it frees him from the present miserable state he was in by reason of his
Sins. 2. As he is delivered thereby from the fears of another World, and the
more dreadful dangers hereafter. 3. As he is hereby reconciled to God and
restored to his favor who was angry and displeased with him before.
First as it frees him from the present miserable state he was in by reason of
his Sins. Nothing is so painful and uneasy so perplexing and tormenting as
guilt when it lies heavy upon a Man's Mind and he has a quick sense and
apprehension of it, this is to be stung with Scorpions to be whipped with Snakes
to have burning Torches and all the conceived instruments of torture applied to
us, There is no torment so great as a Man's Conscience struck with the horrors
of its own guilt, haunted with its own fears as so many Furies or evil Spirits
following and disturbing it wherever it goes, when it has the image of its own
foul actions always before it, and imagines a Divine Judgment and Nemesis
always behind it, when the very chattering of the Birds speaks its crimes to it
as in a known story, and the handwriting upon the wall makes it tremble and be
amazed, and its own inward Consciousness makes it hear and see and read its sad
doom and sentence in all places and on all occasions, what a lamentable
condition must a Man be in when he lies thus under the load of his sins and the
burden is greater than he can bear, and his perplexed mind is in such Agonies
and Anguish as is unexpressible; That sure must be a very comfortable thing
which will take him off of this Rack, and put him into a state of Ease and
Quiet when he is thus tormented, and be a present Anodyne to relieve his pains.
Mankind therefore were in all times very inquisitive and very much concerned to
find out a way if it was possible to expiate sin and atone guilt, they built
Altars and offered Sacrifices and slew Thousands of Sheep and Oxen upon an
hundred Hills and came by degrees to offer up Men and to slay their own
Children and to give their first born for their transgression, the fruit of
their bodies for the sin of their Souls, as the Prophet expresses it Micah 6.7.
They would part with any thing however costly or dear to them to free
themselves from the pain and fear they were under and give any hopes or ease to
their conscious and timorous and perplexed Minds, This was a great cause of most
of the Heathen Superstitions, of their Purgations, Lustrations Sacrifices and
the like, whereby they hoped to clear and purify their guilty minds and
appease the Anger of that Divine Vengeance that they were sensible hung over
their heads by reason of their sins; This showed the greatness of the Disease
and the want and necessity there was of a Remedy for it, which they being
ignorant of, used all the means they could think of and tried all ways however
odd and foolish to help themselves; but it was only Christianity could fully
make known the Expiation of sin by the Sacrifice of Christ and our having
Redemption by his blood even the forgiveness of sins upon our true Repentance,
Colos. 1.14.

This is the most blessed Message and Gospel from Heaven to a poor guilty
Sinner, this is preaching good tidings to the meek and humble sinner, Binding
up the brokenhearted, proclaiming liberty to the captives, opening the prison
to them that are bound, comforting them that mourn, as the Gospel is described
by the Prophet, Isa. 61.1. and in our Saviors own phrase it is giving rest to
them that are weary and heavy laden by reason of their sins, Matthew. 11.28. when
though we are conscious to our se ves of a great many faults we have committed
in our lives and some of them such as fill us with shame horror and confusion
when we think of them yet we are assured they are all blotted out by Repentance
and the whole guilt of them done away as if we had never committed them, this
gives great ease and peace to our thoughts when our Conscience is thus
discharged of all guilt and the terrible fears and apprehensions of it; this is
more comfortable to the mind than to be eased of the most tormenting pain of
body, to have voided a sharp stone after a fit or have a throbbing Ulcer broke
and cured, it is unexpressible pleasure to be put thus out of pain, and be
restored to the peace and comfort of a Man's own Mind, when he had once lost it.

He who has so truly Repented of his Sins as I have directed has all Reason
for this, for he has as sure grounds of Pardon and needs no more fear
Punishment than if he had been always innocent and never had offended or done
any thing amiss; though his Sins filled his Mind with Sorrow before, and gathered
all the black Clouds of Grief and Melancholy over his thoughts, yet now they
ought to be dispersed and he may cheer up and be comforted. If he has any Fears
they are unreasonable, for if his Sins are perfectly gone they ought to be gone
too.

While he was under the guilt of his Sins he had reason with St. Peter to weep
bitterly, with David to wash his bed with his tears, that Bed which he had so
polluted before; with Mary Magdalen to vent so many tears as might wash her
Saviors feet, and then wipe them with the Hair of her Head, that so she might
do Penance with those Meretricious Eyes and Locks which had drawn others into
Sin. The Pious Penitents of old had all the signs and symptoms of the deepest
mourning and lamentation for their sins, ashes upon their head, sackcloth upon
their loins, lying down in their confusion because they had sinned, striking
their Breasts with the Publican and every one crying out in the anguish of his
Soul with the Psalmist, My iniquities are gone over my head, and are a heavy
burden too grievous for me to bear: My iniquities have taken hold upon me, so
that I am not able to look up, they are more than the hairs of my head,
therefore my heart fails me: These are the words, and these the Passions and
this the Picture of a Penitent under a state of penitence and the guilt of his
sins, but now upon his true Repentance all Tears are to be wiped from his Eyes,
or at least the same fountain is to send forth sweet Water that did bitter and
that is to become a Balm and an Oil of gladness to his Soul which was so sharp
and corrosive before, His Repentance will now be his greatest comfort which was
so severe and so bitter before, and when his Wounds are healed and bound up and
the operation is over, The bones which were broken will rejoice and he will
hear of joy and gladness instead of sighs sorrow and contrition. He who had so
much Reason to be angry and displeased with himself before by reason of his
Sins and his Folly, will now be pleased and satisfied when he is grown wiser
and better, and will have that solid satisfaction and lasting pleasure in his
own Mind, which is a thousand times greater than all the vain and empty and
short-lived pleasures of his Lusts and Vices, and he will now have a thousand
times more inward ease by the practice of Repentance than he had before by the
practice of his most grateful Sins.

2. Repentance as it will free him from the present unhappiness of his Sins and
Guilt, so it will deliver him from the fears of more dreadful Miseries in
another World, and from the dangers which he is exposed to hereafter by reason
of his Sins. This is the chief and great Reason why a Sinner is in such anguish
and horror and perplexity at present because his guilt forebodes greater
Miseries to him and his conscious mind has a Prophetic Spirit that foretells
evil things to come upon him hereafter; He knows he deserves punishment and
vengeance to fall upon him and he therefore fears though he has a short respite
here yet it shall be unavoidable and in a greater measure hereafter. Religion
is so Natural to the reason of our minds and has such a sure foundation both in
Nature and Revelation that hardly any Sinner can shake off all sense of it and
free himself from the fearful belief and expectations of its future
punishments, and though he laughs at them sometimes and would seem in his
highest mirth to have courage enough to make a jest of them to others yet he
fears them in good earnest, and trembles at the thoughts of them when he is
alone and when Death brings them nearer to him he is scared and terrified and
has sufficient proof of their Reality in his own mind, What a wretched and
miserable Condition is he then in when the terrors of Death and the greater
terrors of Hell are set before him, when all about him is horror and misery
and the blackness of darkness, when he has nothing to look back upon but the
bitter memory of his past sins and no prospect before him but the unknown and
unconceivable torments of another World, when Gods. Anger lies heavy upon him
and sinks him into the deepest gulf of despair and the Grave and the
bottomless pit are ready to swallow him up and to devour him both Soul and
Body; what an instance of Misery is here, what a Picture of Hell, nay what a
real and sensible Hell is there then before us? Who that stands by the Bed of
such a dying Wretch and draws the Curtains and sees the Agonies and hears the
doleful expressions of such a miserable Creature would not be deeply affected
with such a sad state as he sees a Man put into by sin and impenitence? Who
would not then think Virtue and Religion very comfortable and very desirable
things and much to be preferred to sinful looseness and extravagance? Who would
not then give all the World either that he had not sinned or that he had
Repented in time and so not brought himself into that remediless state of
present and future torment? Repentance if it be true and sincere will prevent a
Sinners coming to this which will otherwise certainly be his Portion and he can
never escape it in this World if he be not stupid, but to be sure not in the
next. Now who that knows he must dye in a little time and that then at furthest
this will be his case if he go on in his sins and be not timely brought off
from them would ever madly continue in them and not break them off by
Repentance when he is all the while exposed to this dreadful danger and lies
open to the fears and miseries of another World:

How comfortable is it to be delivered from those and to live in such a state
that a Man has no reason to be afraid of Death nor to be scared with the
thoughts of another World? But whenever it comes he can welcome it cheerfully,
or at least submit to it patiently without horror and distraction and have
reasonable and well-grounded hopes that it shall be well with him hereafter,
full assurance he may never have without all manner of fears but he will have
cheerful and rational hopes according to the certainty and evidence of his
Repentance and the sincerity of his Virtue and Obedience, such a conditional
assurance every one has by a Faith truly Divine that if he thus repents he
shall be saved, this is founded on a proposition that is Divinely revealed, and
so is matter of Faith, but that I have so repented is not matter of Faith but
only of private Judgment, and Opinion of my self, but I have no reason to doubt
or be afraid if I know upon examining my self that I have forsaken every wilful
sin and have left the ill course of life I was in and would not for any profit
or pleasure commit a wilful Sin though I were never so much tempted to it and
it were never so much in my power, and that I have thus endeavored to live and
to do my Duty sincerely to God and Man though with great imperfections and
infirmities still upon me, this will give us a Rational and a Moral assurance
of our Salvation which is all we can have without a particular Revelation, how
will this cheer and support a Man when he comes to dye, how will it take out
the sting and allay the bitterness of Death in great measure, and be the best
Cordial to keep up his Spirits in his last Agonies and Extremities, being
conscious to himself of his own sincerity and his conscience not condemning him
as to any wilful Sin, He will have confidence toward God, and can assure his
heart before him, 1 John 3.19. He can then safely trust and rely upon the Mercy
of God in and thorough Christ for the pardon of all his sins because he has
truly and in time repented of them, and it is not a mere presumptuous and
ungrounded confidenee which like the hope of the hypocrite shall perish, Job
8.13. but he has a sure Title to it by the Gospel and the spirit of God bears
witness with his spirit, and by the joint testimony of that and his Conscience
agreeing with the Rules and Measures of the Gospel (for otherwise it is but
deceit and delusion) he has great inward comfort and cheerful hopes of Heaven
and has no reason to fear but it shall be well with him in another world. It Is
very happy to live in such a state as this where we are provided against not
only all the evils of this World and the worst that can happen to us here but
against Death and all the evils of another, and may cheerfully enjoy the
blessings of Providence at present and rejoice in the hopes of a much greater
happiness hereafter, so that we may as the wise Man says, Eat our bread with
joy and drink our wine with a merry heart for God now accepts our works,
Eccles. 9.7. but a state of sin and impenitence is a dreadful and a hazardous
state, exposed to the Terrors of Death and the amazing Evils of another World,
so that if a Man considered it as he ought he could not enjoy himself one
moment, nor would ever live under the fears and dangers of it for all the
World, and what if he thinks not of it which is all the relief he has against
it? Yet it is never the less in it self, nor never the farther from him, but
though he is now never so stupid or in the deepest Lethargy yet Death and Hell
will awaken him, or however the flames there may be ready to catch hold of him
while he is asleep and in the most senseless state.

3. Repentance puts us into a very blessed and happy state as it reconciles us
to God and restores us to his favor who was before angry and displeased with
us; We are enemies to God by our wicked works and alienated from him, Coloss.
1.21. Our iniquities have separated between us and our God and our sins have
hid his face from us, Isa. 59.2. It Is they make the only breach and separation
between God and his Creatures and provoke him who is Love and Goodness to put
on Wrath and Anger and become even a consuming fire, so that his anger is said
to be kindled against sinners and wax hot against them and he pours out the
fierceness of his anger upon them and they drink of the cup of his fury and
feel his wrath and indignation; many a sinner has done this and cried out in
the Anguish of his Soul, Thy wrath lies hard upon me, Psalm. 88.7 Thy fierce
wrath goes over me, thy terrors have cut me off, ver. 16. Fearfulness and
trembling are come upon me and horror has overwhelmed me, Psalm. 55.5. Thine
arrows stick fast in me and thy hand presses me sore, Psalm. 38.2. Who knows
the power of thine anger even according to thy fear so is thy wrath, Psalm.
90.11. For we are consumed by thine anger and by thy wrath are we troubled,
ver. 7. God who is a Spirit as he can convey secret and unspeakable comfort
into our Souls so he can impress intolerable and unspeakable horrors upon them,
and who is able to bear the weight of his Anger or endure the sense of his
Wrath and Indignation? In his Pleasure and Favor is Life and in his Anger is a
double Death to the Soul, The inward Sensation and Perception of Gods Love is
the ohiefest joy and happyness to a Soul either in this World or the other, and
the Sense and Perception of his Anger is the greatest Misery; God the fountain
of all Happiness does diffuse and communicate such a Peace Joy Comfort to good
Souls, such an inward Taste and Relish of Spiritual Pleasure and Delight as is
unspeakable, past understanding, called joy in the holy Ghost, and is no doubt
the sweetest and most affecting pleasure a Soul is capable of, this the Angels
and blessed Spirits above enjoy, and are transported with the most ravishing
Sense and Rapturous Impressions of it and it is what makes Heaven to them, and a
little foretaste of it when God lifts up the light of his countenance upon us
when a pious Soul tastes and sees how good and gracious God is, this puts more
gladness in the heart than Corn and wine and oil and all worldly enjoyments,
now on the contrary when God hides his face and withdraws his lovingkindness
and imprints a strong sense of his Wrath and Anger upon the Mind this is the
utmost and the deepest Misery, this gives the bitterest sense of Evil, fills it
with the greatest horrors, sinks it into the deepest gulf the bottomless Pit
of Misery, and is the very Punishment and Hell of the damned.

How happy is it then to be Reconciled to God by Repentance whom we had angered
and provoked by our sins before we feel any of this and before his Wrath and
Anger is poured out upon us, it will certainly fall upon every Sinner some time
or other unless he Repents, for God though he defers his Anger for some time
that his Goodness and long-suffering may lead us to Repentance yet his abused
Love Patience and Mercy will turn to greater Wrath and Fury if we persist in
our sins and in a course of impenitency.

As it is a very terrible thing to have the great God our Enemy and he certainly
is so whilst we are in a state of Sin, so it is the comfortablest thought in the
World and what will alone make us happy to be Assured that he is our Friend and
that we are in a State of Favor with him upon our Repentance.

THE CONCLUSION.
To Conclude, As all general Christian Duties are meant by Repentance, so all
general Christian-Priviledges and Benefits belong to it and are the Rewards of
it, for as Repentance is the same thing in Scripture with Conversion,
Regeneration, the New Birth, the New Creature, the New Man and the like, those
different words and figurative expressions denoting only the same duty,
importing the great Change and Alteration made upon the Mind and Life of a
Sinner by the power of Grace and Religion, So all the benefits and privileges
of Christianity such as Election, Adoption, Pardon, Justification at present
and Glorification afterward which are free and gratuitous acts in God,
granting and bestowing those Favors upon us for Christ's sake upon our being
duly qualified and fitted to receive them, These all belong to those who have
truly Repented and become good Men, and to none else: For God has only Chosen,
Adopted, Pardoned, Justified, and will Glorify such and no other, and till we
have Repented we have no good claim or title to any of those. Our being in a
good State toward God which is the thing meant by all those Phrases under some
different considerations, is on our side wholly owing to our true Repentance
and Obedience; and it is all lost and forfeited by our Impenitency and
Disobedience, which on the contrary make us the Children of Wrath, the Children
of the Devil and Heirs of Damnation, put us into the worst Spiritual State of
Reprobation, Obduration and Excecation, according to the degrees of our Sins
and Impenitence, and into that of Condemnation it self, which is the word that
directly answers to that of Justification.

All those Scriptural Phrases and Expressions of a good State belong to
Repentance, and to the true Christian Penitent, and all those which signify a
bad one belong as truly to Wickedness and Impenitence; for though without the
Free Grace and Mercy of God in and thorough Christ we could not be put into any
such good State, nor have a title to any such Privileges merely by virtue of
our Repentance or any thing we could do, yet to suppose that God will put us
into those states without any regard to our own Actions or not upon the account
of them, is to destroy all Religion, all Divine Government, all Future Judgment
and all Rewards and Punishments in another World. I might clear and illustrate
and enlarge upon these, had not this Discourse already swelled upon my hands
into too great a bulk, and did they not run into something of Controversy
which I would carefully avoid.

I shall therefore only give this last Advice to the Penitent who has brought
himself by the Grace of God into this Good and Happy State, that when he is
thus got out of the Paths of Death and of Sin into those of Life and Virtue,
that he would go on and proceed in the new and right way he is in, and make a
speedy and further progress in all Piety and Goodness, that like St. Paul
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching unto those which are
before, he may follow and apprehend them, and so press forward toward the mark
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.13, 14. that
now he is become a Christian in good earnest he would more zealously promote
that Religion which he opposed and was an enemy to before, and show he is a
true Convert by his zeal and earnestness against Vice and Irreligion, that he
would make all amends he can for his past miscarriages by doing the greatest
good he is able, by serving God and his Glory more heartily, and thus loving
much because much is forgiven him, so that where sin abounded grace may much
more abound, and he may make up the failures as far as he can of his former
Life, and give the best satisfaction and reparation he is able to God and
Religion whom he had so highly injured and affronted; that he may not be
contented only to get out of an ill State, and be just safe and out of danger,
but may endeavor to rise higher and grow in Grace and all manner of Goodness,
and attain to higher improvements and perfections of Virtue and Holiness. This
should be his aim and design and the business of his whole Life, and this will
certainly be so if he has the true love of Virtue, of God or of Heaven in his
Soul, he will then be doing more good, growing more virtuous more rich toward
God, and continually thriving and increasing in his good Condition and his
Heavenly Treasure, as Worldly Men are in their Earthly Trades and Riches, he
will be daily adding to his store, and knowing the worth of Virtue the more,
the more he has of it, he will by a laudable Covetousness be every day raising
his Stock, improving his Talents, and abounding more and more in all useful
Virtues and Christian good Works, which should be the great business and design
of every Christian all his Life.

This will give unspeakable comfort peace and satisfaction to his Mind, and set
him not only out of danger and free him from an ill state, but out of all
doubts fears and uncertainties in his thoughts about it; for the more perfect
we grow in Virtue the more cheerful and well-grounded hopes and assurance we
shall have in our selves, and the more confidence toward God. It Is hard to
know and distinguish exactly between the first lines and partings of Vice and
Virtue, of a bad and good State, where the lowest degree of one begins and the
other ends, as it is difficult to know the first conception and beginning of
Life in an Embrio, and the first daybreak of the morning; but when Life
appears by sensible motions and visible acts and operations there is no doubt
about it, nor when the Sun is up and come to the Meridian that it is perfect
day, so what is the beginning of the Spiritual Life in a Christian Penitent, or
when he first is delivered from the Power of Darkness into Light and a
Christian good State is not so easily known, but it is plain and clear when he
performs the proper acts and operations of the Divine Life and walks as a child
of light, and his goodness shines more and more unto perfect day; i. e. when he
becomes more thoroughly virtuous and more perfectly a good Man, it will be more
out of doubt to himself, and he will have all the cheerful and comfortable
evidence of it to his unspeakable satisfaction. It Is generally very low and
imperfect degrees of Religion and Virtue that make us fearful and doubtful; the
more perfect we grow the more assured we shall have reason to be of our good
State, and though the Penitents tears at first bring clouds and darkness, fear
and melancholy over him, yet perfect Virtue when he is restored to it will
make a perfect day, and bring in the clearest comfort peace and satisfaction to
his Mind; and thus though he sowed in Tears he shall reap in Joy.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Samuel Smith, at the Princes Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1693.
THE Wisdom of God, manifested in the Worls of the Creation in two Parts, viz.
The Heavenly Bodies, Elements, Meteors, Fossils, Vegetables (Animals, Beasts,
Birds, Fishes, and Insects) more particularly in the Body of the Earth, its
Figure, Motion, and Consistency, (...) the admirable Structure of the Bodies of
Man, and other Animals, as also in their Generation, etc. By John Ray, Fellow
of the Royal Society. The Second Edition, very much enlarged. In 8vo.

Three Discourses concerning the Changes and Dissolution of the World. The
First of the Creation and Chaos. The Second of the General Deluge, Fountains,
formed Stones, Subterraneous Beds of Shells, Earthquakes, and other Changes in
our Terraqueous Globe. The Third of the General Conflagration, Dissolution, and
means of bringing them to pass. Of the Future State, etc. In 8vo.

Dr. Rich. Luck's Practical Christianity: Or, An Account of the Holiness which
the Gospel enjoins, with Motives to it, and the Remedies it proposes against
Temptations; with a Prayer concluding each distinct Duty. In 8vo.

Enquiry after Happiness, in several Parts, etc. The Second Edition enlarged.
In 8vo.

The Duty of Apprentices and Servants. 1. The Parents Duty, how to Educate
their Children, that they may be fit to be employed and trusted. 2. What
Preparation is needful for such as enter into Service; with some Rules to be
observed by them how to make a wise and happy Choice of a Service. 3. Their
Duty in Service toward God, their Master, and themselves, with suitable
Prayers to each Duty, and some Directions peculiarly to Servants for the Worthy
Receiving the Holy Sacrament. Published for the Benefit of Families. In 8vo.

The Spiritual Year: Or, Devout Contemplations, digested into distinct
Arguments for every Month in the Year, and for every Week in that Month:
Containing most of the Principal and Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity;
being very plain and useful for the Instruction of Families in all Christian
Duties, and for the disposing of them to a Religious and Spiritual
Conversation. In 8vo.

A Treatise of Church Government, or a Vindication of Dioocesan Episcopacy,
against the Objections of the Dissenters, in Answer to some Letters lately
Printed, concerning the same Subject. By R. Burscough, M.A. In 8vo.


