DISCOURSES Upon several Practical Subjects.

By the late Reverend WILLIAM PAIN, D. D.

WITH A PREFACE Giving some Account of his Life, Writings, and Death.

LONDON, Printed by J. O. for R. Wilkin, at the King's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCVIII.

THE PREFACE.
THE Limits of a Preface will not allow the writing the Life of the Author of
the following Discourses, neither have I materials by me for such a work. My
first acquaintance with him was sometime after his settlement in London. I was
the more inclined to a Correspondence with him, because he had his Education in
Cambridge, under, and was much esteemed by Dr. H. P. a person never to be named
by me, without paying a very particular honor and respect to his memory.

Antoninus begins his admirable Instructions of life, with an account of his
several Benefactors, from whom he had learnt this and that piece of useful and
practical knowledge: instead of many, I am obliged to instance in this
excellent Man alone, to whom I am more indebted, than to all the Teachers I
ever had; and I take this opportunity to give public Thanks to God for the
happy opportunities I enjoyed of his wise Instructions and Counsels; from him I
learnt rightly to understand Religion, the Idea's of which had been so
confounded by false Teachings, and the notion of it set forth in so frightfull
a manner, that there is reason to conclude, that it was the superstition of the
former, which has laid the Foundation of the too visible Skepticism and
Infidelity of the present Age. From him I learnt that the Laws of Religion were
intrinsically good, and infinitely for the benesit and advantage of reasonable
Creatures, which is the only true notion of it, which can secure the Faith, and
keep up the practice of it among Men, who must and ever will be swayed by what
they are once thoroughly persuaded is their chief Interest and highest Benefit.
He was a Man of clear thoughts which he always freely communicated, and of so
universal a Benevolence, and took such delight in doing good, that he obtained
the name of Pamphilus among his Friends. My acquaintance was never large, and I
have staid a little of the longest in the World, to outlive most of those few
Friends I once had; but so far as my small experience has reached, I cannot but
say, I never knew a better Man, a wiser Christian, or a truer Friend. The
Reader, if he be good natured, will pardon me for stepping a little out of my
way, to pay a debt of Gratitude. To return to our Author, of whom I have
undertaken to give some account, from the time of my first acquaintance with
him. He had not been long in Town, before he was taken notice of by some of the
best Judges of Learning, who soon discerned his Abilities, and how fit he was
for those undertakings, in which the Service of the Church afterward required
him to engage; I mean in those perilous times, when both our Religion and our
Civil Rights were so visibly endangered, that many despaired and gave them up
for lost. The Members of the Church of England stood in this breach, which they
maintained with that Courage, that the Enemy gave back, and a space was gained
for our deliverance: The behavior of the Divines of this Church, will be
remembered by Posterity, and a Collection of their writings at a time when
others were so silent and complying, will remain a standing Armory against
Popery, whenever it shall renew its attempts upon us. Then it was that he
showed both his Courage and his Skill in defending our established Religion.
The former in contemning those numerous threatening Letters, some sent him by
the Penny-Post, and others thrown over his Garden-Wall; and one night a Divine,
of about his bulk, and a Friend of his, coming late thorough Harrow-Alley into
Goodman's- fields, which was his usual walk home, two Men with drawn Swords
came up to him, and staring him in the face, said the one to the other, it is
not he, and so went off; which had no other effect upon him, but to give him a
caution not to stay out in the Evenings. His abilities I need not say any thing
of, they are sufficiently seen in those Learned Treatises published by him, on
this occasion, The Adoration of the Host, the Sacrifice of the Mass, and that
extraordinary discourse in answer to the Bishop of Meaux's Book of Communion in
one kind; not to mention his lesser pieces of the sixth Note of the Church, and
his Examination of the Texts of Scripture produced by the Papists for the
Celibacy of Priests: whoever carefully reads over those Treatises will find the
subject exhausted, and that he needs not to search any further into those
Arguments; and by those concessions, so Ingeniously made to his Adversaries,
which showed that he sought Truth only, and not Victory, the possibility of a
reply seems to me to be prevented; and the Learned French Prelate, who has
showed himself to have dexterity enough for most undertakings, would yet I
believe be loath to be put upon the uneasy task of defending his Book against
that answer to it. When the fear of Popery was over, it was the general
expectation that our little disputes and controversies would be thrown up, and
to prevent any future danger, we should be at perfect Peace and Union among our
selves. The behavior of the Clergy in circumstances when they expected nothing
but ruin to themselves and their Families, it was hoped had removed all the
Jealousies of our Dissenting Brethren, and disposed them to such a temper, that
there seemed nothing wanting to gain the wisest and best part of them to our
Communion, but to let them be assured, that we would receive them kindly;
nothing could so effectually secure us from the like dangers from Popery for
the future, nor keep up the practice of Religion and good Morals, as putting a
final end to the Schism, and uniting us in one Communion. Some were of Opinion,
that this was not possible to be done, but by a Comprehension; they said that
an opportunity for this had been slipped within their memories, and that now they
had another very fair one, which it would be unpardonable to let pass: besides,
they saw that without it, a general Toleration would pass in Parliament, the
ill consequences of which were easily foreseen. Others apprehended, that no
Condescension would unite us, that our Dissenting Brethren would not be
satisfied unless they could carry all before them, and that were they takn into
our Communion, they would make no other use of the Privilege than to over-turn
our Constitution as soon as they had an opportunity for it; and therefore they
thought it was better we should continue as we were, till we could have
assurance that we should not be ridiculed for making alterations unrequested,
and without any likelihood of answering the end thereby proposed. This was
wholly a matter of Prudence, and who was in the right could not presently be
determined and therefore it is not to be wondered at that there should be
different sentiments about the means in those who all joined in the same end.
Our Friend, with whom I have often canvassed the Question, was in his judgment,
which he sincerely followed in all things, for a Comprehension, and though he had
a just sense of the sin of Schism, and looked upon that among us as utterly
unjustifiable, and that nothing of any moment could be urged in defense of it;
yet his Opinion was, that this was the only Method, which the present follies
and mistakes of Men would admit of, to establish the honor and interest of the
Church, and to recover expiring Piety, Charity, and other Christian Virtues,
which by our divisions had received a wound not to be cured, without the use of
this balm. Upon these considerations, he was prevailed with so far to concern
himself on this occasion, as to reply to a little piece, entitled Vox Cleri,
published by a Learned and Eminent Divine, as in the name of the Clergy; which
Circumstance, with the style of the answer being a little too facetious, for so
aged a Divine as his Adversary, raised him some Enemies: but had he lived never
so long, I believe he would hardly have concerned himself any further in
proposing expedients of Peace, the very mentioning of which, as his experience
taught him, made Men ready to Battle. The design of the Comprehension being
laid aside, the Toleration bill passed into a Law; with prudent Limitations for
registring the places of Assembling, the names of Preachers, and for securing
the Fidelity both of them, and their people (who were to be known to what
Congregation they belonged) to the Government; but as it has been managed and
used, without regard to the directions of the Statutes, it is a sanctuary for
such as are, as well Enemies to the Government, as to Religion; it is an assumed
liberty to avoid all civil Ties, and to be of any Religion, or none, to worship
God in their own way, or not to worship him at all; it is a refuge for Atheism,
Irreligion and Profaneness, and has produced such a neglect of public worship
and corruption of Morals, as are very scandalous in a Christian Kingdom. Some
little Writers about this time expounded this Law to discharge all persons from
all obligation to Church Communion in point of Conscience; but this tittle
tattle was nothing to what has since followed, every one taking the liberty
according to the Model of Spinosa's happy Commonwealth, to Speak and Write as
he lists.

It was a little surprise to us, so soon almost as our Controversies with the
Papists, and our fears from that party were over, to be encountered with a set
of Men, who, with unusual confidence profess an enmity to all Religion, and bid
defiance to the common faith of mankind; who talk wildly of a Religion, very
improperly called so, which has no dependence upon Times, Places, or Persons,
to Minister in holy things; a Religion without worship or any public Offices,
whereby it is professed, a thing never heard of before in the World. No man
ought tamely to bear an attempt to set aside that public Honor that is done
to the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth; and no Christian can be silent when
the Lord that bought them, is openly denied and his Mission ridiculed. Whither
are we going, when Pamphlets are to be seen on every Stall, wrote directly
against Christianity? when under the pretense of advancing Reason, Revelation
is thrown up, and at best is allowed to be no more than a means of Information,
but no necessitating motive of assent? Are these men of Cardan the Astrologer's
mind, that the Law of Christ shall be changed? and shall it give way to that
sect, which all the other Philosophers exposed, and Epicurus be set up as a
Master and Teacher, instead of our Blessed Savior? Do they think to be too
hard for God? Are they stronger than he? It has been observed, that whoever
breaks violently in upon the Laws of his Country, though he may for a time brave
it; and presume himself beyond control, in the end the Laws are always too
hard for him, and crush him to nothing: and shall men hope to be safe, who spit
in the face of Heaven, and trample all the Laws of God under their feet?
Lucretius was as great a Bravo, and no way inferior to any modern writer, in
the Atheistical way either in Wit or Argument; and yet Religion has kept its
ground and will do so, whatever vain imaginations some few fools may entertain
of gaining a victory over it; however there are those who are resolved not to
give over their attempts, and seem to be combined in a close Confederacy, and
with united strength to try what they can do. The Age every one sees, is
extremely addicted to lightness and vanity, and to turn every thing that is
grave and serious into ridicule; to make the best advantage of this prevailing
humor, they have a sort of Retainers to Atheism, who are as great Enemies to
Reason as to Religion, and have neither inquired into what Religion has to say
for it self, or the objections against it; their work is to break a Profane
Jest or two upon it, and if they can but set down these in writing, they grow
into a great Opinion of their Parts, and take it for an affront for any Man to
speak a wise word in their Company. Others, for each seems to have his part
assigned him according to his Genius, pretend to be men of deep thoughts, and
to have searched into all the secret Arts of Priestcraft, and to have examined
the juggle of Mysteries to the bottom; and withal, to have a great Charity for
the long misguided World, oppressed under the Tyranny and slavish fear of
Religion; and yet in all this their design seems to be merely to banter
mankind. The Author of Christianity not Mysterious, has wrote a labored Book
to amuse the world, and prove nothing; he acknowledges there are Mysteries
without number, and yet will allow nothing to be called so: he will not suffer
Mysteries in Revelation, where reason can know nothing beyond what is revealed,
to be argued from Mysteries in nature, where reason is a proper Judge; whereas
one would think that if in things knowable by reason, we find difficulties we
cannot solve, it should seem less strange when we meet with as great in matters
of Revelation, which we can know nothing of, further than they are revealed. He
will not have a thing said to be above reason, because it cannot be imagined or
conceived; and yet makes above reason to signify something unconceivable or
unimaginable, and to be the same with Mystery. He asserts that there is nothing
in Religion, that is above reason, and yet confesses that there are things in
it, of which we have not an Adaequate and Complete Idea, which is, what is
meant by being above reason: And because we need not understand what we cannot
discover by our natural faculties, or infinite goodness has not been pleased to
reveal to us; proposes it, as a Compendious method to all useful knowledge,
not to trouble our selves or others, with what God has revealed, because we do
not understand all that belongs to its nature or manner of existence: and yet
after all this concession of the imperfection of our knowledge, and that there
are some things we cannot comprehend, affirms that God and Eternity, are no
Mysteries, for want of an Adaequate and complete Idea of them; and that
Infinity and Eternity are as little Mysterious, as that two and three make
five: these are certainly at present great difficulties, but he has promised to
solve them all, only he refers this to a second Book; but he is so cautious as
not to limit himself to any time for the publishing it, that depending upon
health and leisure, which he very wisely says, are things in no Man's power to
command at his pleasure; and yet are much more so, than what he has so very
vainly made a show of undertaking. The Socinians may take it ill to be ranked
with those who speak and write against Religion, but it is too apparent that
they join with them in their attempts upon revealed Religion, and with them
carry those on with such Arguments, as will at last bear very hard upon
Natural, which is not wholly without its Mysteries; and God himself, the belief
of whose existence is the foundation of all Religion, is as incomprehensible as
any the objects of the Christian Faith. These men were once strenuous asserters
of the Authority of the Scriptures, but being pressed hard with the
unreasonableness of that Principle, not to believe any thing though confessed to be
plainly and expressy revealed, unless they saw how the thing could be; they
have bethought themselves rather to lessen the Authority of those Books than to
insist longer on such a sense of 'em, as no other Man, and it is hard to think
they themselves, can judge to be their meaning.

Is that great principle of the Reformation, That the Scriptures are the sole
rule of Faith, come to this? They deserve to be sent to the Island of Anticyra,
if they have any thoughts of utterly running down revealed Religion; but they
may prepare the way for that Church, which by so many Arts and Stratagems has
attempted to overthrow the Reformation; and it is an excess of Charity, not to
believe that some of 'em are employed to that purpose, and designedly write to
serve that cause. Socinus himself did vigorously maintain the worship of
Christ; how agreeably with his principles may be seen in his dispute with F. D.
but his Followers have given it up, and take it ill that any should charge them
with honoring the Son, as they honor the Father; will any man deny this to be
a proper season to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered? and can a
Christian not call to mind, on this occasion, those words of our Blessed
Savior, whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess before my
Father, which is in Heaven? These considerations awakened the zeal of this
excellent Man I am speaking of, to stand betwixt the living and the dead, and
to try to stop the plague that was begun; to this purpose he first drew up a
discourse of Mysteries in Religion, which, not publishing at that time, he
afterward contracted into two of those discourses that were in the Press at
his death. After this, he applied himself to examine the Socinian Controversy,
as it relates to the Doctrines of the ever Blessed and Adorable Trinity, about
which, he spent much time, and many thoughts; he was fully persuaded that
herein lay Christianity, as distinct from natural Religion, and that upon the
Socinian principles, it was impossible to clear the Scriptures from being
purposely wrote to lead mankind into the grossest Errors and plain Idolatry:
and that take Christianity at the best it could amount to no more than an
Institution of Morals, that Mysterious Method of the Redemption of mankind by
the Incarnation, Obedience and Passion of the Son of God, and all the hopes of
sinners from a Covenant of Grace, being hereby entirely given up. These
thoughts were enough to startle any one, who had a concern for the honor, or
being of Christianity. He first set himself carefully to examine the Sacred
Records, which speak so plainly of the Son and the Holy Ghost, as distinct
Persons from the Father; and so expressly assert their Divinity, that it was
just matter of wonder to him, how this could be overlooked or mistaken: we are
indeed amused with Eastern phrases and proper Idioms of speech, long ago out of
use, which, if understood, we are told, would make that sense easy to us,
which some are pleased to put upon the Sacred Oracles: but if the memory of
these be perfectly lost, how comes it to be known that there were ever any such
in use? and yet, unless they know what they were, how can they pronounce them
serviceable to their cause? but if any remain, why are they not produced or
some other Book instanced in, wherein any footsteps of 'em remain? The notion
which the ancient Jews had of the Messiah, is, That he was God who should
become incarnate. Of this there are sufficient intimations in the Prophets, and
it was the received sense of the ancient Jewish Church; the Conception of him
as a mere Man, was an error which sprung from that gross expectation they had
of him, as a Prince and a mighty Conqueror, who should advance the Jewish
Nation above all the Kingdoms of the Earth. And this ancient notion of the
Messiah is doubtless a better rule to follow, in interpreting what is said of
him in the writings of the new Testament, than to confound these by putting a
sense upon them, contrary to what the words import, and referring us to
phrases, that no body knows any thing of, to make it out. But whatever those
Eastern Idioms of speech were, the Primitive Church could not be ignorant of
them, and their Faith and Worship must be allowed to be a full evidence of the
sense in which they understood these Sacred Writings; it is true, there were
some whose Memory can be no credit to any Party, who in the very age of the
Apostles, impugned our Savior's Divinity: but against these, St. John wrote
his Gospel, beginning it with as full and express assertions of our Savior's
Divinity, as can be imagined; and in his Epistles he calls these Heretics the
Antichrist that were already come. Afterward arose Praxeas, Noetus, and after
both, about the middle of the third age, Sabellius; these pressed with the
Authority of Scripture, which so expressly declares the Son and the Holy Ghost
to be God, asserted only one Person trinominem, which was owning a Trinity only
of names: against these the Church declared the Christian Faith as it was
written and as it had received and kept it, that the Father is not the Son, nor
the Son the Father, nor the Holy Ghost Father, or Son; the Father alius a
filio, the Son alius a Patre, the Holy Ghost alius a Patre and Filio, each to
be considered under his proper Character, and in himself as a distinct Person,
though all three united in one indivisible nature. In the same age we meet with
Paul of Samosata, advanced by Zenobia to the Chair of Antioch, he is properly
styled the Father of our modern Socinians, for he asserted that Christ was a
mere Man, and had no existence before his Conception in the Womb of the Holy
Virgin, and was the Author of that foolish contradictory Notion of a Deus
factus, and the Socinians have only revived his Heresy, which was condemned in
the Council of Antioch, and in a second himself deposed. In the beginning of
the next age, Arrius a Presbyter of the Church of Alexandria, sets up to be
Patron of a new Heresy, differing both from Sabellius and Paulus, but agreeing
with them in opposing the Divinity of our Blessed Lord; he maintained another
Essence of the Son and denied his Coeternity and Equality with the Father; and
many falling in with him, the whole cause was publicly heard, the controverted
Texts of Scripture, and the constant Tradition of the Church about the sense of
them carefully examined, and the Worship of the whole Christian Church appealed
to, and by these was the Christian Faith explained and asserted. The fourth age
being the time fixed on, and the Eastern Church, the Stage on which these
things were done; our Author, who had a mind to look thorough this
Controversy, set upon examining the Records and Writings of that time, that
are extant, particularly he carefully perused the Confessions and Decrees of
the great Councils of Nice, and the first of Constantinople, wherein were no
new Articles of Faith framed, but the old ones declared and explained, which
the Church has both Authority and Obligation to do, as the rise and growth of
Heresies make this necessary; and the works of those two great Men, St.
Athanasius and St. Basil, and he found full satisfaction, and met with a
Complete recompense, for all the pains his search had cost him. Being to Preach
in his course at Westminster on Trinity Sunday, he pitched upon those words of
the Apostle, 1. Cor. 8.5. but to us there is but one God, as the Theme of his
discourse; this he did not only with respect to the day, which was sufficient
to justify him in undertaking such an Argument, in so Learned an Auditory; but
with regard to the boldness of our Socinian Adversaries, who have been very
free in charging the Doctrine of the Trinity with Absurdities, Contradictions,
and Impossibilities. What he proposed was to defend our Common Faith of the
Divine Trinity and Unity, which is the peculiar Scheme and Constitution, and
Character of Christianity; and to resolve that obvious difficulty of believing
those Divine Persons of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be each of them God,
which is the Christian Faith, and yet to maintain with the Apostle that to us
Christians there is but one God. It so fell out that some passages, or rather
words, (as is very common in the transient hearing a discourse) were not
rightly apprehended, which had like to have been the occasion of a dispute
betwixt him and some of his Brethren, very eminent for their Learning, and of
known zeal for the Common Faith. This occasioned his Letter in defense of his
Sermons, to the Right Reverend Bishop of R. who, as he was by his place a
proper Judge to be appealed to; is upon all other accounts so qualified, that
no Man who knows him, would refuse his Vmpirage in any thing, wherein Learning
and Judgment joined with Integrity and Candor, are required: but it went not so
far, for he was soon better understood, and both sides satisfied. It Is not
necessary for me to say, why that discourse has not been yet published; the
reason is not that any thing new is advanced in it, or what is not exactly
agreeable with the Notion, Language and Terms of the Church, in constant use at
the time when this Question was discussed: some of the Authorities produced by
him, the World has already judged of; I say some, for he has collected a great
many more to the same purpose, but he thought these sufficient. The last Winter
of his life he spent in reviewing his thoughts on this Argument, and examining
them with all possible strictness, by the Scriptures and the Church Records;
and it was great satisfaction to him that he had cleared his own thoughts about
this Adorable Mystery, and found nothing to lie uneasy to them, in believing
with the whole Christian Church upon the Authority of Revelation, that there is
but one Essence, which we call God, and yet that in the Godhead, there are
three Persons of the same Essence and Power and Coeternal; taking the name
Person in the sense of the Church, not for a mere different mode or manner of
subsisting, or in a metaphorical sense, but for what properly subsists: and he
hoped he had done something for the clearing other Men's thoughts; however, the
honor of our Savior and of the Christian Faith and Religion, were the things
he had in his Eye, and were sincerely intended by him, in all that he had
either Preached or Wrote on that subject.

The World seems at present to stand very much in need of such Men, who want
neither Learning nor Courage to stop the insults of the Enemies, not to this or
that particular Church, but to Christianity it self; and though God whose
counsels are unsearchable takes away some at a time when they were likely to
have been most useful, yet he will always leave a sufficient number thus
qualified to defend his own cause. I dare not now undertake to give a full and
just Character of our Author, I will venture to say something, but what, I am
ready to own, falls short of him; he was a Man of great natural endowments, and
what is more to his commendation, of indefatigable industry; he never left a
subject till he had searched it to the bottom, and perfectly cleared his own
thoughts about it: In his younger years he was much taken with Experimental
Philosophy, having from his first enquiry into Books and Things, always set the
highest value upon that knowledge he thought most useful, and by a Collection
of observations left under his hand, it appears that he had spent some time and
pains that way. In the year 1681. Novem. 23. I find him admitted Fellow of the
Royal Society; but upon his settling in London, he laid aside those studies and
wholly applied himself to that, which was his proper Profession: his chief aim
being now to do the utmost good he could among those over whom he had a
pastoral care, in that renowned City. The effects of his Labors remain to my
own knowledge, among some of his Parishioners, who have owned to me the great
benefit they have received by his constant Preaching, both in helping them
rightly to understand and engaging them in a serious practice of Religion, and
by his Writings they are more generally known. The visiting a whole Parish from
House to House, I cannot say to be a necessary part of the Pastoral care, I
rather lay it in faithfully and constantly discharging the public Offices. It
would be a sad thing to be accountable for the neglect of what in great
Parishes is confessed to be impracticable; this therefore can only be an
occasional duty, in which, a Minister must be left to his own prudence, who is
best able to judge what good is likely to be done in this way, and when. I have
heard our Friend say more than once, that if he could see the necessity of it,
or those wonderful ends it would serve, he would throw up all his own
concerns, and apply himself wholly to it: however, he supplied the want of
that, in the best manner he could, and by ways he thought much more useful to
such as were disposed to mind the concerns of their Souls. For the use of his
Parishioners he first composed, and afterward by Printing it, offered to their
closer consideration his admirable Practical Discourse of Repentance, wherein
he has rectified many mistakes and loose notions about this Doctrine; such as
have had a very fatal influence upon the lives of many, who all the while
looked upon themselves in a safe state: they are chiefly owing, as I apprehend,
to their not distinguishing betwixt baptismal Repentance, and the Repentance
for willful sins, many and long continued in, after Men have covenanted with
God for a constant course of obedience. Two days before he died, he thanked God
that he had lived to publish that Discourse; Not, said he, That it is Wrote
with that care and exactness it might have been, for it was composed in parts,
and at several distant times; but I think it may be serviceable, which is the
only end I proposed in it, to teach the right knowledge and practice of that
duty. I am sensible that some have taken exceptions at what he affirmed of the
invalidity of a Deathbed Repentance, but it is no more than is said by many
others, and as far as I see, must be owned by all, who thoroughly examine that
subject. The Question is not what God may do, or sometimes does, by an
extraordinary act of Grace, but what he has covenanted for, or what are the
plain and indispensible conditions of Salvation required by the Gospel. A
Malefactor, upon whom the Law has pronounced death, may be pardoned by special
favor; and if a sinner, who never repents till he comes to die, be saved, this
is showing him more mercy, than is covenanted for in the Gospel-Law of Life:
and in what instances God will abate of those Terms, no Man can tell, and it is
the highest folly and madness to trust to it, without a particular Revelation.
That God will make allowance for Men's Circumstances in this World, and judge
their several cases with the greatest equity, and proportion their rewards and
punishments accordingly, come within the Terms of covenanted Grace and Mercy;
but the Question is whethe a Minister of the Gospel, who visits an habitually
wicked Man, in his last sickness, can assure him, he shall be saved on such a
Repentance; if it comes up to the Terms of the Gospel, he may give him this
assurance; and then this Doctrine may be Preached, yea, and ought to be for all
the Gospel-condititions of life, and Salvation are to be published to all. Such
Preaching would be very comfortable to those who would be glad to save their
Souls, and yet are very loath to forego their sins; and are not like to be
persuaded to this, as long as they have any hopes of securing them by repenting
when they come to die; These seem to be very plain consequences of allowing the
sufficiency of a deathbed Repentance, by the terms of the Gospel. For his
Parishioners, he likewise drew up a Manual of Devotion, to be used daily in
their families, and put a great number of them into the hands of the Collecter
of his Tithes to be distributed among them: he apprehended the decay of Piety
and coruption of manners to be in great measure owing to the neglect of family
Religion, which be therefore took the opportunity after this to recommend in a
Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, whose example was
like to give the best Encouragement to it: which they so well approved of as to
desire him to publish it. His thoughts were that the true cause of the general
neglect of Family Devotion, is the wrong notion Men have entertained of Forms
of Prayer, which is a thing so past all dispute, that it must lie upon the
Consciences of those who have denied 'em, if, now that the effects of that
error are found so evidently ruinous to Piety and good Morals, they do not in
some public way retract it, and advise to the use of Forms, without which the
use of constant Family Prayer can never be retrieved. He was so intent upon
doing good among his people, that he was often proposing to himself and asking
his Friends to think of something wherein he might be most useful to them; he
endeavored to free the minds of other Men, as he has done his own from false
and loose principles in Religion, the effects of which will in a short time
appear in the Life and Practice. His Religion did not lie in shows and mere
forms of Godliness, which we need not an Apostles Testimony to assure us, may
be separated from the power of it; I take him to have been in that state
described by St. John when he says, he that is born of God does not commit sin,
for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God; He
would not, I dare say, for all the World have committed a known, wilful, and
deliberate sin, and I am sure would have been horribly afraid of himself if he
had fallen into one such sin. I could here give in evidence for what I say, if
it were necessary, a signal instance of a vigorous sense of Religion, and a
resolved and confirmed virtue, such an one as is not very common. I herein say
no more of him, than what in Justice is due, and what by long experience and
many proofs I know to be true of him; he did not indeed discover those signs of
Grace, which some Men expect to find in the face; he had not that affected
gravity and down-look and dull humor, which a Pharisee would perhaps have
sought for, as a visible mark of it; He was always cheerful and gay himself,
and would suffer none to be otherwise, wherever he came: This, I confess, if
any thing was an excess in him, because it must be owned, that he would be
sometimes merry at other Men's cost, who could not bear up against the sharpness
of his wit, which I therefore place among his imperfections. But though he gave
way possibly too much to that facetiousness and pleasant air of Conversation,
which was very natural to him, and as he thought in mixed Company most
agreeable; yet in a closer Conversation, or when at any time the Argument
required it, he knew how to be serious; and was pleased when any subject was
started that required grave talk and strict reasoning: besides, he often took the
opportunity of conveying right notions of things and reproving some Vices in a
jocular way, when he knew not how to do this in any other way; this design he
often had of doing good, and found it successful where it was least perceived.
His Character as a Friend concerns only particular Persons, who have drawn it
at large on their own minds; it signifies not much to say any of this to
others, but if any be curious to know it, I refer them to Plutarch's rules to
distinguish a Flatterer from a Friend. His Friendship being grounded upon
principles of virtue, his passion for his Friend was not Connterfeit, nor his
Conversation with him forced, but natural and easy and all of a piece; he
always used freedom and would neither fall in with, nor decline taking notice
of what he thought was amiss in his Friend: he was ready to assist him to the
uttermost of his power and would embark with him in whatever was fair and
honest, and nothing else; and would always defend him in his absence.

I have now brought him to the last Stage of his life, and you are to see him
die. Now is the truest Judgment to be made of the Wisdom and Steadiness of a
Man's principles, and the sincerity and regularity of his actions. Now all mere
forms of Godliness are discovered, and the Masks of Hypocrisy fall off, and
it is no longer a time to dissemble with God or Man; I am very well aware that
some very pious Persons, who have no reason for it are under great fears at the
approach of death; Natural temper or an habitual melancholy heightened by the
present indisposition of body, with a sinall tincture of superstition, which is
incident to very sincere Persons, may cause their hearts to misgive them; and
put them into frights they know not why, and when there is no ground for them:
on the other side, some Enthusiasts there are who have no manner of claim to
happiness by the terms of the Gospel, but have the highest reason to be afraid
of that Just Judgment that shall render to every Man according to his works;
who yet meet death in a sort of Triumph and Ecstasy, and talk in the wildest
manner of the certainty of their Salvation: this is the effect of the vilest of
all principles; for such are those which cancel the obligations of the Gospel,
and supersede the necessity of a holy life to salvation.

But whatever wrong Judgment Men make of themselves, God will Judge righteous
Judgment; and neither the causeless fears of good Men, not the vain
presumptions of bad Men, shall have any influence on their future state. So
soon as the vital union betwixt Soul and Body is dissolved, the one shall find
themselves safe, notwithstanding their fears; and the other miserably
disappointed under all their bold and groundless considence: But generally
speaking to depart not in Raptures, but in Peace, to die with an undisturbed
yet thoughtfull mind; with a sense of our own unworthiness, and yet, with a
full trust in God's promises, ('till the bodily distemper rises so high as to
take away the free use of our faculties; after which, all that any Man says or
does stands for nothing) I take to be the present and natural reward of a
virtuous Life. He who has lived constantly under a vigorous sense of God and of
another World, who has often had his thoughts in that invisible state, and in
all his Actions has manifested his firm belief of, and earnest desire to reach
the happiness proposed; should, one would think, not find it any great
dissiculty to leave this World to enter upon one far better. Under this happy
and most desirable composure of mind was this admirable Man, and sincere
Christian at the approach of Death, which he had seen advancing toward him for
some time, and sensibly felt it drawing nearer him by degrees. The 7th. of
February 1696 was the last time of his appearing in the Pulpit; he then found
himself very ill, and that the Sentence of Death was upon him: for that reason
he chose to venture abroad to take his final leave of his people in the
solemnest manner, and to close up his Ministry by Administering to them and
partaking with them of the Blessed Sacrament of our Savior's Body and Blood;
which he ever looked upon as designed to be a part of public Christian
worship, and in the first Ages not administered to dying Persons on their sick
beds, unless they were in a state of Penance, and were hereby to be restored to
the Peace and Communion of the Church. The notion of a Viaticum he looked upon
as brought in with superstition, and that it tended to uphold it; upon which
principle, many who neglect this duty all their life long, are very earnest for
it at their deaths, upon the like reason that the Clinici deferred the other
Sacrament till the last hour. His Discourse was upon these words, Luke 12.40.
Be ye therefore ready, for the Son of Man comes at an hour when ye think not.
He designed this as his own Funeral Sermon, as he told the Reverend Mr. M. the
worthy Lecturer of that Parish, as he came out of the Church, and his good
Friend Mr. S. with whom he dined that day. He was so far spent in preaching
that he was forced to desire his assiststance to consecrate the Elements, and
only gave the Cup himself. On the 17th. I providentially came to him, and had
the happiness to attend him to his last moments. He had been that day riding
abroad to try if he could find any relief from the air, and coming home, soon
after I was got to his Lodgings, which were then at Islington, his first
Salutation was after this manner. My Friend, I have been in expectation of
seeing thee these two days, and glad I am that thou art now come, for it is to
see me die, and assist me in dying, which is a very kind and friendly Office.
Great part of that day we were shut up together, and he entertained me with
such admirable Discourses, on the most important Subjects, and talked so
clearly and with so lively a sense of them, that I forgot I was conversing with
a dying Friend, and thought it one of the pleasantest days of my whole Life. He
began with a Discourse of the empty projects and designs of this Life, and the
intolerable folly of being entirely taken up with the Pleasures and Enjoyments,
with the cares and thoughts, and business of this World, when we are every day
liable to enter upon a new and unseen state, which above all things it concerns
us to take care about, and wisely to provide for. This Life is a continued
round and circle of bodily Actions and Business, but in death these cease, and
have an end; that let us down the Curtain, and the Drama of Life is over, and
whatever parts we Acted on this Stage, we lay them all aside; and what we
enjoyed in this Body and this World, is to be no more, and as if it had never
been, and we only had dreamed of it for a while. He takes away their breath,
they die and turn again to their dust, That, said he, is my present Case, and
in that very day all their Thoughts perish, i. e. all their apprehensions of
Worldly Happiness and Enjoyments with all their mighty projects and designs
they had here: how reasonable then is it for us frequently to meditate upon
dying, and how properly was it placed of old among the first rules and
principles of Wisdom. And upon my saying to him, that as he seemed to be got
almost to the end of the race of Life, his Friends were running hard after him,
and would in a short space overtake him; he replied, True, but prithee remember
that I have got the start of thee. Here he took occasion to discourse of the
Christian Revelation, which has discovered the most amazing, but the most
important and momentous Truths for Man to know: It Is this, said he, that gives
me the greatest ease and satisfaction in my present Circumstances, and fills my
mind with the most serene hopes, when I can find pleasure in nothing else; and
without it all my thoughts, when I stretch them as far as ever they will go,
are either dark or troublesome. That God should send his only begotten Son into
the World in our likeness to redeem and save Mankind, that he should propose by
him the advancing us, who are very inconsiderable, yea, sinful Creatures to
such a height of Glory, as to be equal to Angels, to see God as he is, and to
have eternally communicated to us of his own Excellencies and Perfections,
cannot but affect every one who believes and exercises his thoughts about these
matters, with Wonder and Admiration, with all possible Love and Gratitude, and
a most sollicitous study, and endeavor to obey God universally, in hopes of
that eternal Life, which God, who cannot lie, as the Apostle speaks, has
promised. He added, That the design of Christianity and the Terms of Life
therein proposed, did appear to him so very plain, that it was just matter of
amazement, how any Men who had looked into those records and considered their
own nature, and had any notion of the happiness of reasonable Creatures, could
miss of understanding them aright. The Antinomian Scheme he looked upon as
directly Antichristian, and the very worst that the most malicious Enemies of
the Christian name could possibly have invented; and he gave me a very sad
instance of a Person who lived many years in the habit of a very gross sin, and
yet had a quiet Conscience, and thought himself very safe upon those
principles, 'till being startled by a public Discourse of his, God made him an
Instrument of setting the poor Man right in his Notions, and engaging him to
reform his Life; for which his new Convert was very thankful, and assured him,
That he would not for all the World have lived so long in the habit of that
sin, if he had believed, as he thoroughly did now, that it would have hazarded
his Salvation. Here he took occasion to say that he was much confirmed in his
notion of the nullity of a Deathbed Repentance, by considering his present
Circumstances. What could I do, said he, Were I now to begin to Repent of a
long Wicked life? I profess, I could not have the least hopes of my Salvation;
but, blessed be God, this is not my own Case, I am sensible of a vast number of
Weaknesses and Imperfections; but they are such, as I am well assured, the
Covenant of Grace will make an allowance for: I can say I have been Sincere in
the main designs of my Life; and, I thank God, I make no question of being
happy, when I can once get loose from this Prison of an Earthly infirm body,
and shall be set above those Imperfections, which cannot be wholly remedied in
this state, and to be freed from which is the reward of the next. He gave me
his thoughts at large, about the Doctrine of the ever blessed Trinity, which
are not needful to be here set down, especially since I have already taken
some notice of that Matter. All that I shall add, is, That he never intended
any Controversy with those who believed this Doctrine; his business was to
defend it against those who opposed it, and he was fully satisfied, that what
he had Preached and Wrote on this subject, was agreeable to the Scriptures, and
the sense of the Church; and he was fully confirmed in his Thoughts, by the
judgment of the most Learned and unexceptionable Divines of our Church. The
Right Reverend Bishop Pearson explains the Divine Unity as he has done, and
asserts the necessity of it, for avoiding that old and so often urged objection
Tritheism: It is most necessary, says he, To assert that there is but one
Person, who is from none; for if there were more than one, which were from
none, it could not be denied but that there were more Gods than one: This
Origination of the Divine Paternity has anciently been looked upon, as the
assertion of the Unity, and therefore, the Son and the Holy Ghost are but one
God with the Father, because both from the Father, who is one, and so the Union
of them.

He perfectly concurred with this excellent Person, who, without any question,
is allowed to speak the sense of the Catholic Church; and with the Fathers of
the Nicene Council, as their sense is expressed in their Creed, which is a part
of our Liturgy. He believed the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, were one God, and
yet three real distinct Persons, as evidently distinguished in their Persons,
as united in their Nature: The Father is not the Son, nor the Holy Ghost; the
Son is not the Father, nor the Holy Ghost; the Holy Ghost is neither the Father
nor the Son: the true and living God can be but one, the Father is originally
the one God; the Son is the same God, but not originally of himself, but has
his Divine Essence by Communication from the Father; the Holy Spirit is the
same God, not originally subsisting of himself, but having the same Divine
Nature and Essence, common both to the Father and the Son, communicated by them
both to him; So that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God. The Father
originally that one Essence of infinite Wisdom, Power, and Majesty: The one
Person originally of himself, subsisting in that infinite Being; The Son is God
of God, by being of the Father; the Holy Ghost is God of God, by being of the
Father, and the Son, as receiving that Infinite and Eternal Essence from them
both: this is the explication of that adorable Mystery, as it is delivered by
that excellent Prelate forementioned, in his Authentic Book upon the Apostles
Creed. By this time his spirits and his breath failed him, and he could proceed
no further; and now having entertained me as long as he could, he gave me to
understand, That I must not expect much more from him, about one thing or
other; but that he would look to be entertained by me, the little time I should
have him with me: And immediately calling the Family to Prayers; so soon as
they were ended, he went to Bed, and was willing I should leave him for that
night. In the morning, which was Thursday, he desired me to accompany him in
his Chariot, to London to consult Dr. M --, not that he expected any relief
from his prescriptions, for he concluded himself too far gone to be recovered,
but because he thought it not fit to omit any thing that could be done, for the
sake of his Family chiefly, whose interest it was that he should have lived a
little longer with them. I returned with him to his Lodgings, but he found
himself so far spent, that he hastened to Bed, and desired me to come up to his
Chamber, and in the Church form to commend his Soul to God. Not being willing
to sink his Spirits too much, and presuming that his apprehensions of present
Death were the effect of the disorder his Journey had thrown him into, I made
use of some other Collects proper at that time, and purposely omitted the
commendatory Prayer; upon which he called to me, and entreated me to use no
other than that, and, if I pleased, the Lord's Prayer with it, For, said he, I
am just going. So soon as I had done, Well, said he, I now thank thee, and take
my leave of thee: I have nothing more to say to thee, nor needst thou say any
thing to me, thou have nothing further to do, but to bid me good night. And
immediately turning himself on one side, lay still, and spoke no more all that
night. On Friday morning he told me, he wondered to find himself alive;
however, we persuaded him to bleed, according to the Dr.'s order the night
before, he told us it was to no purpose, and had an opinion he should die
whilst he was bleeding; but he added, that he gave up his body to our
management, and we might do with it, as we pleased: by this time his Friend Dr.
T -- came in, to whom he talked sensibly of his case, and told him he was so
well skilled in his Profession, that he knew very well he could not live out
another night. The Dr. was no sooner gone, but he called me to him, and
attempted a Discourse which he was not able to go through with; what he aimed at
was something to this purpose: What a poor Creature is Man, if he had hopes
only in this Life, he must go naked and alone, and without any Friend to
accompany him to the dark Grave? All that thou will see of me presently will be
a stiff and senseless carcass: I have already lost all my thought, I can scarce
tell what I say to thee, I did not just now know where I was; now I do; I am in
my Bedchamber; I have no power to command a thought; thou shall in a few
moments see that they are all perished and gone. This he repeated several times
with some concern; and, in half an hour, they went quite away, and returned no
more, for all that afternoon he lay still, only at ten at night he put forth
one hand to me, and lifted up the other, and his eyes to Heaven, to signify to
me, that he had yet some knowledge, though his speech was gone, and that he was
praying for himself, and a little after midnight he breathed his last. I have
seen many Persons die, but none like him in all my life: I heard not the least
unbecoming word from him in all his illness, which was to me the more strange,
because I knew the natural heat and eagerness of his temper; he showed not the
least sign of uneasiness or dissatisfaction in his circumstances, nothing of
fondness for this World, or any desire to stay longer in it; no manner of fear
of death, or doubts about his future good state, but throughout his sickness,
and to the last minutes that his understanding continued, a perfect contempt of
all Earthly things, vigorous hopes of a Blessed Immortality, and an entire and
absolute resignation of himself to the Will of God. The truth is, his behavior
was enough to make a Man in love with death, and to long for a dissolution, and
at that time it made such an impression upon my spirits, that while it lasted,
I thought I could with great ease have died with him. Having been longer than I
intended in my account of the Author, I shall leave the following discourses to
speak for themselves. There is evidently a spirit of true Piety that breaths in
them, and one general aim proposed to promote a wise understanding and sincere
practice of Religion: They are published as they were found in his ordinary
Notes, and not designed by him for the Press, but if they may do any service to
God and Religion, and the Souls of Men, Our Author himself would have ventured
them Abroad into the World, without being any ways concerned for the defects
and imperfections, which may be spied out in 'em; for, in the prosecution of
such noble ends, he has declared himself sufficiently armed against all manner
of censures whatsoever, and publicly professed, That it was more satisfaction
to him to publish a few plain and useful Discourses, Pref. to Practical disc.
of Rep.
than to have had the ability, or met with the applause of writing the Wittiest
or Learned Book in the World.

The First Sermon.
ROMANS IX. 14. What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid.


THE Apostle in defense of Christianity, and the Gentiles being received into
it, who were Strangers and Aliens, rather than the Jews, who were the Children
of Abraham, and God's peculiar People, having to justify this, made use of an
Instance of God's free disposing his Favors as he pleases, and such as to the
Jews was an unanswerable President, because upon it all their Privileges
depended, above the rest of the World; the same Children, not of Abraham only,
but of Israel, to whose line the promised Seed was confined, before they were
either of them born, or were in a capacity to do Good or Evil, yet God declared
that Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, v. 13. and notwithstanding the
rights of Primogeniture, yet transmitted this his Love and Hatred down even to
their Posterities, the Israelites, and the Edomites; upon this he seems to be
startled with an Objection, rising up from all this, and looking him fully in
the Face; What shall we say then? is their unrighteousness with God? God
forbid. This is so shrewd an absurdity, that if we must be driven to it, it is a
demonstration against not only Christianity, which he was defending, but
against all Religion: For. if God be not a Being of Righteousness and Justice
in what he does, who can expect rewards for serving him, or need sear
punishment for any wickedness he commits; Virtue and Vice are but empty names,
if he has not an impartial regard to them, and his own words are not to be
trusted or credited, if we question his Righteousness and Integrity; if we are
not well assured of that in the first place, we can never know but he may
deceive us, in whatever he says, or promises to us, nay, all his Revelations
may be but like the Heathens deceitful Oracles, to impose upon the credulous,
and all his Miracles but tricks of Legerdemain, and slights of an Almighty hand
to deceive us more artificially; but God forbid, as the Apostle says, that any
such thing should blasphemously be charged upon the great God, or any such
Notions formed of him, from whence it is unavoidable to infer them. Tho we can
never get the thoughts of him out of our mind, nor wholly take out the Natural
Characters of him, that he has imprinted upon us, yet if we so blur, and deface
them, with lines drawn from our own ill Tempers or mistaken Apprehensions, as
to represent him instead of his Essential Excellencies, and Moral Perfections,
which are the brightest Glory that shines all around him, with the black and
ugly features of Almighty Rage and Cruelty, Malignant Spite, or Ill Nature; or
which may be the same, Imperious, and Arbitrary and Ungoverned Will, conducted
by no Principles of Justice, or Goodness, nor acting by any Rules of Right, or
Wrong, but as the unaccountable impulses of Fondness or Anger happen to incline
him; if we set up such a monstrous Idol in our thoughts with ghastly looks, and
terrible visage, instead of the most Perfect, and Righteous, and Blessed God,
as we do the greatest dishonor to the Divine Nature, mere than if the Jews had
really set up an Asses head, as they were charged to adore, for the God of
Israel, so we destroy that inward love and delight, that hearty esteem and
veneration which the thoughts of so excellent and amiable, so great and good,
and just a Being should excite in us, and do a great many other the saddest
mischiefs to True Religion; as I shall show by and by: We make it a desirable
thing even to the best of Men, that there were no such Being in the World, under
whose Tyranny, for such is Power without Justice, they may be made miserable,
as well as others, and all must groan under his Iron Scepter, and have reason
to wish they could wrest it out of his Clutches, but none could kiss it, or be
satisfied with it; they might tremble and crouch, and bow before it, offer
Prayers, as the Manichees to their evil Principles, or build Temples, as the
Romans to the Fever, or the Plague; they may dread him as an irresistible evil,
but never Worship, and Honor, and Esteem him as we ought to do an Infinite
God, i. e. as an Almighty Goodness, or an Eternal Righteousness.

But alas, who did ever deny that God was Righteous? who was ever so bold as to
charge the great Lord and Creator of the World with the least shadow of
Unrighteousness? or what pretense, or possibility indeed can there be of any
such thing? Is not whatever he does therefore righteous, because he does it,
let it be what it will? There have been many who have thought he made the
greatest part both of Men and Angels to be eternally miserable, and doomed
them, before they were created, to that wretched State, and that he might have
dealt so with all the rest, if he had pleased, and yet allow him to have been
very righteous; others have thought that he appointed that they should first
sin, at least some one of them, and from thence he would take occasion to damn
as many of them as he pleased, without any regard to their own actions; and
this they thought was a better way of displaying his Righteousness to us: But
who could ever be so foolish, as to charge God downright with unrighteousness?
He that has none above him, to control or determine him, to give any Laws, or
Rules to him, whatever he does according to the purpose and pleasure of his own
Will is most certainly Righteous.

This is the common and easy, but mistaken account of God's righteousness,
which because the Apostle here does not make use of as he might, and so have
given a shorter answer to the supposed Objection, but rather allows that there
is some unrighteousness, which is so in its own nature, and which therefore
could not be charged upon God; for else, to say with such abhorrence, God
forbid that there be unrighteousness with him, would be only to say, God forbid
that he should not do what he does, or that he should not will what he wills;
when if you suppose that to be what you please, yet the supposing him to will
and to do it, makes it to be righteous, and then there would be no need of such
a phrase, (...), as is here used before hand. I shall endeavor therefore at
this time,

1. To lay down a better, and a firmer Notion, and account of God's
Righteousness.

2. To show you the usefulness of it, by the consequences of the other Opinion.
And,

3. To vindicate the Righteousness of God according to this true Notion of it,
and clear it from what either in this Chapter, or any where else may seem to
reflect upon it.

1. I shall endeavor to lay down a better and a firmer Notion of God's
Righteousness, and that in these Particulars.

1. It Is not mere Will and Arbitrary Pleasure that makes God to be Righteous,
for that is such a floating and uncertain thing, that it cannot be a fit and
stable foundation for Righteousness; mere Power and Will like a violent Wind
act always strongly and impetuously, but uncertainly too, sometimes one way,
and sometimes the quite contrary, as the vapors happen to rise and move it; It
will fall under no certain Rules or Calculation, nor can you tell where to have
it the next moment, so variable will be ungoverned Will, and so impetuous, when
it is assisted with Strength and Power, that only gives it weight and force, but
determines it not one way or the other; and if all the effects, and efforts of
this were to be called Right, then the doing quite contrary things may happen
to be so; for what should hinder mere arbitrary Will from doing one thing at
one time, and the quite contrary at another, unless it have something to
regulate it? The destroying the Righteous with the Wicked, damning Innocents,
and doing all imaginable mischief, shall be called righteousness, if done by
the Manichean Evil, and Almighty Principle, for there can be no difference
between him and the good one, if what both of them will, be therefore
righteous. Whilst righteousness is thus founded in Power and Will, be it never
so great, yet if it be not bounded by any certain rules of Right and Wrong,
what shall keep it steady to its self, or prevent its doing at one time what it
dislikes, and is therefore unrighteous at another? Like a mighty Torrent, it
will rage, and roll, and break down all before it, if it have no certain Banks,
and Current to keep it in; if Justice and Righteousness be only blind Will,
without any Scales in her hands to weigh things by, it will be but the same
with blind Chance and Fortune, and never to be distinguished: Did the Divine
Nature act by no certain and fixed Rules, it might be called Great and Powerful,
but neither Just nor Righteous; there could be no such thing, if there were not
some unalterable Standard of Right and Wrong, and some other fixed measure of
those things, besides what Arbitrary Will made to it self, according to which
the Judge of all the Earth shall do right, Genesis 18.25.

2. It Is God's acting by the unalterable rules of Righteousness and Justice,
that makes him to be righteous; and the absolute impossibility he should act
otherwise from the Rectitude and Perfection of his own Nature, there are (...),
as Justin Martyr calls them, things eternally just, which are not made, and
fictitious things, but are natural and everlasting, as are the Eternal Truths
and Verities of things which were not made so at such a time, by the command or
will of another, but were fixed from Everlasting, and were so immutably in their
own Nature; and these are the fixed and unalterable rules of Righteousness which
arise from the mutual Relations and Respects that things have to one another,
and are not to be altered even by God himself: As common Notions and
Mathematical Axioms are founded in the Nature of things themselves, that the
whole is greater then its part, that Equals added to Equals, make Equals, which
are Everlasting Truths, and can never be made otherwise, no, not by God
himself, but are so from the mere (...) and Respects of things to one another;
so there are also as Eternal and Immutable rules of Righteousness fixed and
determined by the Nature of things, and their Relations to one another, as
plain and unalterable, as any Mathematical Verities, and as necessary
Foundations for Morality and Justice, as the others for Science and
Demonstration; so that Right and Wrong is in its own Nature, as certain and
unchangeable as the Nature of a Circle or a Triangle, and God can no more act
contrary to these, than he can make the three Angles of a Triangle not equal to
two right ones, or two and two not to be four, or one of the parts of a
Contradiction not to be false.

3. These Eternal, and Immutable Rules of Right and Wrong, by which God acts,
and can no more violate, than the Intelligible Natures, or Truths of things,
are such as we by our Reason can know, and understand, and make Judgment by,
else we must never pretend to form a Notion of God by them, or ascribe any such
thing as Righteousness to him, and when he so often calls himself the God
Righteous, and Just, who is without any Iniquity Deuteronomy. 32.4. and David could
say of him, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and thy Judgments are Upright, Ps.
119.137. a supposes that we have Idea's and conceptions of those things, and
that they are true, and agreeable to the things themselves; Nay, when God
appeals to us, Ezekiel. 18.25. to Judge betwixt him and others, whether his ways
are equal, or no, it is not sure like making a blind man Arbitrator about
colors, or a judge of Beauty; We must be supposed to have Power, and Faculties
to make Judgment in the Case, and that the Principles of Right and Wrong that
are in our minds are agreeable to the nature of things, and to those that God
himself acts by: God indeed says in the Prophet Isa. 55.8. My thoughts are not
your thoughts, nor my ways your ways, the meaning whereof is not, that what we
think to be just, and right, and equal, and appears most plainly so to us, yet
is quite otherwise in God, and of a different Nature, for this destroys all our
Conceptions of any Perfection in God; but the plain sense of that place is,
that God was not like the Jews, hard to be reconciled and unwilling to forgive
injuries, that was spoken as an encouragement to the Command just before, Let
the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon, for my thoughts, are not your thoughts, nor my ways
your ways. God indeed is infinitely more Wise, more Righteous, more Perfect in
all things than the best of his Creatures, yet we must apply the same Ideas,
and Apprehensions of those things which we have in our minds to him, that we do
to those, as we demonstrate alike of a greater or a lesser Circle, or else we
lose all notion of his Mercy, Truth, and Righteousness, and when we say, God
cannot lie, or do what is evil, or unjust, we mean the very same thing that
would be so in men, or else we must mean nothing.

There be many Circumstances indeed, and different cases, and considerations in
the Actions of God to his Creatures, and the Creatures to one another, but yet
when they are allowed for, it is by the same Scales, as I may say, that God
weighs out Right which we also use, only there must something on his side be
put into them sometimes to make them even, for should they be others unknown to
us, we should be wholly at a loss how to weigh, or measure his Actions, or how
to account them to be Just and Righteous, or how to pronounce that truly of
them: But I may say of Righteousness, as Tully says of Reason, that it is
common both to Man and God, and the very same Signatures and Marks of things,
which are Originally in the Divine Mind, are instampt also upon all rational
and understanding Beings.

4. God's acting by those Eternal and Immutable Rules of Righteousness, is
truly Righteousness in him, though he has no superior to give him any Laws and
Rules; for Righteousness and all Virtue, the truest and the noblest, is what
proceeds rather from a Vital Principle, and inward Energy of the mind, than a
set and liveless course of Obedience to Laws and Rules prescribed by another;
when a great and brave Mind acts by its own wise and generous Principles,
follows the Notices and Dictates of its own All-seeing Understanding, and its
Will is always regulated by its own Essential Perfections, and a Natural
Rectitude that is in it self, so that it can no more do an ill or unjust thing,
than change it self, and put off its own Nature; this is such a Righteousness
that has root in it self, and lives, and grows from that innate radical
Principle, and differs as much from the other, as a thing that grew into such a
shape from a Plastic and Vital Power in it self, does from that which was cut
and carved by the hand of another. This is that Original Righteousness
springing up in the true Fountain, like light in the Sun, whilst Righteousness
in us, though it be of the same Nature, is but like that in the Air derived from
it, and mixed with a great deal of darkness and a mere observance of Precepts
and Rules, as they are prescribed by another, and the acting from a Righteous
and Inward Principle in ones own mind, are as different as the Clock-Work
Motion, and flying of Regiomontanus's Eagle, from some. Wheels and Wires, and
the Natural Motion of a living one, from its own Spirits and Muscles, and the
force and spring of inward life.

Thus is Righteousness in God truly Righteousness, though he has no Superior to
move or determine him: And thus I have laid down what I conceive the true
Notion and Fountain of Gods Righteousness, which though it may be too deep for
some to see to the bottom, yet it stands upon the firmer ground, and is
immovable.

2. I shall now show you the usefulness of it, from the mischievous
Consequences of the other opinion, That Gods Righteousness consists only in
Arbitrary and Ungoverned Will.

1. That takes very much off from our Obligation to Right, if there be no such
thing in the Divine Nature; by Righteousness may be meant a very large and
comprehensive Virtue, that contains almost all others under it, and there must
be the same Reason and Foundation of those as of this, and if we can conceive
the God we worship to be without those, it will greatly abate our esteem of
them and obligation to them; if we conceive that great mind is happy and
perfect without those, we have reason to think our own may be so too, for
whatever thoughts we have of God, they must be the Standard and Measure to us
of all Perfection. It is a very natural Consequence which St. John makes, 1 Ep.
2.29. if ye know that he is Righteous, ye know that every one that does
Righteousness is born of him: if Righteousness be founded in the Divine Nature,
then whoever is truly Righteous, is both like unto God and beloved by him as a
Child of its Parent. God cannot but love and be pleased with what is so
agreeble to himself, and bears his Divine Image and Resemblance upon it; for
the same Reason that he loves himself, and takes infinite complacency and
satisfaction in his own Perfections he will love also those who are partakers
of the same Divine Life and Nature, and are Righteous as he is Righteous, that
is, Righteous Men, as he is a Righteous God, for that the Righteous Lord should
love Righteousness, as the Psalmist speaks, Ps. 11.7. is the result of his own
Natural and Essential Perfections, but there is no reason why he should not
love any thing, even the contrary, if he were not truly Righteous himself, and
his love depended upon mere Arbitrary Will, without regard to any thing else.

2. This has been therefore the ground of all Superstition and undue Worship of
God, and of the great mistakes that are in Religion, the conceiving God to be a
mere Great and Arbitrary Being, and only Absolute and Almighty Will, without
the Perfection, and the line of Righteousness; from hence Men have hoped to
please him, and procure his favor with outward Pomp and Solemnity, with
multitude of Sacrifices, and great Presents and Oblations, with Bowings, and
Cringes, and Prostrations before him, with bended Knees, and empty Words, and a
course of External Performances, without any true and inward Righteousness;
they have imagined a sort of Religious flattery would take with him, and that
it was enough to sooth up his greatness with some officious addresses, and to
make their court to him with a set of hollow and affected Complements; by these
they thought God was sufficiently obliged, and took great pleasure in them,
like some vain and foolish and haughty Mortals: Indeed was God such an one as
themselves, or as they imagine, he might be so, but if he be a Being
Essentially Righteous, and Holy himself, it is then not to be hoped, that any
thing will commend us to him, or procure his Favor but a Righteous Mind;
without that, let Men dispute as long as they please, no Man can be Elected or
Justified, or think to be saved by a Righteous God; nor can it be worth while
to contrive any Tricks or Devices whatsoever, which has been the great business
of false Religion, by which Men would fain please God, and be very Religious,
without being truly Righteous; without this neither Penance nor Absolution;
Whipping, or going Barefoot, Pardons, or Indulgences, Masses, or Pilgrimages
will signify any thing, and whatever we trust or rely on, wherever we ground
our Hopes, and make comfortable Reserves and Expectations to our selves, will
most certainly deceive us without Righteousness.

Those who think God is only infinite Will, acting Arbitrarily, without
observing any rules of Righteousness, if their Constitution such that they are
apt to have gay and pleasing Ideas and Images of things Represented to their
Minds; they are inclined to think that God will be easily pleased with them for
very little Matters, and so fall into that sanguine Superstition which I
mentioned before, or think perhaps that he has Chosen and Elected them from
Eternity, and their names are written in the Book of Life; but if their blood
be thick, and their fancy blacker, then they imagine God to be Severe and
Revengeful, hard to be pleased, and easily provoked, and implacable when he is
so: and with these sad and dreadful Apprehensions, his Mind is always haunted
as with frightful Specter, and he comes to the Temples, as Plutarch says, as
if 'twere to the Dens of Wild Beasts, or the Nests of Dragons, for he conceives
that God is as hurtful as any of those Creatures: so there with a scared
Countenance and a perplexed Mind, the timorous Worshipper offers up his Child
perhaps, or the reeking Bowels of some Humane Sacrifice, or sometimes his own
Blood to the God he Worships, and thus hopes to appease the cruel Moloch and
the fierce Cerberus with some Morsel or other, that may satisfy his Ravenous
indignation; all which miserable Superstition, and mistakes in Religion, which
were so Notorious in the Heathen World, and not quite got out of the Christian
Church, are for ever prevented by this clear and firm Principle, That God is a
Being truly Righteous himself, and that he neither loves nor hates others, but
as they are, or are not so; for Righteousness excludes both partial fondness
and unreasonable displeasure.

3. It makes all Religion to be a positive Arbitrary thing, and takes off from
its intrinsic Worth and Excellency, as having no Foundation in the real
goodness of what is commanded, nor in the Nature of God, but only in his
Arbitrary Will and Pleasure. Whereas this it is, that truly commends Religion
to the Minds of considering Men, that it is the obliging us to such Laws as are
Eternally and Unalterably Good, from the nature of things; which do naturally
produce good Effects to our selves and the World, and are the necessary causes
of our happiness, and that therefore God has laid them upon us, not as a Yoke
he would have us submit to, merely because we ought to be subject to him, but
as they are good in themselves, and the necessary means of our. Happiness: that
his Commands are but the Copies of his own Original and wise Reason, the
Transcript of his own Eternal Righteousness and Perfections; and that the
Righteousness he Commands us, is taken from God himself, and is a lively
Pattern and Exemplar of his own Nature, and Essential Righteousness.

This does extremely commend Religion and Righteousness to us, that it is not
only founded in the Will, but the Nature of God too, and is not only interwoven
with the very make of our Humane Nature, but derived from the Natural
Perfections of God, as the Fountain of it; that it is not an imperious restraint
upon us from humoursom and boundless Will, that had no antecedent Reason thus
to limit and confine us; but that all the Laws of Righteousness, besides the
Stamp and Impress that Heaven has fixed upon them, are of intrinsic Worth and
Value, and that their own goodness is the firmest sanction and the truest
reason of their obligation.

4. The having such a Conception of God, is very dishonorable to God, and
uncomfortable to our selves, if we consider no other effects of it upon our
lives; it is a robbing him of one of the Noblest Perfections of his Nature, of
the richest Jewels of his Crown: and the most resplendent Justice and
Righteousness are the greatest Excellencies of a Governor, of a great and
powerful Being, and his power without those will be only a greater mischief.
There is nothing that all Men do more admire and commend than impartial Justice
in those who are above them, because it is a guard and protection of every Man,
a fence set about him and all his Interests, and nothing is more manifest than
the influence which Justice has upon the good of the World; so that every body
when he thinks on a Cato or an Aristides blesses him in his heart, and speaks
well of him with his Lips. And what we think such a Perfection in men and such
an object of Esteem there, if we deny it to God, we stop one of the main
streams of Honor, that should flow from him, and cut off the brightest Ray of
the Divine Luster: neither can we give that Honor that belongs to him, if we
strip him of those Perfections, any more than we can see the Sun, if we disrobe
it of its Light, or admire the face that we have mangled and deformed: There
must be such a congruity in the Object, like Charms sitted to attract our
Passions, and excite our Esteem, or else we can no more love and honor than we
can taste with our Eyes, and see with our Palate: and mere Power is no more an
object of Love and Honor, but as it is an Instrument to do (...) good, than an
Earthquake or a Clap of Thunder; it will amaze and affright us, and put us into
a Consternation, but never bring us heartily to Honor and Esteem it. We shall
dread such a Being as has us under, and can crush us as he pleases, just as a
little Bird does the Eagle, when its Claws are upon it; and we shall live in as
much terror and confusion, and uncertain destractions of mind from such
thoughts of God, as a Slave does under his Merciless Patron, who knows not what
hardship he shall suffer next, whether he shall be Sold, or Starved, or
Murdered. If when we know that his Power is Absolute and Irresistible, and have
no security from the goodness of his Nature, that he shall not use it to rack
and torture us, and do us mischief unless we do that which Justly deserves it;
we may then be glad if we could with the Epicureans, free our minds from the
melancholy thoughts of such a Cruel and Overruling Nemesis, and must never
hope to come to perfect Ease, and Tranquillity, and repose of Mind, till we had
got rid of the sears of such an Invisible Mormo. But God forbid that this
should be the case of Mankind; no it is the most equal and impartial Justice
that rules the World, that Administers all affairs with the greatest Justice
and Righteousness, whom we have no reason to dread, unless we do base and
wicked things, that disorder and do mischief: then indeed he will severely
Chastise and Punish us, but else there is not the severity or injustice or hard
usage that we need ever fear from him, no more than a Child from the most
indulgent Parent, or a Subject from the best natured Prince and Governor. There
was never in all his vast Kingdom and Empire of the World, in all his long and
lasting Government, any the least Unrighteousness that could ever be charged
upon it, nor has any, the meanest Person, reason to complain of any the least
injustice done it, nor ever shall have; which is the third and last Particular.

3. To Vindicate the Righteousness of God, according to this true account of
it, and clear it from what either in this Chapter, or any where else, may seem
to reflect upon it, which will be great ease to our minds, and confirm what has
been asserted before: and this I shall do by laying down briefly two or three
Principles, that will meet with almost all cases and all objections about this
matter, for I must not descend now to Particulars.

1. That Arbitrary and Unlimited goodness is no instance of Unrighteousness, as
if a Prince think fit to show extraordinary Favors to some of his Subjects
more than others, to raise them to higher Places and Preserments, or to give
them some greater Privileges and Advantages under him, he is not to be called
unjust or unrighteous if he do no wrong to his other Subjects, though they do not
taste so largely of his Favor and Bounty: for a Power and Prerogative to do
good, is Unlimited, only Justice, like the Angel to Abraham, stops its hand
from doing mischief. And this was the case in this difficult Chapter, of God's
bestowing the Privileges of the Gospel, and Christianity on the Gentiles,
rather than the Jews; As the Gentiles, which followed not after Righteousness,
have attained to Righteousness, even the Righteousness that is of Faith, but
Israel, which followed after the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to the
Law of Righteousness, v. 30.31. tho that was wholly by their own Fault: And
this principle the Jews had no reason to disallow, who had before reapt so much
benefit by it; it being the only ground why God was more gracious to them, than
the rest of the World, and that he still allows some Persons and Countries much
greater means of Grace than others, though there are none who want what is
sufficient for them.

2. That God, as absolute Lord, Proprietor and Creator of the World, has so
vast a Right over his Creatures, as to put 'em into what condition he pleases,
that is not worse than the having no Being, for that is but giving 'em a lesser
good. But to put them into such a state as it were desirable rather to be
annihilated, than to be so miserable; to do this without some fault of theirs
that shall deserve this as a punishment, is against the plainest Axioms and
Rules of Right and Justice, and is to take more from a Creature, than he gives
it, and so make himself as it were a debtor to it. There cannot be any such
thing as unlimited Right, no, not in God over his Creatures, for all Right
supposes some Rules to bound and limit it, the transgressing of which may be
supposed, and therefore may be wrong and injury, and here is the (...) of the
Predestinarians: but to dispose of Kingdoms in this World and tranfer 'em from
the Canaanites to the Jews, to give others an express command to make the
Jewels of the Egyptians their own, to command the life of a Child at the hand
of its Parents, as a Sacrifice to him that gave it, and the like; this is a
right belongs to the absolute Lord, Proprietor, and Creator of the whole World;
and as such he may give Jacob a more fruitful Land and greater Kingdom, and
show his love to him rather than to Esau that way.

3. That punishment and severity upon sinners, which is necessary for public
good, and for the Ends of Government, is not to be called Unrighteous, be it
never so great: and I can never believe that God does ever inflict more, no,
not in the Eternal torments of Hell, nor has any other end in that, or any
other punishment and severity, than to give a sufficient sanction to his Laws;
than wisely to Govern, and keep the world in order, and procure with the best
Advantage, the Welfare and Happiness of all the Beings that are in it; and
whatsoever punishments are necessary to that end are upon that account Just and
Righteous; since that is the only true measure by which a Just proportion can
be assigned between the fault and the punishment. I know not what they mean who
talk of any sort of Vindictive Justice in God different from this, as if there
were any revengefull Passion in him to be satisfied by the miseries of his
Creatures, or he took any other pleasure in the punishment of them, but merely
the pleasure of doing Justice; 'ris this is a further assurance to us of Gods
Righteousness, that a Being so great and powerful and self sufficient, can
have no such passions as spring up in weak and impotent minds, nor be tempted
to do any injustice because that proceeds always from weakness and imbecility.

But I must enlarge no further on these particulars, I hope what has been said
already will give some satisfaction to our minds, that there is no
Unrighteousness in the great God. But he that is infinitely Great, is therefore
infinitely Just and Righteous, because he can have no Mean and Unrighteous
designs, either for himself, or against others, so that Justice and
Righteousness is necessarily joined with Almighty Power, and it must be a
thought full of dread and horror that can conceive it possible to have them
parted and separated; but in Truth, where there is any one infinite Perfection
there must be all, and therefore we have the same Evidence from reason of Gods
being Righteous, as of his being Almighty, or of his being at all; and they who
from some mistaken places of Scripture and Revelation endeavor to Represent
God under another Notion and Character, destroy that true natural Notion and
Conception of a God, upon which all Revelation is built, and which must be
previous and antecedent to it; and make Religion, and the thoughts of a God,
which is the most cheerful and comfortable thing in the World, to be an
hideously black and melancholy Superstition; and as this may reasonably be the
cause of a great many's becoming Atheists, who had rather believe there was no
such Being as a God, than that he was such an Unrighteous being as some would
represent him, so it would tempt any Man to wish to be so if he could, and if
it were in his Power. But what shall we say then, is there Unrighteousness with
God? God forbid.

The Second Sermon.
MATTHEW. XI. 29. last Part. And ye shall find rest unto your Souls.


OUR Blessed Savior in the foregoing verses, was exhorting all Persons to
embrace his Religion, who were under any load and Burden, Trouble, and
uneasiness of Mind, and he promises to give them ease and refreshment. Come
unto me allye that Labor and are heavy Laden, and I will give you rest.

This is a great Undertaking and Proposal, and very desirable and inviting to
Mankind. The Diseases and Disorders and Uneasinesses of the Mind, are a great
many more than those of the Body, and it is a more Divine thing and more owing
to the Gods as Tully speaks, to find out proper Physic and Remedies to Cure
them than the other; Our Savior proposes his Religion and his Example, as the
means to do this, Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me. There were a great
many Sects of Philosophers of old, in which the wisest Men always aimed at this
Tranquillity and ease of Mind, and proposed their Doctrine as the way to attain
it, and gave admirable Rules of living up to such heights of Virtue, as should
make Men casie and happy in all conditions, even the worst that could befall
them; and a great many of them it must be confessed were as great Examples, as
Teachers of these, such as Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Zeno, and others, who
were the natural Prophets and Apostles of the Heathen World, and taught 'em the
best Wisdom and Virtue, and the best Directions how to attain the truest and
perfectest happiness, they knew humane Nature to be capable of. Revelation, and
especially the Religion of Christ, has done the same with much greater
advantage; has shown us a right Notion of Happiness, and all that conduces to
it, and has both enlarged the view and prospect of it in another World, and
improved the Method of acquiring and obtaining it, and confirmed that good old
Notion, that it lies only in Virtue, that nothing else can make a Man happy,
and this alone can do it. Our Savior as well as most of the Philosophers were
to all appearance none of the happiest men in the World, they were poor and
mean and despised and contemned, and had very little or none of those things,
in which the World places Happiness, Riches and Honors, and Pleasures, which
we so fondly admire and esteem and pursue after, as the happiest things that
are to be enjoyed, and think those are not in earnest or only envious and
illnatur'd because they cannot attain them, who speak otherwise of them. Our
Savior proposes no Worldly advantages to his followers, but rather the quite
contrary, and yet he Preaches happiness to them even at present, and joins the
Beatitudes and the Christian Virtues together in his Sermon, as inseparable
Companions; and though he left his Apostles in a World full of afflictions and
seeming miseries, yet he tells them, he leaves his Peace with them, John 14.27.
Such a Peace as was proper for him to give and them to receive, not as the
World gives, but such an one as should have this effect upon them, as that
their hearts should not be troubled nor be afraid, that no evils should disturb
or take away this Peace of mind, that in him they might have Peace, though in the
World they had tribulation, John 16.33. and that they might always be of good
cheer because he had overcome the World. It Is a great thing which he here
offers to Mankind, be they never so weary and oppressed with cares, and
troubles, labor under never so many seeming evils and afflictions here, have
never such great loads and oppressions upon their Minds and Spirits, that make
them uneasy to themselves, and very miserable within; that if they come to his
Religion, and take his Yoke upon them, follow the Rules and precepts of his
Doctrine, and become of such a temper and spirit as he was, that they shall
certainly meet with ease and comfort, relief, and refreshment, And ye shall
sind rest to your Souls. This Rest and Tranquillity of Mind is the greatest
Happiness in the World; what Philosophy aimed and pursued after, what we should
endeavor to attain above every thing, and what if we once perfectly reach,
nothing could ever make us the least miserable; what alone is worth seeking
after, by all the Rules of Philosophy and Religion, and without which, nothing
is worth aiming or seeking after, and lastly what Christ and Christianity
propose, and can bring us to.

How and by what ways they do it, or what is the best means to attain it, shall
be my chief business to show; as to what it is, or wherein it consists, that we
know better by inward sensation or preception, than by any description or Ideas
of it; we feel what ease is both in Mind and Body, and we have a quick Sense of
pain and uneasiness in both; Indolency of Body, and Tranquillity of Mind, are
known by all to be great and desirable things. The pleasures of our compounded
nature, and such as have a near Analogy and Resemblance with one another,
however we are forced to express and describe one by the other, they are not
mere Negatives, such as suppose only no Sense of pain or evil, which may belong
to one that is asleep or stupefied, or to a Stock or a Stone: but a positive
Sense of what is agreeble to its Nature and the right use of its powers and
faculties, and an Enjoyment or Perception of a good or Pleasure, suitable to
them, with an entire freedom at the same time from what is contrary and
unagreeable, painful and troublesome and uneasy. The very absence of what is
painful and uneasy, brings a great pleasure, because Nature then enjoys it
self, and has its own suitable perceptions without any disturbance. What
Diseases and Pains and Tortures are to the Body, the same are disorders and
troubles to the mind, from tormenting passions and uneasy Thoughts; from Fear,
and Guilt, and Sorrow, the apprehension of evil as present, or coming upon it;
we want words to express what we know and conceive of this: and Peace of mind
is opposed to all things that weary and disease, and disquiet and disturb it
whatever they are, whether the Evils and Troubles and Afflictions of this
World, or Passions and Disorders from within, inordinate and irregular Desires
and inward Commotions contrary to right Reason, or the more dreadful terrors
and horrors of some greater evil than any in this World. The mind, it is
certain, has a quicker and more smart, and cutting sense o^ Pain by these, than
the Body from any Disease. The Diseases and Maladies, Disorders and Pains of
the mind, are greater and harder to be cured, than those of the Body. Wisdom,
and Philosophy, Virtue and Religion, are the proper Physic, the true Cure and
Remedy of them, the only things that can bring the mind to that Good, Sound,
and Healthful State, that it shall be well and rightly disposed in it; due
Frame and Crasis, sitted to perform its proper Operations, and enjoy its
agreeable Pleasures; the Pleasure and Enjoyment of its self, and its own Wife,
and Virtuous, and good Thoughts, the pleasant Hopes and Expectations of
Religion, and all the superadded Enjoyments from thence, that Revelation
assures us of; besides what are natural to it from the right Exercise of its
own Powers, such as Peace of Conscience upon Pardon of Sin, inward Sense of
God's Favor, or his lifting up the light of his Countenance upon us, Joy in
the Holy Ghost, and rejoicing in hope of the Glory that shall be revealed:
These are such Pleasures and Enjoyments of Mind, as are beyond Nature, but
within Christianity, which raise and exalt the Soul to something beyond that
Tranquillity and Calmness, and Serenity of Mind which Philosophy so talked of.
This improves it higher, and raises a more noble structure of Happiness to our
Souls, but upon the same Foundation, having the same Bottom to build upon, the
inward Ease and Peace and rest of the Mind, which is the greatest thing we can
desire, or is worth our attaining.

To be very easy always within, to have Peace and Quiet in our own Breasts, to
be disturbed with no uneasy Thoughts, no tumultuous Passions, no Fear, Grief,
or Sorrow, no carking Care, or corroding Trouble; to be rufled with no
discomposure, have no dark Clouds hanging over our Thoughts, no Storms or
Tempests raging within our Breasts; this is Tranquillity of Mind an inward Calm,
and Serenity of Thoughts, contrary to that Temper of mind, Which is like the
troubled Sea, which cannot rest, to which the Scripture compares it, Isa.
57.20. neither apt to be much raised or too much depressed, Nec attollens se
unquam, nec deprimens, as Seneca speaks, Sed semper aequali, and placido statu,
always even and in a placid state, propitius sibi, and sua laetus aspiciens,
pleased with its self and its own thoughts, and having nothing to sour and
disorder it self, or infuse a poisonous bitterness into it. This is that good
state of Soul, that rest which is a greater Happiness than all the World can
afford, which he that has, will be Happy in whatever Circumstances or Condition
he is, and which we might certainly find by Religion and Christianity, if we
lived up to the Principles and Duties of it; Take my Yoke upon you, and learn
of me, and ye shall find rest to your Souls.

I shall premise a few cautions to prevent any mistake in this matter, and the
better to state and explain it.

Then show how we may by the help and means of Religion, attain to this Rest,
Peace, and Tranquillity of Mind.

1. First then, I do not pretend that Religion and Virtue, will set Men free
from all the evils of this World, and be a protection against any manner of
outward Troubles or Calamities ever falling upon us; This cannot be, For Man is
born to Trouble as the Sparks fly upwards, Job 5.7. They are a great many of
them natural and necessary and unavoidable, and God must alter the nature of
Things and the nature of the World, and work perpetual Miracles to free us
always from them; to have our Bodies subject to no Diseases and Indispositions,
our Estates subject to no Losses and Casualities, or Children or Friends not
subject to Death, or to be taken away from us, this is impossible, and what no
good Man must expect; that the Rain or Drought should not sometimes spoil his
Corn, the Sea shipwreck his Goods or Vessel, the Fire burn his House as well as
another: these common misfortunes which happen alike to all, and a great many
Losses from the fraud and injustice of others, as well as abundance of natural
evils arising from the Mechanism of our selves and the World; these the most
Virtuous cannot expect to be exempted from, but like Travelers through this
World, they must all pass through the common Road with others, and sometimes meet
with bad and unpleasant way, and now and then with a shower that may fall upon
'em: but the Religious Man is however much better provided against those,
against the common and unavoidable evils of life, than another who is but
equally subject to them; his Mind is Armed against all the darts of Fortune,
and they shall not enter so deep, nor smart so grievously as to the wicked; he
has something within to support him under all the Calamities and Afflictions of
this World, a good God, a good Conscience, and a good Prospect, and Hopes of
Heaven, when a wicked Man has none of those to keep him up, but must wholly
sink and fall under them. The one will have the Peace of his Mind, and a
Comfort within, that shall pour Oil and Balsam into all the Wounds of Fortune
and make Afflictions more easy and tolerable; but the other will increase the
smart of them, by his wickedness, that will then lie heavier upon him, when his
Spirit is oppressed with other troubles, the load of those and of his sins both
will be insupportable to him, and when his mind is sore by its inward guilt,
every hard thing from without, will more pinch and gall him. A good Man may
keep this Peace of Mind under any Worldly afflictions, but a bad Man cannot.

2. Neither will Religion make all things equal as to the outward Happiness of
this life, arising from Men's different States and Conditions and unequal
Circumstances in this World. It may be allowed that there is a proper and real
good, in the Plenty, Riches, and Conveniences of life, and that a good Man is
not quite so happy that wants them, as if he had 'em; but they might be an
accession, a small Addition to his more true and greater Happiness of Virtue,
though that be infinitely more Great and Valuable and Desirable, yet I do not
know that Religion takes away or disallows the other; we may therefore both
Lawfully Desire and Endeavor to make our outward Circumstances in this World
as good, and easy, and comfortable as we can, within the bounds of Virtue, and
it is both Natural and Lawful to do it; and it borders, I doubt, upon Hypocrisy
or Superstition to pretend the contrary, and is always confuted by a contrary
Desire and Practice in those who have talked otherwise. But still a good Man
can be contented and easy in a very mean and strait Condition, if Providence
allots this to him; and he will not Disquiet or Disturb himself, for what he
sees others enjoy, if God sees not sit for him to have them: and tho he can
allow a lesser good and a proper use and convenience, and some small Happiness
perhaps as to this life, to belong to those outward things in respect of the
Wants and Necessities, and the State we are in here, which made Aristotle and
the Peripateticks put the Externa Bona into the Ingredients of complete
Happiness; yet he can be very Happy with a few of those as knowing that Man's
Life consists not in abundance, as Christ says, Luke 12.15. and that a few
things will suffice nature; and having Food and Raiment, which is the Apostles,
as well as Natures competency, he can be content and make up a Happiness to
himself out of the better and more essential Parts and Ingredients of it, to
wit, Virtue and Wisdom, and a good Mind, without those Appendages and
Ornaments, Trimmings, and Garnishings of it, which we call outward Happiness
and Prosperity. I am not for maintaining that Stoical Paradox, That a virtuous
Man was thereby Rich, and a King, and every thing that is Great: They might as
well have said also, he is always Strong and Healthful, tho it is plain, he may
be both Sickly and Poor; and his greatest Virtues may take away neither of
those evils, and their contraries may be allowed to be both goods in a lower
Sense and so Desired by us: but he will be Happier a Thousand times without
those, than without his Virtue; they can never make him truly Happy without
that, but he may be Happy without those, by the Peace and Comfort, the Firmness
and Goodness of his own Mind, although if he had them too, they might add
something to his present Happiness and Good Condition, this I will not
Cynically deny. Nor yet,

3. That Religion will quite alter his bodily Temper, any more than his Worldly
Circumstances, but a good Man may labor under an unhappy Temper, and ill
Crasis, and Disposition of Blood and Humors: His Wise and Virtuous Soul may
male habitare, be lodged not only in a Deformed, but a Sickly, and
Unhealthfull, or otherwise ill-framed Body; A natural Sulphur and Choler may
lodge in his Blood, that may be too apt to Fire and heat him, or too much dull
and heavy Phlegm, may clog his Spirits, and make them Listless and Unactive,
and not rise to Warmth, and fervor in his Religious Duties; the Salts that keep
the Humors from putrefying may make them too Sharp or Sour, and apt to make a
Temper too Fretfull and Peevish; or a black melancholy Humor may be thus
produced and become Predominant that will disorder the Spirits, and fill the
Head and other Parts with dark Vapors, and irregular Ferments, and draw a
Cloud of Darkness and Disconsolateness over the Brain, and even the Soul it
self. Now Religion will not, nor cannot cure this any more than any other
Bodily Diseases, and he that is afflicted with them, must bear them, as he
would the Gout or Stone, or any other Disease that is incident to us; but since
these affect the Mind more, and the Mind also by its close Union and Re-action
upon the Body, does in great measure raise and excite, or abate and allay
those; therefore it is a great part of Human Virtue, and a proper Work of
Religion, to take as much care as can be of those natural Passions, which are
caused in (...) those different Humors and Temperaments of Body; for all Anger
and First, and the other Bodily Passions that are so troublesome both to our
selves and others, arise from them. The Soul is the same in all Men, not more
inclined to any of those Passions by its Original make and nature, than the
contrary; they all arise from our Body, and our lower Nature, and are the
results of that, and therefore they are in Brutes, we often see, as well as
Men: but the Soul by being Vitally united to the Body, has a Preception and
Sensation of them, and such thoughts are necessarily caused in it by them. Now
neither the first motions of the Body, nor first thoughts of the Soul upon them
are sinful, because they are both necessary, but the Soul has a Power within it
self, either to consent, or not consent to these Bodily Motions and
Inclinations, which we call Passions; and this Principle of the Soul, we call
the Will, I do not mean a power to consent to their first rising, or not rising
in us, that is often necessary and unavoidable, and so not within the power of
the Soul, but perfectly unvoluntary; but then whether it shall continue such a
thought, that is excited upon such a Passion, at least continue it so far as to
approve and like it, and consent to it, and put it into Act if it can, and
actually execute it, and let it produce any outward and lasting Effects; this
is in the power of the Soul, and herein lies the great Exercise of its Virtues,
in governing and subduing the Passions, and mortifying the carnal Lusts and
Bodily Inclinations; if it yields to those so as to commit any Unlawful
Actions, or any sin in pursuance of them, then it fulfills the Lusts of the
Flesh, and walks after the Flesh, and is carnal, and carnally minded, in St.
Paul's phrase, Romans 8.6. but if through the Spirit, and by help of Religion, it
does mortify these deeds of the Body, it shall live, v. 13. If it suffer no sin
to reign in its mortal Body, nor give way to those Passions and Lusts, so as to
commit sin by them, but with the greatest care and pains keep them within the
bounds of Reason and Religion, then it does Crucisie the Flesh with the
Affections and Lusts, Galat. 5.24. not that they must become quite dead and
extinct, so that we feel no motions of them: no; they may remain in the best
and most regenerate Man, as to some inward motions of Concupiscence, but they
are not sinful unless they conceive, i.e. are consented to in the heart and
bring forth sin in the life, James 1.15. Now Religion is so to Govern, and keep
under all these Passions and bodily inclinations, that they run not into Sin,
but it cannot quite cut them up and extirpate them; it is to improve and
perfect Nature by Grace, but not to destroy it: These Passions therefore,
caused by those Bodily Humors and Tempers which we are naturally inclined to;
these which are one of the greatest causes of the troubles and disorders of the
mind, and which bring the greatest Uneasiness and Perturbation to it, and rob
it of that Evenness and Calmness, and Tranquillity, which is the great Happiness
of it: these Religion cannot so wholly remove and take away as that we should
be perfectly free from them, and from all the motions and risings of them; but
it will and must so far subdue and conquer them, as that they neither have
Sinful and Unlawful Effects upon others, nor so far disorder our selves, as to
spoil and destroy the Peace, and Rest, and Quiet of our minds. I do not mean
that they should never disturb us, for so they will a little, as often as we
feel them; but not to that degree, as to take away the Peace and Tranquillity
of our mind, and to destroy the habit and temper of it; if they do, we can
never be Happy with them. How Religion cures them, and to what degree, it must
overcome them, I shall consider afterward; at present I shall only observe
that Religion does not wholly destroy and root them up, nor alter our bodily
Temper and Constitution; but a good Man still lies open to the first motions of
Anger, Peevishness, Melancholy, and the like, and may never be quite otherwise,
any more than alter his Complexion, or his Stature, and make his Hair White or
black: but he may have Peace in his Mind, and Rest in his Soul, notwithstanding
that in the rational Frame, and Habit, and Temper of it, founded upon the Hopes
and Principles of Religion, these are troublesome and uneasy to him, and will
also affect his Mind, as well as any other bodily Pain and Disease; but yet his
Rest and Tranquillity, may be consistent with both those: for it is a rational
intellectual Sense and Perception in the Soul, which depends upon Principles
and Rules, and not upon mere Temper and Mechanism of body; for then ill
Weather, as well as an ill body would alter and destroy it.

I come now to show how we may attain it, which is the most considerable thing
of all, and when we have if, we shall better understand it, than by any other
account of it; like Health we know what it is, though we cannot so well describe
it, and like ease and pleasure, we can best Judge of it by feeling it: It Is as
Tully calls it, sanitas animi, the Health and Soundness and good Temper of the
Soul, and when the Soul wants it, it is Sick and under a Disease, in Pain and
Disorder. We all know how good and sweet a thing health and ease is both of
Body and Mind, so that there need not many words to commend them; how to get
it, and preserve it, and recover it when it is lost, is the greatest Question.

Our Savior here tells us we may find rest to our Souls, and obtain this Peace
and Tranquillity of mind. I shall consider what the means are, and by what ways
Religion does effect this in the following particulars.

1. Religion teaches us that Happiness lies chiefly in our Mind, that that is
the proper seat of it, and that it lies not in things without us, but is a
Treasure in our own Breasts, something within ourselves, which belongs to our
Souls, and consists in the Perfection, Improvement and Enjoyment of them; this
is in other words called the Salvation of the Soul, restoring it to its lost
Happiness, and freeing it from the Miseries and Evils that sin brought upon it.
It Is the great and proper business of Religion, to save the Soul or make it
Happy, which is done by making it Wise and Virtuous, by raising it to its
truest Perfection, by improving it with Virtuous Habits and Dispositions, and
bringing it to a Godlike, Heavenly Frame and Disposition, and so cultivating,
and fitting it for the greatest Enjoyment of God and Eternal Happiness.

Religion puts us upon this one thing needful, and its whole Scope and Design
is to Cure and Mend, to Perfect and Improve the Soul, to Convert and Sanctify,
and Regenerate and Inlighten the Mind; which are words that import the making
it wise and good, because in this lies our true and proper Happiness, in the
Moral state and Gracious temper, and Disposition of the Mind, and in such a
Perfection and Enjoyment of it, as is attained by Religion. They who think
Happiness lies in bodily Pleasures, or outward Enjoyments, do at the same time,
leave Religion, and mistake Happiness. Religion bids us moderate all Carnal and
Worldly Enjoyments, and mortify all the Excesses and Immoderate desires and
degrees of them, and takes off as far as may be our natural Love and Affections
to them; and will by no means allow us to place our Happiness in them, as being
poor and empty, short and transient things, in respect of the more true, and
greater, and inward Happiness of our own Minds. Religion bids us mind that, and
those things in which it consists, take care of our Souls and the means of
improving them in Grace and Virtue, and the freeing them from those Vices and
ill Tempers, and Habits, that will Destroy, and make them Miseiable.

A Man's Happiness or Misery, even his Eternal one, is founded in his own Mind,
and depends upon the good or bad Temper and Disposition of it: for the
Happiness of the Soul is like the Health of the Body, something within it self,
and consists in the Vigor and right Operations of all its Faculties and its
own inward Powers, and, as Plutarch observes, a Gouty Foot is not cured by a
rich Shoe, nor the Headache took off by a Crown or Diadem, nor an ill Mind made
Happy, by any thing without it; while it is sick and uneasy within, it will be
Miserable, though it has every thing else; for Happiness lies in our Minds, and
within our selves; and Religion, by teaching us this, and being concerned
wholly to better, and improve our Minds, and applying it self wholly to them,
is very helpful to bring us to it; for it thereby directs us where it lies,
and takes us off from all false scents and pursuits of it, and from all vain
opinions and imaginations about it. To know the true seat of Happiness, and
where it lies, in what it is placed, and wherein it consists, is one of the
best means to attain it, and necessary to prevent all mistakes and wandering
Quests and unprofitable Searches after it, which almost all Men are guilty of,
by Imagining it lies in other things, and in things without 'em, and not, as it
truly does, in their own Minds, (...) as Plutarch says; wherefore since the
Fountain of this Rest and Tranquillity of Mind, is in our selves, let us take
care to keep clean and purify that.

2. Religion teaches us the truest and best Wisdom, which is the Foundation of
this Tranquillity of Mind; for it is some Folly or other, some weak Thought or
Passion, vain Fancy or Opinion, and the want of a true Understanding, and the
rightly using our Reason, or making true Judgment of things, that is always the
cause of the Disorder and Disturbance, and Indisposition of Mind. Says Tully,
The Fountain of all perturbations is a Defection from right Reason, something
which does excite turbid motions, contrary and opposite to Reason; and
therefore in his Excellent Discourse on this Subject he calls Wisdom, Sanitas
animi, insipientia autem est quasi insanitas quaedam, quae est insania,
eademque dementia: Wisdom is the Health and Sanity of Mind, and Folly is its
Unsoundness, and what puts it out of order. And he calls this good state we are
speaking of, sanitatem animorum positam in tranquillitate quadam,
constantiaque. Now Religion teaches the Mind the truest Wisdom, and cures it of
the greatest Follies that are incident to it; it directs it to have right
Thoughts, and to make Judgment of things; proposes to it the best end, and the
surest means to attain it; shows it what is its chief Happiness, and its
Principal Interest, and puts a right value and estimate upon things according
to their worth and desert, and thereby frees the Mind from all wrong Opinions
and Imaginations, which are apt. to make it Vicious as well as Disorderly; for
all Vice is founded upon false Reasonings and want of right Judging of the
Nature of things, whereby they imagine such Actions to be good and agreeable;
and that they shall be Happy in having such Pleasures and Enjoyments, and
gratifying such Lusts and Desires, but they and themselves Mistaken and
Deceived, and therefore vexed and troubled, and repent of their own Folly one
time or other, and so plainly confess and accuse themselves of having done a
weak and silly thing, what their wiser thoughts cannot but condemn; and what
appears now to be contrary to right Reason, would Men live up to that, which
should be the design of a Wise Man, and what his Reason was given him for, and
what makes him live above Brutes and Animals of mere Sense, and lower Passions:
we should never be uneasy or disturbed or unquiet in our Minds, we should
always approve of what we do, and be satisfied from our selves as the Wise Man
speaks; we should live by Principles that would always support and bear us up,
and let nothing sink or deject us; we should never do a Weak, a Rash or a
Foolish thing, that we repented of and were sorry for afterward; we should act
steadily and constantly, by the certain Rules of Wisdom and Virtue, and not be
so uncertain and mutable in our Thoughts and Actings, which causes great
disquietude and unevenness, and disorder in our Minds. Were we but as wise as
Religion would make us, we should have very little to disturb us; Religion is
what teaches us the best Wisdom, and if rightly understood, preserves us from
the greatest follies and weaknesses of humane nature; and true Wisdom is the
Foundation of Peace and Tranquillity of Mind, which is always lost, and
destroyed by some folly or other contrary to right Reason and true Wisdom.

3. Religion teaches us not to place our Happiness in any outward things of
this World, for if we do, we shall find Happiness is not in our power, and that
we cannot always reach or attain it; for things here will often fall out cross
and contrary to our desires and wishes, and there are a thousand Accidents to
hinder and disappoint us of our Worldly aims; and we must be often very
uneasy, and very miserable, if our mere missing of them makes us so: and if we
could attain them, and become masters of them, we should yet find our selves
disappointed, and should not meet with that Happiness that we expected from
them. Had we all we could wish for or desire in this World, yet we should not
find that satisfaction, and complete Enjoyment we imagined beforehand in any
condition; for thus Experience convinces us, and convinces all Mankind, that
there is still something wanting to make us Happy, whatsoever we enjoy of this
World; and how much soever we have of it, there is so much emptiness in all the
things of it, so much mixture and allay of evil with good; it is so unagreeable
to the larger capacities of our Souls, and so short of filling and satisfying
them, that Solomon pronounced of all Worldly things that they were Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit, Eccles. 1.14. and this is not a Philosophical rant or a
discontented Reflection, or an Hyperbolical saying; but a strict and certain
truth, founded upon the best Experience, and the wisest Observation of things;
for no Man whoever set his Heart upon the things of this World, found that
contentment and full satisfaction in them that he expected, but met with more
cares and troubles in the pursuing them, than they were worth, and pierced
himself through with a great many sorrows and anxieties, by being over desirous
of them: and if he gained them with all his labor and toil, yet was as far
from true Happiness as before; for as the Prophet elegantly expresses it, The
Bed is shorter than that a Man can stretch himself on it, and the covering
narrower than that he can wrap himself in it, Isa. 28.20. Worldly things are
too narrow, short, and imperfect, and are no way fitted to make us completely
happy; something will still be wanting that we call good, and some evil will be
present and mixed with what we enjoy, that will allay and embitter it. To seek
for Happiness in this World is to seek for the living among the dead; It is not
here, it is risen, it is above; it is only in Heaven and in God, and Religion,
and to be enjoyed no where else. Religion raises our Minds to a nobler and
truer Happiness than any in this World, and it helps us to as good degrees of
it, as we are capable of at present; by taking off our hopes and desires, and
expectations of it, as to Worldly things, and curing us of too much concern and
anxiety about them, and making us indifferent and casie, and contented whatever
our present Circumstances are in this World. Which is the

4. Fourth thing by which it procures and affords this ease and tranquillity of
Mind that we are speaking of. Most of the uneasinesses of life, are caused by a
solicitude about Worldly things, proceeding from an immoderate love, and an
over great Opinion of them, as if our Happiness lay in possessing a great
abundance of them. This is the root of that Covetousness and Ambition, which
make us inordinately desire Riches and Honors, which two are very restless and
uneasy. Vices, and fill our lives with infinite Trouble and Disquietude, and
make our Minds always Uneasy and Discontented. He is a very Happy Man, who is
easy and satisfied in his present Circumstances, and has learnt with St. Paul,
in whatsoever state he is therewith to be content, Phil. 4.11. who has made
such true Judgment of Worldly things, that he has no great Opinion of them, nor
does admire or think there is very much in them: but having the Conveniences,
and Accommodations of life, can eat of his own little morsel, and drink out of
his own Brook, with as much Pleasure and Satisfaction as if he were to take
from the greatest Heap, or drink of the greatest River, or be Entertained with
all the Luxurious Plenty, and Ambitious State of the Rich and Great ones, who
with all their Enjoyments have a Thousand times more trouble and uneasinesses
than the other in a more moderate condition. For it is certain, the way to
Contentment and Happiness, is rather to abate our desires, than to fill 'em;
and the more we raise and heighten these, the more uneasy we shall always be.
Vain Opinion and weak Imagination set a false value and estimate upon the
outward differences amongst Men; but I doubt not but they may be all equally
Happy, and that Previdence has distributed good and evil with a more equal and
impartial hand than we imagine, and that those of low condition enjoy as much
Happiness in this World, as those of the highest: The difference is not made by
Circumstances, but by temper of Mind, and by keeping our desires within
moderate bounds, and not being anxious, or sollicitous, or uneasy for what we
do not enjoy; but in being contented and well pleased with whatever Providence
allots to us: when we bring our selves to this, we shall be easy and happy and
free our selves from those immoderate desires, carking cares and anxious
sollicitudes about the things of this World, which pierce us through with a
Thousand sorrows, and destroy the Ease and Tranquillity of our Minds. Now to do
this we must be taught and convinced by Religion, that Happiness lies not in
outward things, and be cured of the contrary weak Fancy and Opinion that makes
us so immoderately desire 'em, and be so anxiously concerned about 'em, to the
loss even of that Rest and Peace of Mind, that we might otherwise have without
them.

5. Religion teaches us to govern our Passions and lower Inclinations, and so
to keep them from disturbing us, and breaking the Peace and Tranquillity of our
Minds. One of the greatest causes of uneasiness to us, and what is most
contrary to this Rest and Tranquillity we are seeking after, is the Disorder of
our Passions, and the Disturbance and Disquiet they give us. Anger ruffles us,
and puts us into a storm, and destroys that smooth, calm, and sedate Temper,
that meekness puts us in: Envy preys upon it self, and is inwardly corroded
with its own sharp and sour humors: Pride swells its self with its own inward
poison, and is blown up with an inward Vapor that Pains and Distends it, and
makes it very uneasy, even whilst it is very conceited of its self. Till these
inward Diseases and Indispositions and Commotions of Mind are cured in great
measure, by the Prescriptions and Directions of Religion, a Man can have no
ease and quiet in his own Breast: for while he is under the power of any of
these, or indeed of any lower, or bodily Inclination, such as Lust, Anger,
brutal Rage, or brutal Concupiscence; and has not mastered those natural
Corruptions, nor brought those Boisterous and Headstrong Passions under some
Government and Subjection to the Laws of Wisdom and Decency, Virtue and
Religion; they will run him into a Thousand Mischiefs, Follies, and
Inconveniences, and he will never have true Peace and Tranquillity in his own
Mind. It Is the great business therefore of Religion, to mortify these bodily
Passions and lower Inclinations, to Crucify the Flesh with the Affections and
Lusts, to put away all Wrath, and Clamor, and Bitterness, and to take off the
Corruptions and Weaknesses of Humane Nature, by the rules of Religion, and the
assistances of the Holy Spirit, and to Guard us where sin does so easily beset
us, by the Considerations of Heaven and Eternity, and another World, which are
only Arguments strong enough to make men conquer and deny those passions and
Inclinations which are in great part natural to them. Religion has a Power in
it, if duly applied and attended to, to make the most passionate Man Calm and
Gentle, the most Lustful Man Chaste, to Sweeten the most Sour and ill-natured
Temper, and Tame the most Outrageous and Violent. This Christianity did of old,
as Lactantius, and other Fathers assure us, and boast of its Virtue and
Efficacy; and this it no doubt will, and must do, in order to our Eternal
Happiness if we come under the full Sense and perfect Government of it: for no
Man can go to Heaven with those irregular and unmortified Passions about him,
any more than come to Peace and Tranquillity of Mind here; what is required and
is necessary to the one, is necessary to the other also, and what promotes the
one does at the same time promote the other; for the more approaches we make
toward Heaven hereafter, the more we make at present, to this Peace and
Tranquillity of Mind; and whatever tends to acquire the one, tends also to
acquire the other: Religion by the same way leads to both, and the more we grow
in one, the more we shall grow in the other; it is one of the greatest
Perfections Religion is to bring us to, not to Destroy or Extirpate, but Govern
and Master our natural Inclinations and bodily Passions, and make them always
easy to our selves, and subject to Reason, Wisdom and Virtue; and when they
are so, then we shall be in this most Pleasant and Happy State, which we call
Rest and Tranquillity, and Calmness of Mind.

6. Religion, and especially Christianity, removes all Guilt, and all Reason of
inward Trouble of Mind, and Disquiet of Conscience; nothing is so contrary to
this Peace, and Rest, and Tranquillity of Soul as an inward Consciousness of a
Man's own Guilt, and a dread of what he Deserves upon it; this will always
disturb and make him uneasy in whatever outward Condition he be; it will be a
Wound at his very Heart, and like a Dart struck through his Liver; he will feel
it like a Prick upon a Nerve, a Pain in the Tenderest, and most Sensible part
of his Mind, for such is a Sense of Guilt, and the Fears and Horrors that go
along with it. Now what shall Cure this if a Man has fallen into it, and what
shall best preserve him from it but Religion? Christianity has provided a
Remedy for the greatest Guilt, which is the Blood of Christ, and thereby pours
in Oil and Balsam into the most wounded Conscience; and by the Privilege of
Repentance and New Obedience restores it to Peace and Comfort and a good State,
and frees it from its Dreadful Fears and Apprehensions; it gives a Man firm
Grounds of Hope and Comfort upon his return to his Duty, though he has not always
observed it, and assures him that he shall be well treated by God upon it. This
is a great thing which is owing to the Grace of God, in, and thorough Christ;
and is the great Grace of the Gospel, and what natural Religion could not
Discover or Ensure to us: Christ alone gives this Rest to those who are weary
and heavy Laden, with the Burden of their Sins; and Guilt is a Load and
Burden too heavy for us to bear; but what he has done takes it off from us
upon our Repentance and Amendment, and becoming good Men, though after we have
been otherwise.

Religion will best Guard and Preserve us against all Sin, and keep us from
doing any thing rashly and inconsiderately, that should afterward trouble and
vex us when we reflect upon it; and will therefore prevent, as well as cure,
the painful Disorders and Disturbances of a Guilty Conscience and Uneasy
Mind, and keep it always in the most Virtuous, and therefore most Comfortable
state: for nothing is such a ground of Peace and inward Comfort, as to live
always in a Habit of Virtue and Religion, in the practice of one, and by the
principles of the other, and never to act contrary to them, or oppose them, in
any thing we do; this will make a good Man always pleased and satisfied from
himself as the Scripture speaks, Prove. 14.14. and give him the closest and the
truest Happiness, which is the Peace of his own Mind. What a Comfort a good
Conscience is, it is like Health or Pleasure, better felt than described; it is
a continual Feast in all Conditions, a perpetual spring of Joy and Comfort,
rising up in a Man's own Mind, and overflowing his Heart with unspeakable
Pleasure and Delight: What will make a Man bear any Circumstances? Endure any
evil? Suffer any Affliction? Go through any Cross or Reproach, and be though not
without Sense, yet without any great Trouble? When his Innocent Mind speaks
Cheerfully to him and Refreshes him from within.

A Man can never have true Peace and Tranquillity of Mind, without Virtue, and
Religion; for none but a good Man conscious to himself of his own Integrity and
Sincerity, can have a good Conscience: and nothing is so contrary to this Ease
and Rest, this Tranquillity of Soul, as an evil Conscience, which like the
troubled Sea, is always Stormy and Boisterous, and casts up Mire and Dirt, as
the Prophet speaks, Isa. 57.20. the filth that is at the bottom of it, and is
therefore the most directly opposite to the Calm and Serene State and Temper of
Mind that we are seeking after. An evil Conscience is always full of Fears, and
Horrors, of Dread and Disquietude; it is a Worm gnawing on a Man's Vitals, a
Vultur preying on his Liver, a Snake stinging him to the Heart, a Fury Whipping
him, a Devil tormenting him, a Hell kindled in his own Breast. Nothing can be
too great and terrible to represent it by, and hardly any thing can come up to
the misery of it, when it is in a high degree. Religion by delivering us from
that, delivers us from the greatest trouble and uneasiness of Mind; and whoever
is not stupid and senseless, will fall into that some time or other, unless he
live Virtuously and Religiously.

7. Religion gives us Cheerful Hopes as to another World, and so takes off the
immoderate fear of Death, which must otherwise all our life make us Subject to
Bondage, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 2.15. and fill us with wretched and
servile Fear whenever we think of dying; and we cannot but think of it
sometimes when we see the common Fate of Mortality in all others, and have some
Warnings and Monitors of it, in our own Bodies: then what a melancholy thing
must it be for a Man to think of going down into the place of darkness and
forgetfulness, to become a cold heavy lump, a stiff dead Corpse, to have all his
brisk and vigorous Spirits put out and extinguished, and an end put to all his
Pleasures and Enjoyments, if he have not some Hopes of an after Immortality and
of a better Life after this: No Man could enjoy himself or be easy in his
thoughts, if he thinks at all, who knows he must die in a little time, if he
has not the fears of Death took off and moderated by the Hopes and Expectations
of Religion. He that considers, says Plutarch, (...).
the nature of his Soul, and that Death Translates us into a better State, or
at least one that is not at all evil, has made an excellent provision, both for
the Happiness of life, and against the fear of death; and he make; this one of
the great means of procuring this Tranquillity of Mind, thus to overcome the
fears of Death; for otherwise that will embitter all our present Enjoyments,
and spoil all our Mirth and Jollity, and draw a dark Cloud over all our
Cheerfullness and Gaity, to have the thoughts of Death steal in now and then
upon us, as they unavoidably will, if we have nothing to make them less
terrible and frightfull, than they will be to a wicked Man; he must be sadly
scared and amazed at any such thing, and cannot think, much less look on Death,
without sad Misgivings, and Horrors of Mind; and therefore can never have any
settled Peace and Tranquillity in himself, but it will be all broke by one
thought of Mortality, by the hearing a Knell, or seeing a Coffin; for let him
seem to put on never so much false Courage, and to laugh at these things in the
midst of his Company and his Vices, yet he trembles at them when he is alone,
and a cold and clammy sweat feizes upon him whenever he thinks of dying in
earnest: nothing can prevent this Despondency and dying of Mind, and arm even
against the natural fear of bodily Death, which will often come upon us, and
scatter all our other Comfortable thoughts; but Religion, which takes out the
sting of Death, which lessens and abates its terror, and fortifies us against
it by the Christian Hopes of being free from all Guilt and Punishment
hereafter, and of having a better Life, and being in another World, when we are
to part with this here.

Death must be very terrible to the thoughts either of an Atheist, by Depriving
him of all Being, and of all Enjoyment; or of a wicked Christian by consigning
him to Judgment and Punishment, and Translating him to Eternal Death and
Misery: only Religion can take off its Terror, and sweeten the bitter Cup with
the Supports, and Comforts, the Aids and Assistances, the Hopes and
Expectations it affords to a good Man in his last Agonies and Extremities, and
at all other Times when he thinks of dying.

Lastly, Religion infuses inward and unspeakable Comforts into our Minds from
its present Privileges and future Hopes, from God and his Spirit, and their
secret Communications, Operations, and Influences upon our Souls, which are the
highest improvement and the highest degrees of Peace and Tranquillity of Mind.
Nature and Philosophy knew nothing of this, but Revelation, and especially the
Christian, give us the Knowledge and Assurance of it, and many a Pious and good
Christian has felt the Effects and Comforts of it in his Soul, when he has had
a Cheerful and well grounded Sense that his sins are pardoned in, and through
Christ, upon his true Repentance; and that he is justified by the Grace of the
Gospel upon the Terms and Conditions of it; and that he has a Title to Heaven
by God's promise upon his own sincerity, and has reason to Hope that he shall
partake of all the great and glorious things that belong to the Christian
Salvation; these will raise and inspire him, as it did the Apostles and first
Christians, with a more than ordinary Comfort, Peace, and Cheerfullness of
Soul, and make him very Happy, though in the greatest Sufferings and outward
Afflictions. 'Twas this which made the Christians Rejoice always in the Lord,
Rejoice in Tribulations, Sing, and be Cheerful in Prisons, and be more than
Conquerors over all their Troubles, when they had these inward Comforts to
support and raise, and invigorate their Minds: when, though their Enemies were
implacable and irreconcilable, yet God they knew was reconciled to them, and
though the World hated thom, yet he loved them; though they had Tribulation from
without, yet they had Peace in themselves, and Peace in Christ, as he promised
them, Mat. 16.32. and though all things were very dark and dismal about them, yet
they had a clear prospect of Heaven, and, like St. Stephen, could see that
opened through a shower of Stones, and Christ sitting at the right hand of God.
One such view of Christ and Heaven, though but by the Eye of Faith would give a
Man a Pleasure and Courage of Mind above not only the Pains and Torments he
endured, but all other Pleasures he ever felt in his Life; A great, but ill Man
could say, That the Pleasures and Comforts of Religion, even when they are
Mistaken, and Enthusiastic, are greater than all the Pleasures of Sense and
Carnality. What are they then when they are true and well grounded? how do they
not only give Peace to a Man's Mind, but even Rapture? not only Calm and Quiet
it, but Transport it? not only give it Rest and Tranquillity, but Ecstasy and
Joy? This is called in Scripture the Joy of the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. and the
Peace of God, which passes all Understanding, Philip. 4.7. for we do not know
how God, who is a Spirit, can Communicate inward Joy and Peace to our Spirits,
and convey a secret Sense of his Favor, and Relish of his Kindness, and make
us taste, and see how Gracious he is, as the Psalmist speaks Psa. 34.8. and
lift up the light of his Countenance upon us. There is more in all this, not
only in the extraordinary supports, promised in particular Cases and
Circumstances, but in the ordinary Hopes and Comforts of Religion to a good
Man, than all the Pleasures of this World, all the Charms and Enjoyments of
Flesh and Blood can ever amount to; and as we plainly feel Peace and Ease of
Mind to be a greater good than any bodily Pleasure, and know this from Sense
and Experience, as well as Religion; so when this is heightened by those
unspeakable Joys, and that inconceiveable Peace, which is derived from God and
Religion, and his Holy Spirit; these give such an improvement to this Peace and
Tranquillity of Mind, as nothing can equal, but the Enjoyment of Heaven; and
which the wife Heathens and Philosophers knew nothing of in their Discourses on
this Subject. Religion and Christianity therefore out-doe these, and Discover
new Springs to feed and maintain this, and to raise it higher; and though they
run into the same Channel, namely, the Happiness of the Mind, yet it is with a
fuller Current and a stronger Stream: and they do more perfectly promote that
Rest and Peace and Tranquillity of Mind, which though it be various in degrees,
yet is the greatest Happiness, Perfection or Pleasure it is capable of in
general, either in this or the other World.

Whoever attains to this is the Happy Man, whatever his outward Condition be:
for while he is easy within himself, and has an inward Rest, Peace, and
Tranquillity in his own Soul, all outward things signify very little to him.
Our Savior did not Promise his Disciples or Followers any good Circumstances,
or Happy outward Condition in this World; but he promised them Peace in him,
and Peace in themselves: and that if they followed his Example, and learnt his
Temper, and lived up to his Religion, they should find Rest and Ease to their
Souls, and be freed from those heavy Loads and Burdens that oppress our Minds,
and are the causes of Misery to us. Religion and Christianity are the true cure
for the Uneasiness, and Indispositions, and Diseases of the Mind; and if we
could live up to its wise Rules, and bring our selves to that Frame and Temper
of Mind it would beget in us, we should be always Easy and always Happy; as
Happy as we could be in this World, in spite of all the evils of it, and
Eternally and Completely Happy in the next.

The Third Sermon.
MAT. VII. 13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait Gate, for wide is the Gate and
broad is the way that leads to Destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat; Because strait is the Ga'e and narrow is the way which leads unto
Life, and few there be that find it.


OUR Savior did not think fit to give the World a set Code of Laws, as Moses
did the Jews, or a Methodical System of Ethics, as other Writers have done
since; no more did the other wise Teachers of Virtue and Morality, Pythagoras,
Socrates, Epictetus, Antoninus, and other Heathens: the Patriarchs of old, who
were Preachers of Righteousness, Solomon or the Prophets afterward, but with
greater simplicity and inartificial plainness, they dropped their excellent
Precepts, and sage Directions without any formal Method; and thus Christ taught
us the best and most perfect Rules of Virtue, in his occasional Discourses, and
Particularly in this his excellent Sermon upon the Mount, which is such a
Discourse that it carries an internal Evidence, and a Heavenly Authority along
with it, enough to satisfy any Wise and Good Man that the Doctrine is true,
and that it comes from God, though it had no Miracles, nor other Evidence to
prove it; for the Soul, if it be not vitiated, Tastes and Relishes such
Congenial truths, that are agreeable and natural to it, as the Palate does its
food, and Judges of their inward truth and goodness, by an internal Sensation
and Perception and an immediate Congruity to its Faculties.

When our Savior comes toward the Conclusion of this his Sermon upon the
Mount, which was an Epitome of Christianity, and the Sum of all those Virtuous
Precepts which were to make his Followers the best Men in the World, to make
them exceed all the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and out-doe all
the Examples, and all the Characters of Heathen Virtue; he tells 'em there
would be great Difficulty to rise to these Seize: that Religion and
Virtue in such a pitch as he had set them, and as was necessary to make a good
Christian, and to fit him for Heaven, were not such slight and easy things;
but that they must use great Care and Pains, and Labor, in the Attaining and
Performing of them; that it was very easy to be vicious and wicked, and
therefore most Men were so: but that to be Virtuous as a Christian ought to be
in all those Instances and Degrees he had taught them, was a more Hard and
Difficult matter, and that few would come up to it; but yet this was a thing
absolutely necessary to their Eternal Happiness, and they must either take the
Pains to do this, to come up to these strict Terms, or else they must Perish
and be undone for ever by falling short of them, Enter ye in at the strait
Gate. From which words I shall consider,

I. What are the Difficulties of Religion and Virtue, or upon what account they
are a strait Gate and a narrow Way, and Vice a wide Gate and a broad Way.

II. Press the Duty and propose the Motives for our entering in at this strait
Gate and narrow way, notwithstanding that it is so.

1. What are the Difficulties of Religion and Virtue, etc.

1. Then our Savior's words might perhaps have some regard to the hard
Circumstances, Dangers, and Persecutions that Christianity was exposed to at
that time, in those first ages of it, and is liable to afterward; then indeed
it was a strait Gate, when they who entered into it, were bound to leave all
they had in this World, all their Temporal Interests and Possessions, for
Christ's sake and the Gospel's, and all that would live Godly in Christ Jesus
must suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. then it was hard for a Rich Man who had
great Possessions, and was loath to part with them, to follow Christ, tho he
had a great Desire and Inclination to do so, as in the Instance of the young
Man, Mat. 19.21. so that our Savior said thereupon, it was easier for a Camel
to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, i. e. to become a Christian at that time.

Then the way to Heaven was strait and narrow, when it was beset with so many
Dangers, filled with Crosses and Gibbets, and a Man must venture his Life as
well as Estate, whenever he entered into it; but this was but a particular and
accidental case, tho every good Christian ought to come to such a Perfection in
Religion, as to be prepared and disposed for this, whenever God shall think fit
to put this hard Trial and Difficulty upon him. But,

2. Christianity is thus strait and narrow upon other accounts. viz. The
standing Terms and Conditions of it, as it forbids every sin and every wilful
wickedness upon the Pain of Damnation: This is very hard indeed to the
generality of Men, and makes it a very strait and narrow way, when it leaves no
room for any one darling Lust, undue Liberty or beloved Sin to go along with
us: for according to the Gospel, he that will not part with every willful sin,
however Pleasant or Profitable it be to him, must part with Heaven for it; though
the Temptation to it be never so Great, and the Charms of it never so
powerful, yet if Religion do not conquer and overcome it, we must for the
short Pleasures of Sin, be Miserable for ever; though it conduces never so much
to our Interest or Advantage, so that we could gain the World by it, yet it
will prove a dear Bargain at the last, and we must lose our Souls for it: for
by the irreversible Terms, and unalterable Conditions of the Gospel every
willful and habitual sin, destroys our good State, and without a timely
Repentance and Amendment excludes us out of Heaven. And however we may think
fit to abate of those Terms by our loose Opinions and false Principles, and
make other Judgments of our selves, by the wrong measures of a Licentious Age,
or as Mistaken and as Licentious Doctrines; yet Christianity has so plainly
fixed these, that we have no reason to believe that God will, or can any way
abate of them; and to be sure our Religion does not.

3. There are some particular duties in Christianity that seem very hard and
difficult as well as the general Terms of it; such as loving Enemies, not
revenging Injuries, self-denial, Mortification, and the like; which though they
are against the grain of our Nature as some Men think, and as impracticable as
the Rants of Stoical Virtue, yet are made necessary to our Pardon and Salvation
by the Gospel, Mat. 5.43.6.14, 15. Mark 8.34. Romans 8.13. and they truly are so
in their right Sense and Meaning, and ought to be as much performed by us, as
any other parts of our Religion; we are bound as Christians to love our
Enemies, with the general Acts of Charity, due to all mankind, not with the
particular Offices of kindnesses due to our Friends; we must not revenge an
injury to gratify a mere Private and Outrageous Passion, without regard to
public good; we must deny our selves any Worldly Interest, when it is
Inconsistent with our duty; we must mortify every Natural Passion and Sensual
Inclination, so as to keep it within the bounds of Virtue and Religion: these
are all agreeable to Reason and Prudence, and to the Laws of Civil Government,
as well as to the Principles of Religion.

4. Religion puts a check and restraint not only upon our Actions, but upon our
Words and our very Thoughts, and this is hard, some think, that their Tongues
should not be their own, nor their Thoughts neither; but that of every idle
Word they must give an account in the day of Judgment, and by our Words we
shall be Condemned or Justified, as well as by our Actions, Mat. 12.36, 37. and
that our secret Thoughts should be tied up, so that we must not harbor any
wickedness even in our Hearts and Thoughts Mark 7.21. Now this, however severe
it seems, yet if by idle Words be meant only evil Words, as I doubt not but
it is, such as those of Slander and Desamation of which our Savior there
particularly spoke; or such Profane and Lewd Discourse, as tends to affront
Heaven, or to Corrupt those who hear it, and proceeds from a Malicious,
Irreligious, and Corrupt Mind. This gives such a vicious Tincture, even to our
Words, that he who cannot better govern his Tongue, than thus to injure his
Brother, or let fly at God and Religion, This Man's Religion is vain, as St.
James says, Jam. 1.26. if he pretend to any: and he who by his Mouth thus vents
the Exulcerated Malice, Pride, and Uncharitableness of his Heart, and from such
an Unchristian Temper calls his Brother Fool or Racha, is in danger of Gods
Judgment and of Hellfire, as our Savior says, Mat. 5.22. It Is the Venom and
Malignity of the Heart, and inward Disposition, that, like a Corrupt Fountain,
Poisons and Vitiates those ill streams that flow from it; and this is the true
Plastic Principle within us, that Forms and Denominates all our Actions, which
are but the Fruits growing upon that Root, and, as our Savior says, A good
Tree brings forth good Fruit, and a Corrupt Tree, that which is evil, v. 17,
18. of this Chapter. All Moral Good and Evil, is conceived and produced from
the Heart; and God who sees it there even before it comes into Act, whenever it
has the full consent of the Will, does very justly Condemn it, and charge it
upon us. For, as without this consent of the Will, no Action is Criminal before
him, so with it the Crime is both Specified, Committed, and Perfected, though it
go no further than the Thoughts and the Heart.

5. Religion requires our lives to be useful, as well as Innocent, and enjoins
us not only to do no ill thing, but to do all the good that we are able; else
it is but a negative and a useless Virtue, the easiest and the softest side of
it, like the old Principle of Privation, without the Matter and Form, that is
to give it a Being and a Substance. We read in Scripture, not only of the
wicked Servant, who was guilty of great Crimes, Misdemeanors, and Injuries
against his Lord; but of the Unprofitable one, who did no manner of good, but
was idle, and useless in his Service, and for this Reason alone was cast into
outer darkness. God will call every one of us to a strict and severe account
how we have used and improved all the Talents he committed to us; all the
Powers, Abilities and Opportunities of doing good, he has put into our hands:
and if like Loiterers in his Vineyard, we have only Feasted our selves with the
Fruits and Delicacies of it, and wasted our idle time in Ease and Luxury, and
spent a vain and useless Life in trifling and impertinent either Pleasure or
Business; and not Labored at all in the great Work and Business of Religion,
for which we were sent into the World: we must not at the last expect any wages
from him, but be punished for our useless idleness, and great omissions, by the
Just Distributer of Rewards and Punishments, who will render to all Men
according to their Works; and who expects we should do all the good we can, for
the sake of Heaven, as well as abstain from all manner of Evil, for the sake of
Hell.

6. Religion requires the Uniform practice of all Virtues, and the entire Union
and Conjunction of all Christian Graces to make and constitute a good Man;
whereas any single Vice or wilful Habit of Sin will denominate and make a bad
one, so as to make him incapable of Happiness and obnoxious to Misery. This is
an undoubted truth in Religion, which requires though not the Perfection of
Degrees, yet the Perfection of parts; so that no plain Virtue must be wanting,
nor no voluntary sin be allowed without the certain danger of being excluded
out of Heaven, as St. James says, he that shall keep the whole Law besides, and
yet offend in one point, wilfully break any part of it, Commit one Act of
wilful Treason and Disobedience against Heaven, is guilty of all, resists and
opposes all that Divine Power and Authority, which gives Force and Sanction to
every Law; and becomes liable to the same sort of Punishment, though not to the
same equal degrees of it. The Virtue of the Mind, and Divine Life of the Soul,
like the Life, Health, or Beauty of the Body must be made up of the regular
(...), Disposition and Symmetry of all the parts; whereas one Fatal Wound, or
Mortal Disease may kill us, as well as many; and one great and Notorious
Deformity will Disfigure a whole Face. Virtue is like a straight line which
must be every where even and regular, but a crooked and irregular one may be so
in a hundred parts. Vice is infinite and knows no Bounds, but Wanders and Roves
through all the vast unlimited extent of Evil, but Virtue confines us, and
keeps us within the narrow compass of what is Good and Righteous, and made our
Duty by a Divine Law. These are from Religion, its Terms, Conditions and
Constitutions, there are two other Difficulties arising from our selves.

7. A great Reason why Religion and Virtue are so strait and narrow a way, is
because our Natural Appetites and Inclinations, which are necessary to our
present state, are so many, and so hard to be all governed and kept within the
bounds of Virtue and Religion; these result from our Animal Nature, and are a
true part of us, as Compounded of Flesh and Blood, and are so much Gods
Workmanship and Creation, that we neither can nor ought to destroy them; he
allows us to gratify 'em within due bounds and did not put those strong
Appetites in our Natures, merely to vex and torture and disatisfie us, but we
must Govern them with great care, and not lay loose the Reins upon their Necks,
nor let them grow too Masterless and unruly, at any time, for Reason and
Religion; they are, I confess, the great Trial and Instance of Human Virtue,
and they may become a snare to us, and the great inlets into sin without due
care and watchfullness and managery; we must be therefore always upon our
Guard, lest this Flesh and Sense which we carry about us, and are so fond of,
become a Traitor to us, and Sin do not some way or other surprise us, and enter
at some of those weak places of Humane Nature; we must stop and check the
strongest Inclination when it would lead us into Sin, and so far as it is
Vicious, Immoderate, and Excessive, destroy it, though with never so much Pains
and Violence; we must pluck out a right Eye and cut off a right hand, and
destroy every Sinful Inclination, be it never so Natural to us, and Crucify
the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts, so that we may keep them always within
the bounds of Wisdom and Virtue, and suffer no Sin to Reign in our Mortal
Bodies, that we should obey it in the Lusts thereof. Romans 6.12.

8. Lastly the Difficulties of Religion, and Virtue arise mainly from the
Prejudices and ill Customs and Habits of Vice which get possession of most Men
before they well Understand Religion and the true good and necessity of it; our
first years are a life of Sense, before we grow up to Reason and Understanding,
and then other things, make the first Impression upon our Minds, and fill them
with weak Images and Fancies, and Foolish thoughts; and thus when our Passions
are strong and our Reason is weak, Vice generally gets the start of Religion,
and without a very Happy and Virtuous Education, we contract a great many Ill
Habits and Vicious Customs, that increase and grow up with us, and it is very
hard to break and alter those, when we grow Wiser by Time and Experience, and
come afterward to have a better Sense of Religion and better Apprehensions
about it; though we are then convinced of the Folly and Danger of our Sins, yet
we are become such Slaves to 'em by long use, that it is hard to break their
Chains, and get loose from them, and here lies the great Difficulty of
Religion, and this makes it to be a strait Gate, and a narrow way, especially
at the first entrance into it, when old Customs and Habits must be changed and
altered, former liberties retrenched and denied, old Companions must be
forsaken and former Temptations must be overcome, and Repentance, which is the
hardest part of Religion, must be the first duty of it, and must cure the old
Prejudices and the long habits of Sin, and in the Scripture phrase bring in a
New Nature, a New Soul, and make us New Creatures and New Men; this is a great
Difficulty indeed, but it is brought upon our selves by our own fault, and we
cannot blame Religion for it any more than we can the Physician, or the Physic
that is to cure us of a Disease, that we have let run so long upon us, that
it is hard now to perform the cure, and it cannot be done without going through a
long and tedious course, and using a strict Regimen, and very great abstinence
from what may be hurtful to us. The great Argument to persuade us to all this,
is that we must die if we do not; if notwithstanding all these Difficulties and
hard Things in Religion, we will not comply with it, we must be Miserable for
ever, we must lose all that life and happiness, those Glorious rewards it
promises to us in another World, and we must suffer all the Dreadful, Amazing
punishments it there threatens.

There is no reserve against this, but either by perverting Religion, or by
denying it, either corrupting its Principles, and by false and mistaken Notions
giving our selves hopes of happiness without living up to the Terms and
Conditions of it, or else utterly denying it as a Cheat and a Falsehood, the
latter is more impudent and daring, and what but few hardened wretches can come
up to, the other is more common, and as Pernicious and Destructive. More Souls
are lost by false Principles, and the horrid corrupting of the Doctrines of
Religion, than by downright Atheism and Insidelity, by trusting to a late and
Deathbed Repentance, and thinking a little matter will do the business
hereafter, as well as a very strict and a very good life, by relying upon the
Mercies of God and the Merits of Christ for Salvation without Obedience to the
Gospel, and performing such things upon which alone those are promised, by
thinking to be saved, or justified by Faith alone, without Works or a good
Life; and making Faith to lie in a presumptuous Confidence of Gods Favor, or
having an Interest in Christ, without regard to the plain Terms, and Conditions
of Christianity; or by the other superstitious Doctrines of having sins
pardoned by an Absolution or an Indulgence, and the like; such Doctrines as
these, which turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, which make Religion an
encouragement to Looseness and Licentiousness, and give Men hopes to escape
Misery, though they live in their Sins, and come not up to the strict and severe
Terms in Religion, but to go to Heaven by some other Imaginary and
Unaccountable way, and to be saved upon some account or other, by Grace, or
Christ, without entering this strait Gate, and going in this narrow way; these
deceive Millions of Souls, who tho they believe Religion, yet do not live up to
it, but corrupt and pervert it, so as to take off its Force and Influence upon
their Lives, and make them never the better by it.

The other reserve, which is a most desperate one, is that of Atheism and
Infidelity, or an utter dis-believing all Religion, or at least a comfortable
Doubt and Suspicion, that it may not be true, and this I am afraid lies in too
many Minds, but then all Mankind have been out of their Wits in believing it,
for there have been very few, either in the most Wise or most Barbarous Parts
and Ages of the World, but what have done so; unless then we have been all
Cheated with Books of Revelation, and Histories of Miracles done by the
Prophets of Old, and by Christ, and his Apostles afterward, which are better
attested than any Actions or any Books besides, that ever were in the World
1600 Years ago, so that we may as well call in Question all the Greek and the
Roman story, as the Jewish and the Christian, and when we have run into such a
Frenzy of Skepticism as to do that, and without having any positive proof
against Religion, and the Being of God, and another World, for it is impossible
to have that, and the greatest Atheist will not pretend to have any Evidence,
Certainty, and Demonstration, but that they may be true notwithstanding all his
doubts; after all this, the whole Frame of Nature and the Wise contrivance of
the World, of the Heavens above, and the Earth, and Animals below, is a
standing Evidence, as great as can be given of the truth of Religion in
general; and a Man's Reason must be wretchedly blinded with his Vices, who does
not see it, or who winks so hard that he will not discern it; these wretched
Reserves being therefore taken away, I shall proceed to press the duty of
entering in at the strait Gate, and narrow way, and propose the motives to
engage us to this, notwithstanding all the Difficulties I mentioned.

1. Religion is a business of such importance, that whatever straits and
hardships there be in it, we must not stick at those, but resolve however to go
through with it, for our Life, our Happiness, our All, our Eternal state lies
at stake, and depends upon it; Our Savior only tells us strait is the Gate,
and narrow is the way which leads unto Life, and wide is the Gate, and broad
is the way which leads to Destruction: And this is sufficient, if Life and
Death be set before us; whatever be the way to them, we should look at the
great Ends, Issues, and Consequences of things, which are the mark a Wise Man
always aims at, and whatever means are in our Power, to attain the one and
avoid the other, we should make use of, without any long Counsel or
Deliberation; for no Man demurrs and considers whether he shall choose
happiness and escape Misery, Nature, and Instinct prevent our Reason here, and
we are made with an inward spring which runs of it self to the one, and flies
from the other, whenever we truly apprehend them; and therefore did we consider
what that Life is, that Eternal Life of Happiness which Virtue leads to, which
is to live in the perfect Enjoyment of the greatest good, and the purest
Pleasures free from all Alloys and all Approach of the least Evil and Trouble,
to live for ever with God and Angels in rapturous Bliss, and Heavenly Delights,
and Joy unspeakable, to be Possessed of a Crown, a Kingdom of substantial Glory,
and all such Good and Desirable things, that this World affords but a faint
Shadow, and imperfect Resemblance of; we should find this is a Life worth being
fond of, and seeking after, compared to which, this our present short life mixed
with so much real Care and Trouble, and so little imaginary Pleasure, is but a
sort of Death, but walking in a vain Shadow, and Dreaming of Happiness, and
hardly worth a Wise Man's choosing, were it not for a better Life, which is
only worth the name of Living, where we are born into another World, and Virtue
shall give us a Glorious Immortality; this is a Reward that will sufficiently
Recompense our short Labors here, and were Religion never so Difficult, yet
the worth, and greatness of that, were our Hopes and Desires of it
proportionable to it, would inspire us with new Vigor and Resolution, and
convey Strength and Power enough to carry us through them all; for what will
not a great reward make Men do, whither will they not Travel, where will they
not fight, what danger will they Flinch from, what Labor will they Refuse,
when a certain and great reward is offered to 'em? And had we but as good
thoughts of Heaven, as the Soldier has of Honor and Victory, the Merchant of
Gold and Gain, and the Husbandman of a good Harvest, we should never think much
of all the Pains and Difficulties that are in Religion, were they a great many
more than they are; as on the other side, if Men had but a due sense of that
Destruction, to which the wide Gate and the broad way of wickedness leads 'em,
and the Sad and Dreadful Condition their Vices will bring 'em to in another
World, did they consider what exquisite and amazing Misery, both of Soul and
Body, is wrapped up in those Words of Hell and Damnation, no Vice, though never so
Charming, would make 'em endure it for one day, no Pleasure of Sin for a
Season, would make 'em bear it for so long a time as this Life is, and nothing
would ever tempt 'em, not only not to suffer it for ever, but to run the hazard
and venture of it, were there not a thousand times the reason to fear it that
we have by Religion, and were it but merely probable, or but just possible,
which Atheism it self can never deny, yet no Wise man would expose himself to
such a Dreadful and Irretrievable danger for the Poor and Pitiful Temptations
that are in the greatest Sin. But

2. Besides the Consideration of another World, Religion with all its
straitness and hardship, does not abridge us of any Comfortable Enjoyments of
this World, nor Deprive us of any of the true Pleasures and good things here,
which a Wise Man would Desire, or which our Nature was made for; for they may
be all enjoyed within the compass of Virtue and allowances of Religion, and
that with more Convenience and Advantage than in a Course of Vice and
Wickedness; Religion does not Deprive us of any good proper to our State and
Nature, nor tie us up from any of the Comforts or Pleasures of Life, with a
peevish severity and moroseness, with a touch not, taste not, handle not, but
only restrains us from what would be Evil, and Pernicious to us, if it were
allowed us; keeps us from the forbidden Fruit, and from those excesses and
extravagancies, that are Destructive to our selves and Mischievous to the
World; it does not destroy any of our Natural Pleasures, but refines and
purifies them, and draws them off from the filth, and Sediments which lies
always at the bottom of those that are sinful, and so it makes them clearer
and sweeter, and frees them from all that Nauseousness and Bitterness that Vice
generally mixes with them; Virtue does neither Decay nor Disease our Bodies,
Trouble, or Torment our Minds, Consume or Squander away our Estates, nor Ruin
and Shipwreck our Fortunes, nor bring any such Mischiefs upon us in this World,
as Men's Sins often do, but as keeping the bounds of it, will lead us to Eternal
Life, so it will generally promote and improve the greatest happiness we are
capable of in this.

3. Religion is as easy as God could possibly make it, and none of its
Straitnesses and Severities are Arbitrarily imposed upon us, but from the
Reason and Necessity of things, and the absolute Fitness, Goodness and Wisdom
of whatever it Commands, and its real Tendency to our greatest Perfection and
Happiness; for Religion is not an Arbitrary and Positive thing, made so by the
mere Will and Pleasure of God, which might have lessened our Burden and abated
of our Duty in many Cases had he pleased, and not imposed such hard Tasks, and
such strait and severe Virtues upon us, but have left us more loose and not
tied us up so strictly as he has done; this is a great Mistake, and a wretched
Misunderstanding of Religion, for that as to the moral part of it, is founded
in the Nature and Perfections of God, which are Eternal and Unalterable, and in
the as Eternal and Unalterable Reasons of things, and those Respects and
Relations which they necessarily have to one another; so that as God cannot
alter the Nature of a Circle or a Triangle, nor make two and two not to be
four, so neither can he the Nature of Vice and Virtue, nor make Good to be
Evil, or Evil Good. Moral Virtues are as much founded in the Nature of things,
as Mathematical Truths, or Metaphysical Verities, and the Properties of them
are as certain, and fixed as those of Lines or Numbers. Such Actions are as
necessary to the good of the World, and the Happiness of Societies and
particular Persons, as such Offices and Operations of the Body, are to maintain
its Life and Health, so that breathing is not more necessary to the
preservation of the one, than Justice, Fidelity, and other Virtues are to the
other; and should God have let us loose from any of those Virtues, even the
strictest of them, which the Libertines are most apt to complain against, such
as those which restrain their Natural Passions of Lust and Anger, he would have
let in a Thousand Mischiefs and Evils into the World, and have road us, as
Brutish and Uncivilized, and as miserable as the very Beasts themselves, and as
incapable of Society, and the benefits of good Order and Government. But

4. As all the Laws of God are good and as easy as he could make them, so they
are made more easy by that Divine Grace, and Assistance, whereby he enables us
to perform them, and whereby the Difficulties of Religion are much lightened
and abated; for every thing is said to be light, or heavy in proportion to the
strength and power of another, and according as our strength is increased by
the Divine Grace and Holy Spirit, so is Religion and Virtue, made more easy to
us; so much then of inward strength and power as is conveyed to our Minds by
Gods Grace, which is a Physical and Secret Energy like that of inward life,
Strengthening us mightily, in the inward Man, regenerating, quickening,
renewing, raising, enlivening us, as the Scripture speaks, so much lighter is
the Burden of Religion that God lays upon us; for it is the same thing to take
off so much from that or to add so much new strength to him that is to bear it;
and therefore however hard and difficult Religion be to the weakness and
imperfection of Human Nature, to our single power, which would of it self fall
and sink under it, yet when we have the Assistance of Heaven, and the Aids and
Supplies of Gods Grace to help and cooperate with us, then we can do all things
through Christ which strengthens us, and through his Grace, which is sufficient
for us; and we cannot in reason complain for want of Power when we may have it,
and God is ready to give us whatever power we want, even to Conquer the
strongest Propensities, and most irresistible Temptations; and this will take
greatly off from the badness of the way which leads to Life, when we have the
Spirit of God like a good Angel to lead us through it, always to Comfort, and
Help, and Encourage us in it, so that it would be much more tolerable though it
were through never so Dark and Unpleasant a Wilderness, when, like the Jews, we
have the presence of God and his power to Conduct us all along to the Happy
Land.

5. Though we are apt to complain of the Difficulties in Religion, yet there is
no great End whatever which we can attain without as much Pains and Labor, and
going through as many Difficulties and Hardships as we do in Religion; No Man can
arrive to Learning or to any Liberal Art or Science in any Perfection; no Man
can rise to Honor and Preserment, can get an Estate, or the like, without
using as much Diligence, as much Care and Watchfullness, as in the business of
Religion, without denying himself as many Liberties, spending as much Time and
keeping himself to as strict Rules and Measures, as are in Religion: Nay, I
dare say, many a Man takes more Pains and meets with more Difficulties to get a
sorry livelihood in this World, than would ordinarily carry a Man to Heaven,
and make him live Happily for ever; what shall we then charge God so Foolishly,
as if he had used us hardly in Religion, and make the way to Happiness strait
and narrow and difficult, when we as ordinarily and more willingly, take as
much Pains and go through as many Difficulties in all other things; it is
because we have not such a value and Esteem of the Ends and Designs of
Religion, as we have of other Worldly ones, that we complain of the Hardness
and Difficulty of that above the other; did we think Heaven as Desirable as an
Estate, and Virtue as great a Good as Honor, which is but the shadow of it, we
should pursue it as vigorously and overlook and contemn all the Difficulties
that lie in the way to it, and there is this advantage in seeking and pursuing
the Ends and Designs of Religion above any of those in this World, not only as
they are far greater, and infinitely more valuable and important, but that the
one is certainly to be attained, if we use our utmost Care and Diligence,
whereas we may sail and be Disappointed of the other, after using all means in
order to it; we may not be able to gain an Estate, or compass such a Wordly
Design let us do what we can in it, but no Man shall miss of Heaven, but through
his own Fault, and by his own Negligence and Carelessness.

6. Many Sinners take more pains and trouble, and run through more difficulties
to compass their vicious Designs, and commit their Sins, than a good Man does
in gaining Heaven, and practicing the hardest Virtues and Duties of his
Religion: For thus, how restless and unwearied, and indefatigable are the
Covetous and Ambitious, the Revengeful and Maliticious, or the Lustful and
Debaucht, to attain their Ends, and gratify their extravagant Desires and
Inclinations: How do their several Lusts put them upon the hardest Drudgery,
and make them Toil and Labor, Watch and Attend, Project and Contrive, and be
at more pains and trouble to undo themselves for ever, than would save their
Souls, and make 'em Happy for ever. The Devil is much the harder Master of the
two, and puts his Slaves to more vile and uneasy work in the Servitude of Sin,
than God does his Children and Servants in the doing the hardest part of their
Duty, and many have been greater Martyrs in the Devil's Service, and gone
through more for the sake of their Lusts than other Martyrs have done for heir
Religion, and for the sake of Heaven.

Though Vice seems more Natural, as falling in with some Propensities and
Inclinations that are within us, yet how must a man at first, offer great
Violence to himself, and to the tender sense of his own Mind, before he can be
brought to commit a great Sin? With what Reluctance and Self-denial, as great
as any that Virtue puts upon us, does he part with his first Innocence, and
enter upon a Debauch, till by degrees he grows a less Modest, and more
Courageous Sinner, and is led on at last to commit it with greediness, and it
becomes Natural to him, and 'twould be no great difficulty for him to leave it,
but it is only the Custom and Habit makes it so, and not any thing in Nature, or
in the thing it self? For let the Customs be equal on both sides, and let a Man
be as long used to Virtue as he was to Vice, and he shall find that as Natural
and agreeable and as hard to be overcome as the other, so that as the Scripture
represents it, it is as hard for him that has been accustomed to do evil, to
learn to do good, as for the Ethiopian to change his Skin, or the Leopard his
Spots, 'Jer. 13.23. So whosoever is born of God, i. e. a very good Man, does
not commit sin, and he cannot sin because he is born of God, 1 John 3.9. But

Lastly, and to conclude, it ought to be no manner of Prejudice to Virtue, that
there are but a few that enter the strait Gate, and find the way to Life, and
many that go in at the wide Gate and the broad way, that leads to
Destruction, as our Savior says. This ought not to be regarded by us as a
Discouragement to Virtue, or as any good reason to be wicked for Company, tho I
doubt it is a very common and prevailing one, and draws a great many into the
broad way, because they see such great Numbers in it, and they do not care to
be singular nor to be Reproached for being so, but are willing to do what they
see so many others do, and hope to escape as well as the rest, and that they
run but the same risque and hazard, that they see so many Thousands do besides,
and so they resolve to venture as well as others, let the Preachers say what
they please; Now this, however common and powerful it be, yet is the most
unreasonable thing in the World; for is any man in another case willing to be
sick or to die for Company, or for the sake of example? Would any be so Easy
or so Complaisant, as to pledge another in a Cup of Poison, or would he not
stop the mad frolic when he saw the rest of the Company drop down Dead before
him? Is any Man unwilling to avoid the Plague if he can, because there is
ageneral Infection, and because so many of his Neighbors or Acquaintance have
died of it? Would any refuse the saving his life, and escaping, if he could,
upon a Plank, because the rest of his Company are Sinking and Drowning? Did Men
think it as much worth their while to save their Souls as their Lives, how many
soever lost them, had they as Just and terrible Apprehensions of their own
Damnation, as they have of their Dying the Temptation of Example and Company
would be quickly taken off, and signify nothing? For alas; what Comfort will
it be in the Flames of Hell to hear so many others Roaring and Howling in them,
their hideous Cries and Tortures and Lamentations will rather increase, than
lessen them, and make it only a more sad and dismal Scene of Terror, like that
of a whole City or Country swallowed up by an Earthquake or overflowed with the
Eruptions of a burning Mountain, and the liquid streams of Fire and Brimstone:
No Man who knows what it is to be Happy but would wish to be so tho he were
alone, and no Man who knows that virtue alone is the way to life and happiness,
but must choose to be Virtuous, though he saw never so many others wicked, let
them Reproach and Laugh at him as long as they please for a Man singular and by
himself, let them count his Life Folly, for being so strict and precise (if it
be in the great matters of Virtue) for not drinking to the utmost pitch, nor
daring to swear the least Oath, nor venturing upon a Debauch, or any Common, or
any Modish, or Fashionable Vice (the Reproach and Scandal of which is took off
by the great Party and Number it has of its side) but living up strictly to the
Rules of the Gospel, and the Terms of Salvation there laid down without any
such abatements, as the loose Opinions, or loose Practices of others, are
willing to put upon them (since God will not alter his Methods or Judgments by
any of those) let them I say Condemn on Deride him never so much for this, and
call him Precise Fool, or Formal Saint, and the like, yet no Man that knows the
good of Virtue, will be Laughed out of it by a Nickname, or be ashamed of
being singular in that any more than in any other Excellency of Learning,
Knowledge, or Wisdom above others; and I suppose none of those who are so much
against singularity but would be willing to be Rich, or to be Well, and at
Ease, though never so many others were Poor, or Sick, and in Pain, and why then
not to be Virtuous and Happy, though never so many others are Vicious and
Miserable.

The Fourth Sermon.
MATTHEW. VI. 19, 20. Lay not up for your selves Treasures upon Earth where Moth
and Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal? But lay up
for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt,
and where Thieves do not break through and steal.


THis most Excellent Sermon of our Blessed Savior, as in every thing it gives
us the highest and the noblest precepts of Virtue, that are above all the
Morals of the wisest Heathen, and far excel the best rules of the greatest
Masters in Philosophy, which might have convinced Greece and Athens it self,
that he must be, if not, the Son of God, yet some great and extraordinary
Person sent from above, that without Travel abroad or Education at home, unless
in a poor Trade, should outdo even Socrates, or the more admired Moralists
amongst 'em, so he has all along adapted 'em to Humane Nature, and our present
State and Circumstances in this World, which was a thing that they were
deficient in; for as they often were too short in their precepts and much below
the things, so at other times they were as much too high and gave precepts that
were too big, and not at all fitted to the size and scantling of our present
State or the make of Humane Nature; they were not only for wisely Moderating
and Governing, but quite rooting all Passions and Affections whatever out of
their wise man, which was to make him not a Man, or such a Creature, with such
Faculties and Powers, as God thought for wise reasons fit to do, this was not
to improve but destroy Human Nature and to set Virtue beyond its pitch and out
of its reach, which our Savior who knew our Frame and our outmost Capacities
has never done; they went so far in their rants about the contempt of this
World and despising riches as to commend him that foolishly threw them into the
Sea, that they might be no hindrance to his deeper Philosophizing. Now this as
it betrayed a great weakness in him that could not otherwise better use 'em, so
it is Calculating Virtue, not for this World, but for some other Eutopian
Meridian, the making it not Useful and Comfortable, but Destructive of our
present State and Condition in this World; and tho our Blessed Savior both by
his Life, and his precepts, showed as great contempt of the things of this
World, as ever any person did, and has given the best Arguments that can be,
not to be sollicitous for outward things, nor take any thought for the Morrow,
in the latter part of this Chapter, by trusting in the Divine Providence, and
being especially careful about better things, the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, yet he has no where told us that these are inconsistent, and
that a Man must throw away his Estate, and renounce all his worldly goods, as
well as the Pomps and Vanities of this World, if he will become a Christian and
go to Heaven; this indeed is said to be the Heresy of Pelagius, in which he
was not likely to have very many Followers; and tho several places of Scripture
tell us how hardly they that have Riches shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mark 10.23. and that it is easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of
a Needle, than for a Rich Man is enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, v. 25. which
is all meant of them that trust in Riches, v. 24. that we cannot serve God and
Mammon, bids us not love the World nor the things that are in the World, for if
any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. yet
they all import no more, and so will be fairly understood, by this excellent
direction of our Savior that I am now to discourse of, Lay not up for your
selves Trusures.

Neither is that purely a Negative, an Universal forbidding us to lay up any
Treasures upon Earth, for if we do not that in some measure, we are not guilty
only of great Imprudence, but even of Infidelity too, If any provide not for
his own, and especially for those of his own House, he has denied the Faith,
and is worse than an Insidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. not to make provision for ones own
Offspring and Children is to be more Unnatural than the Heathens, nay, than
the very Fowls, and the most Ravenous Beasts, and not to supply an Aged
Helpless Parent, is to be guilty of that which the Heathens counted the most
infamous Ingratitude; nay, if by an honest Industry and lawful Profession we do
not some way or other, make our selves serviceable to the public and able to
procure some good, to the whole of which we are parts, we are like dead and
useless Members, that serve neither for Life nor Motion, nor the conveyance of
Blood and Spirits; and as in the Natural body, so also in the civil, it is
impossible to maintain either its Life or Strength, unless some greater parts
are Replenished with a larger abundance of Blood and Spirits, and there be a
general. Circulation and lesser conveyance of 'em to every part. Neither
Government nor the World could subsist so long as God intends it, if Men should
lay aside all prudent care about the things of this World; all would be put
into a dead Hand, and that would quickly make a dead Body, if it were not
Lawful for some Men to Trade and grow Rich; the present state of this World
makes this to be necessary and is utterly inconsistent with general Vows of
Poverty, and as a Man may Lawfully work for his livelihood, (and according to
the Apostles Rule, He that will not work neither should he eat, 2. These. 3.10.)
without breaking our Savior's command, John 6.27. Labor not for the Meat that
perishes, but for the Meat which endures unto everlasting Life, so he may by
prudent and honest ways take care of his Worldly Concerns, and add to his
Estate, and grow Rich without any Violation of our Savior's Rule, Ley not up
for your selves Treasures on Earth, for those Treasures on Earth are not of
themselves Evil, and may be matter of very great Virtues, such as the rich Men
are particularly charged with 1 I'im. 6.17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich
in this World that they do good, that they be Rich in good Works, ready to
Distribute, willing to Communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good
Foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life,
which it seems they may be made the means of attaining; so that by these
Negatives, is meant only a comparative command, that we rather lay up to our
selves Treasures in Heaven than in Earth, that we be more careful for the one
than the other, not that one is forbidden by the other, but to be preferred
before it, as we have the like manner of expression most frequently in
Scripture, Prove. 8.10. Receive my Instruction and not Silver, and Knowledge
rather than Gold, so Mat. 9.13. I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, i. e.
rather than Sacrifice God did so much value inward and real Righteousness
before outward Rites and Performances, that he says to the Jews, Hosea 6.6. I
desired Mercy and not Sacrifice, nay, more expressly, Jerem. 7.22. I spoke not
unto your Fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the
Land of Egypt, concerning burnt-Offerings or Sacrifices, but this thing
commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, i. e. this was what in the first and
chief place I commanded you, and very much preferred and Regarded before the
other, so Joel 2.13. Rent your Hearts and not your Garments, i. e. have an
inward Sorrow and Humiliation, rather than an outward; and a great many other
Phrases, that seem expressly to forbid a thing, in respect to something else
that may stand in Competition with it, when yet they do not so absolutely, but
only diminish and lessen it, in respect of the other and prefer that before it,
and so this precept as it lies in my Text, whole and entire, without breaking
it into parts, is plainly to be understood and includes in it these several
things.

1. That we should much more Value and Esteem Heavenly Treasures in our
Thoughts and Affections, than Earthly.

2. That whenever there is a Competition between those, and we cannot secure
both, we part with the Earthly rather than the Heavenly.

3. That we use as much Care and Diligence to obtain the Heavenly as the
Earthly.

4. That we so seek the Earthly as to make 'em Means and Instruments toward
the obtaining the Heavenly.

1. That we should set a greater value upon Heavenly Treasures in our Thoughts
and Affections than upon Earthly, that we should account them much more
ercellent and desirable things and place our Happiness and chief good in those,
but not in the other; We may allow these outward things such a due place in out
Thoughts as they deserve, that they are Comfortable Conveniences, and
Necessary Accommodations to our present state, but not such things as are good
in themselves, or that can afford us any true Happiness, but what we see Men as
Miserable in their fullest Enjoyment of, as those who have the greatest want of
'em, by no means comparable to Wisdom or to Goodness and Virtue, or the least
improvements of the Understanding and Mind; such as is in some measure
proportionable to the wants of Nature and the Circumstances of this Life, a
wise Man may count desirable, who is not bound with a Stoical fullenness to
think it indifferent whether he be Clothed or Naked whether he Starve or have
Food to eat, nor in a Cynical Bravado throw away his Earthen Dish because he
can drink without it, and despise every thing but his Tub and Sunshine; no
this is a self-denying kind of Haughtiness, that despises every thing because
it over-values it self, and contemus not only the World, but the maker of it
too, who would never have placed us in such a well Furnished Habitation, if we
might not have used the Conveniences that belong to it, nor have been at all
the better for all the rich stores he has laid in for the use of his Creatures;
but then indeed we are to account them but as common Utensills, that are
convenient for our lower and smaller occasions, not as our Treasure, and what
we account of any great Worth or Value, or make to be a prime ingredient into
our true Happiness; though they may seem to give some outward Color and Varnish,
yet that must be something within, and if it be not sound underneath, 'twill
quickly moulder away and consume for all they can do, that are no more to be
thought parts of our Happiness, than our Hair or Nails are parts of a Man, such
Excrementitious parts as may outwardly adorn, but be no manner of cause of the
true Life, or strength of the Body, such Goods as we may value and desire and
purchase too according to that low and moderate rate, which they bear in
proportion to the real needs of this present Condition; out to over-prize and
esteem them as things equal to Virtue and Goodness or to place our summum
bonum, or chief Happiness in 'em, and let 'em take up the chiefest place in our
Hearts and Affections, this is to worship Mammon, to set up that for an object
of my strongest Passion and Devotion, which ought to have the lowest place in
'em.

Thus to set our Hearts upon Riches, if they do increase, which the Psalmist
forbids, Ps. 62.10. to trust in 'em, as our Savior speaks, Mark 10.24. and
place our greatest confidence in those, as if we might surely expect Happiness
from 'em; this is the Idolatry the Apostle Charges Covetousness with, Col. 3.5.
setting up a Golden Calf, to help us in our Distress instead of the God of
Israel, and making a Deity of that which would do very well in earrings and
Bracelets; the making that which would be serviceable in the matters of this
Life, to be so highly valued and even adored by us, is like the Folly of the
Graecians, who bowed down and Worshipped that wooden Statue of Hercules, which
Diagoras made a good Fire of, that helped to dress his Provision, that being a
much better use of Wood, than to be made a God of. And he that has a due sense
of the meanness, the Uncertainty and Transitoriness of these Earthly Treasures
in respect of the Heavenly, their being subject to be corrupted by Rust, to be
eaten by Moths, Secretly Wasted and Devoured, or violently seized upon by
Thieves, and subject to a thousand Casualties, will not be so apt to overvalue
them or prefer 'em to the other; if we compare and bring 'em together, we shall
find a very great difference between 'em upon many accounts.

1. These Earthly Treasures are subject to a great many Hazards and
Uncertainties, which the others are not, Violence and Rapine may force 'em out
of our hands, though we hold 'em never so fast, fraud may secretly beguile us of
'em, before we are aware, or a Pyrate may Rob and a Storm sink all our Fortunes
in an Instant, and if they come safe home, yet they may be lost there, a War
may Plunder us of all we have, or a Fire may make a speedier Destruction, and
Devour in a moment the fullest Barns, or the richest Warehouses, and we may
sit like Job mourning upon their Allies, the only thing it has left us; so many
various Casualties are they subject to, so little are we insured of them, that
we hold 'em at the Mercy and Favor of a thousand Contingencies; but the
Heavenly Treasures are quite out of harms way, and not subject to the Chance or
Courtesy of Fortune; no Man can steal away our Virtue without our own consent;
it is safe in our own Breast, and locked up securely in our Minds; the Oppressor
that can strip us Naked of every thing else, cannot touch our Innocence, nor
take that from us. The Sabaeans could rob Job of his Oxen and his Asses; a Fire
could consume his Cattle, and the fall of a House bury all his Children in the
same Grave, but nothing could remove his Patience and take away his Integrity,
that still he retained and held fast, Job 2.3, 9. The Philosopher that lost all
in a wreck, yet kept his Philosophy and Wisdom in spite of Fortune, and the
Apostles, who left all they had, still preserved their Religion and a good
Conscience, which by the decree of the Senate could not be Sequestered, nor
Confiscate by the Emperor's Edicts; those inward Treasures of the Mind are
safe, when things without are never so uncertain, and when they shall bring us
to another World, then they secure beyond possibility of the least danger;
whatever Storms and Shelves and Rocks we pass through here, when we once Land and
set Foot upon the shore of Eternity, we are out of all danger and in a safe
harbor, where we shall enjoy the rewards of all our Toil, and be vastly
enriched with Treasures of that Happy and Secure place.

2. These Earthly Treasures are fading and Transitory, but the Heavenly are
durable and lasting; Riches certainly make themselves Wings and sly away as an
Eagle toward Heaven, Prove. 23.5. of a sudden we know not how they are got out
of sight, and we can never set Eyes on 'em again; they leave their possessor
sometimes without much warning; like Tides, they roll from one Shore to
another, from this Man or Family to the other, and leave him perhaps a Beggar
to day, who was in the greatest Plenty but a little before, or if they be not
so Fickle nor leave the owner on a sudden, yet in a little time he must leave
them, Death will strip him naked as he came into the World, and then all his
thoughts perish, Ps. 146.4. All his thoughts of being rich or great, or happy
in this World, all the mighty Projects and deep Contrivances about worldly
things are quite at an end, and a sudden stop is given to the building of
bigger Barns or finer Houses, or making greater purchases and laying up more of
these Earthly Treasures. The Soul is perhaps taken from him the night before he
was resolved to do all this, and then how insignificant are they all, and what
is he the better for 'em. Thus Foolish it is to carry on only such short
designs, that we must break off very suddenly and abruptly, and not lay our
Thoughts deeper than the Grave, or beyond this transitory Life, not to have our
thoughts and aims upon greater things that must for ever employ our Minds, that
are more lasting and durable, of a more sixth and solid Nature, and that will
last as long as our immortal Souls, that we may sit down with, and bid our
Souls be for ever at rest, for they have goods laid up, not only for many
years, but for ever.

3. These Earthly Treasures are such empty things, that they can never give us
such inward Happiness, as the Heavenly will: We are apt indeed to admite at the
brave outside, the appearing gaity and finery of the Rich and Great, but all
this without Virtue, is but show and pageantry; they have none of that real
Happiness, nor enjoy any thing of that fatisfaction we imagine they do; they
have a thousand Troubles and Multitudes of cares, caused even by their Riches
and Greatness, that lie heavy upon 'em; vast loads of unseen miseries oppress
'em, and inward and secret guilt fills 'em with horror; and vast legions of
evil Spirits haunt and disturb those Houses within, that look so stately and
beautifully without. We make very false measures, and are mightily mistaken if
we conclude him to be Happy, that we see has the visits and the Complements,
and the greatest Court made to him, alas, we see not into his Mind nor how
uneasy he is there, and how little the better for our foolish Opinion of him;
it is only his own thought; and his own virtue and good temper of Mind that make
him a Happy Man for all this, and without this he may Cheat others, but he can
never deceive himself; these are inward and close to his Mind, and
indiscernible to any one but himself, the other are all external and loose,
like Scenes and Pictures looking fine at a distance, but if we come near 'em,
it is all gross daubing, they cannot yield us that Enjoyment and Happiness that
we vainly fancy and expect in 'em; and whilst we imagine we embrace what we can
wish, it proves but a thin Cloud and Air, and very often what the wise Man
found it, who had made as many Experiments about worldly Happiness as any Man
did, Vanity and Vexation of Sptrit, and therefore not worth so much passion and
concern to attain 'em, nor fit that we should lay out our Money for that which
is not Bread, and our labor for that which satissieth not, Isai. 55.2. for
windy and empty trash, rather than for that solid food, which will nourish and
feed and feast 'em to all Eternity.

2. Whenever there is a Competition between those, and we cannot secure both,
that we part with the Earthly rather than the Heavenly; when we do an ill thing
in order to our worldly interest, when a Bargain will not go off unless it be
voucht with a downright lie, nor an Estate be got without open Knavery, or some
underhand slight and secret injustice, nor a great Place or Preferment be
obtained unless we venture upon some thing that is mean, and shameful, and
dishonest, then to scorn to do a base thing for any advantage, and to prefer
Honesty and Conscience, before Gain or Greatness, this is to value the Heavenly
more than the Earthly Treasures; this shows we love Virtue, for it self, when
we choose that alone, not for its present dowry or portion, but for its own
sake, and what we may expect hereafter, and will not forsake it for all the
offers that the World can make: This indeed, is the true gage of our
Affections, the true way to measure our love to these worldly things, and know
whether it be too great and immoderate or no; if we will be guilty of the least
Sin or Injustice, in order to the getting Money or growing Rich, if we will
wrong the Orphan or cheat the Widow, whose Estate is entrusted to us, if we
will break our promise and deny our word, when it would be some loss to us to
perform it, and avoid a Just debt upon some little trick or legal nicety, or do
any thing for our Interest that comports not with fair dealing, with equity and
an honest mind; why, this shows that we have too great a love and value for
these Earthly things, when we are taken so with the tempting Charms of 'em,
that if we cannot fairly court 'em to our Embraces, we will commit a Rape upon
'em and force 'em some way or other into our possession. When Naboth's Vineyard
looks so pleasant and beautiful that Ahab will purchase it, though at the hard
rate of Perjury and false-Witness; when we had rather part with our Virtue, and
violate our Conscience, than let go a present interest, so that when these two
are put together in the Balance of our cooler Judgment, Earthly Treasures do
much outweigh the Heavenly in our Thoughts, and though they are much lighter in
themselves, yet our affections always cast the Scales on that side; and so
likewise in the possession as well as getting of Riches, when we use 'em basely
or not at all, and be unwilling to part with 'em upon a good occasion, when a
decent opportunity calls for 'em, when our poor Brother stands in need of 'em,
when God or the public require 'em of us, when we can serve the ends of Piety
or Charity, or public good by 'em, then not to be willing to part with 'em,
this is a certain sign that we love 'em too well, that we think nothing so good
as our Money, and that we count it much more eligible to be Rich, than to be
either Good, or Charitable, or Pious, and that we had much rather be one than
the other; nay, which is strange, be one than both, so little do we value every
thing else, and think nothing is to be compared to a great heap, and a long
inventory, and that what we have in our Chests and our Coffers is much more
valuable than what we have in our Souls, or than the Soul it self.

3. This comparative precept supposes that we must use as much care and
diligence to obtain the Heavenly as the Earthly Treasures, and if Men would
once do that, I am sure they would never miss of the former; if we would as
heartily and diligently set about getting Heaven, and making our selves
Virtuous, as we do about getting a livelihood, and making our selves Rich, we
should never sail of the one, though we very often do of the other; a thousand
Accicidents and Contingences hinder us of obtaining our worldly aims, and with
all our thoughts and toil, and care, we can never compass our wishes, but when
we have tired our selves with a hot and eager pursuit of these worldly things,
and followed 'em as close as we could through a hundred mazes and labyrinths, yet
they fly away, and we can never catch or lay hold of them; But in the Heavenly
Treasures it is far otherwise, no Man ever mist 'em that did all he could to
obtain 'em, that after he had set himself seriously about 'em, used his utmost
endeavor, and persevered in doing so, at last he would most certainly and
infallibly get 'em, if he were no way wanting to himself; if he were hearty and
resolved in the business, and did not by idleness, or something else, break off
his designs too soon, he would never fail of success at the last, which should
be a very great encouragement to make us more diligent about those Heavenly
Treasures, which have many other considerations to excite our industry and our
labor about 'em, their exceeding value and lasting duration, which are the
constant motives that put us upon an unwearied care and labor after any thing
here: What pains do we refuse, what labor do we count too much to get a
plentiful Estate, that we may quickly leave, and be but a short time the
better for, if it may descend to our Children and Family; how can men deny
themselves their ease and their quiet, nay their meat and their sleep, and
drudge and toil very willingly for that; nay, how does a poor man labor and
sweat, strain his Nerves and his Muscles to get Bread, and a mean Livelihood:
Why, if we think Heaven is worth our while, do we not use as much labor for
that, as we are willing to undergo for a lesser matter? If the Heavenly
Treasures were but of equal worth, were but at the same rate with the Earthly,
yet why do we not put out our utmost strength and vigor, and strive, and run,
and contend earnestly for that prize? If we believed it to be of such great
worth and value, as we generally pretend, why cannot we deny our selves in some
little matters for the sake of Heaven, as we do for to carry on our worldly
concerns? Why do we like Children run so long, and sweat and toil our selves
after a Painted fly, whilst we Truant and are Lazy, and Neglect our main
business?

4. This comparative duty enjoins (...) to put the Earthly Treasures to such
uses as to make 'em means and instruments toward the obtaining the Heavenly, so
in the parallel place of St. Luke, where he gives an account of this same
Sermon of our Savior, by the very same precept as it is there expressed, we are
bid sell that we have and give Alms, provide your selves bags which wax not
old, a Treasure in the Heavens that fails not, where no Thief approaches,
neither Moth corrupts, Luke, 12.33. So that since these Earthly Treasures are
so liable to hazards and uncertainties here, so much in danger to be torn from
us by the hands of violence, or subject to some other mischance or casualty,
the best way to insure them, and to make the most of 'em, is to employ 'em to
Charitable uses, and the relief of our poor Brethren; this is the secure way to
make those corruptible things that are so ticklish and uncertain, so apt to
slip away from us, to be our own for ever, this will make those transitory and
perishing Riches to last for ever; and whereas by keeping 'em very close to our
selves, and being unwilling to part with any of 'em, we in a short time must be
utterly deprived of 'em, by this way we return 'em to another World, and shall
be sure there to enjoy the benefit of 'em, with double interest; by this means
the Silver and Gold that was but a better sort of earth than we tread on, is
turned into a Virtue and made matter of true Religion, and by this we show our
greater value to Heavenly Treasures, than the Earthly, when we are willing to
part with them to attain the other, when they are our prime scope and aim, that
bear the chief place in our thoughts, the other but the means and instruments
to attain it; when we do not account the Earthly Treasures goods in themselves,
as the Covetous generally do, who think it their great Happiness to heap up
vast Riches for no other end beyond the comfortable satisfaction of being Rich,
whilst they are such Idolaters, as the Apostle calls 'em, Ephesians. 5.5. that
terminate their worship upon the very Idols themselves, and look no further;
but to make 'em serviceable to the ends of Charity and Beneficence to those who
are in want and necessity, this is to value that in the first place, and those
chiefly in order to it, and this is the true use that God the Donor of 'em
expects of us, and this is not only consistent with laying up to our selves
Treasures in Heaven, but the most certain way to do it, as I shall briefly show
by naming a few considerations to that purpose. As,

1. Whatever we do this way we engage God to reward us either in this or
another World. He that has pity on the poor lends to the Lord, and that
which he has given will he pay again, Prove. 19.17. God becomes the poor Man's
surety to us, and it is a very great piece of Infidelity not to trust his word,
for the payment of a little sum hereafter, that we now part with to the poor;
nay, it shall be no great while before he will take care to repay it us with
great advantage; he very often does it presently in this World, by blessing the
rest of our Estate the better, for Dedicating some part of it as a first fruits
to his use; he has promised that he which gives to the poor shall not lack;
Prove. 28.27. That the liberal Soul shall be made fat, Prove. 11.25. Eccles.
11.1. Cast thy Bread upon the Waters, for thou shall find it after many days.
Ps. 41.1, 2. Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him
in time of trouble, the Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall
be blessed upon the Earth. All which places assure us, even of a Temporal
Retribution, which the Divine Providence will make to the Charitable Man, and
this does for the most part, if not always happen, but to be sure God will
greatly recompense him at the last day.

2. By thus using our Earthly Treasures, we enrich our Minds with the most
excellent Virtue, and the most Christian disposition, and nothing is more
Valuable and more Heavenly than this kind, and bountiful, and good habit of
Mind, by which we are disposed, as we have ability and opportunity, to do good
to those who stand any way in need of it; this is the very temper of God, to
communicate out of his rich store plentifully to others. Had he been niggardly
and kept all to himself, where had we been, and all his Creatures that owe
being, and all things to his bounty? Therefore he has commanded no duty so
frequently, nor so earnestly as this of Charity and Mercy, so that this often
engrosses the sum of the whole Law, and is called Righteousness in general; it
is never left out in the Character of good Men in Scripture, but is always made
a principal Ingredient in the Composition of that Virtue and Goodness that will
prepare and qualify the Mind for Heaven and Happiness.

3. We cannot make our Earthly Treasures so Beneficial to us any other way, nor
turn to so good account, if we would spend 'em to the best purpose; after we
have supplied our own wants and just occasions, what is over and above serves
only for Vice or Vanity; it is but food for our Lusts, nourishment for Pride, or
Intemperance, or Sensuality; the best use we can make of the overplus, is to do
good with it, to comfort our poor Brother who is ready to starve for want of
what we profusely squander away, who would be mightily relieved and supplied by
what we spend Vainly, or perhaps Vitiously; thus we may both escape the
temptations of Riches, and also make the most beneficial use of 'em another
way, that which would be quite lost, if laid out upon any thing else, will by
this means be more fully our own, than what we have under Lock and Key, the
poor will keep it safer for us than Locks and Bars; what is given to him, is
better put out, upon a greater Interest and surer Fund, than if we had all the
Land upon Earth tied for it; God is bound, as I told you, and is become our
debtor thereby; we have made over our Estate to him, and he is our Trustee for
it, which 'twas very likely we should lose quickly, or be robbed, or
sequestered of, if 'twere in our own name. This is the best Merchandice we can
make of our stock, when we are in a Country where it is in danger to be seized
on, to transmit it to our Country, and return it to him who is in Heaven, and
will most certainly repay it us when we come thither; this is to make our
selves such friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when we fall they
may receive us into everlasting Habitations, as our Savior says, Luke 16.9.

4. I shall add but this consideration, and that I think a very strong one to
Men that have thoughts of a reckoning hereafter, that when we shall appear
before God's Tribunal to give an account of our selves and actions, there will
be a most special regard had to the discharge of this duty above all others,
that we shall be Examined and Sentenced there, chiefly upon the account of our
having relieved the poor Members of Christ. So Mat. 25.41. where our Savior
tells us, how the process shall be in that great day, the most dreadful
Sentence of Goy cursed into everlasting fire, shall be pronounced upon those on
the left hand, for this reason, for I was Hungry, and ye gave me no Meat; I was
Thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in;
Naked, and ye Clothed me not; Sick and in Prison, and ye visited me not. This
is the particular Crime, the deepest Charge of that black Indictment, not so
much for Injustice, for Adultery, for Murder, any of which shall yet condemn us
at that day, as for Unmercifullness and Uncharitableness to the poor, which
Christ takes the most unkindly and hardly from us, as done to himself; But the
blessed Sentence shall be to the Bountiful and to the Merciful, who have been
Charitable to Christ in his poor Members, to whom he will pronounce these
joyful Words, v. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, enter into the Kingdom
prepared for you, from the beginning of the World, for I was an Hungered, and ye
gave me Meat; I was Thirsty, and ye gave me Drink; I was a Stranger, and ye
took me in; I was Naked, and ye Clothed me; I was Sick, and ye visited me; I
was in Prison and ye came unto me. This is singled out rather than any thing
else, as more regarded by God, than any other Virtue; and if we would ever hear
that Sentence from the mouth of Christ, pronounced to our selves, let us at all
times, as we have opportunity, practice this Virtue, and so lay up to our
selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt, and where
Thieves do not break through or steal.

The Fifth Sermon.
LUKE XV. 31. And he said unto him, Son thou art ever with me, and all that I
have is thine.


THis is part of the Parable concerning the Prodigal Son, and the answer of the
Father to the eldest Son, who had not been a Prodigal, but had served his
Father many Years, neither transgressed at any time his Commandments, v. 29.
Notwithstanding which, the Father seemed to treat his Prodigal and Riotous Son,
who had left his House and run away from him, and devoured his living with
Harlots, v. 30. and wasted his Time and Estate in Lewd and Vicious courses; to
treat him, I say, upon his return, with more expressions of love and kindness
and rejoicing than he ever did the other, who had never offended him.

This seemed not a just and a fair usage to the elder Brother, as much failing
in Justice to him as exceeding in kindness to the other, too little rewarding
the constant duty of the one, and too much encouraging the Lewdness and
Prodigality of the other; so that not without good reason, he seems to take it
ill, and to be angry at this unreasonable dealing of his Father's.

Parables are very good ways of Instruction, and very lively Representations of
things, or truths by way of Picture or Scene, and Dramatical History; now though
all the parts must be suitable and agreeable to one another, yet there is a
main aim, plot, and design that runs through the whole, which was chiefly
designed by it, and is the great scope of it, and other things are but as the
Circumstances and Ornaments, the Dress and Habit, this is the air, the stroke
that give life and likeness to the whole.

The Parables of this Chapter concerning the lost Sheep, the lost piece of
Silver, and the returning Prodigal, were designed to show how acceptable and
well pleasing to God the Repentance of a Sinner is, and that he shall certainly
be received very kindly upon it, and to represent this after the manner of men,
in a way suitable and affecting to us, God who is said in Scripture to be angry
and provoked at Sinners, is here said to Joy and Rejoice at their Return and
Repentance; The joyful Father kissing and embracing his returning Son, putting
the best robe on him, and killing the satted Calf for him, and receiving him
with all the expressions of Mirth and Rejoicing, this is to represent the love
and kindness of God to a Sinner upon his Repentance; but we must not apply
Parables too far, for they touch not in all their parts, but only like Globes
here and there in a point.

These Parables seem at first sight to teach and denote, that the Repentance of
a great Sinner in some part of his Life, is more pleasing to God than the
constant obedience of a good Man all his Life, which undoubtedly can never be
true, and therefore the Parable can never mean that, but only by comparative
and condeseending representations to show, that God is very well pleased and
will certainly accept a Sinner upon his true Repentance; that expression must
not be understood strictly and rigorously, There is Joy in Heaven over one
sinner that Repents, more than over ninety nine just Persons that need no
Repentante, v. 7. the Angels, those lovers of Virtue, cannot but rejoice as
much and more at Men's living always by the Laws of Heaven, as at their
sometimes Repenting for breaking them; and God, like a wise and good Father,
cannot but be better pleased, that his Children were always Dutiful and
Virtuous and Obedient, than that they were any time otherwise. This is plain
and undeniable at first sight; indeed upon a Vicious Son's being reclaimed, a
Parent may have a quicker Passion and Resentment, as upon a Child's recovery
after a hopeless Sickness, in which he was given over, his being restored to
life, as it were, gives a greater Joy to the Parent than if he had been never
ill, but this is but the working of Different, Humane, Animal Passions in us,
and the ebbing and flowing of our Spirits upon apprehension of some good or
evil that greatly affects us; None of this is truly in God, but only the
several acts of his Wisdom, and Wise resolves of his will, and meant and
denoted by them. It Is all human and a condescension to the Passions and Humors
of men, to rejoice more at the finding one lost Sheep or one lost piece of
Silver, than at a great many that were always safe; so for a lost Chisess
^^^^^ing home, than for a great many that cover were in danger. This is not to
be taken strictly, but only as it is to teac^^ and represent this positive
truth, that the Return and Repentance of a Sinner is very acceptable and well
pleasing to God, and that he will certainly be received by him; thus in other
Parables when Christ, to show the power of earnest and constant Prayer,
represents it by a Widow's importuning an unjust Judge, Luke 18. Chap. and by a
Friend's prevailing to make another rise, and give him what he wants, not
because he is his Friend, but because of his importunity, Luke 11.8. this which
is usual with Men, must not be strictly applied to God, as if his blessing
flowed not so much from his own goodness as that they were extorted by
importunity; so in the Parable of the unjust Steward, Luke 16. and in others,
there is, not to be (...) nice Application of every part, but only of the main
scope and primary design, which is as it were thereslex image representing the
thing intended, without those Collatoral rays, that are but adventitious and
adhering to it.

Among the many mistakes about Repentance, which are not a few, for we have
made a shift to corrupt most of the positive parts of our Religion, and were it
not for what is Moral and Natural nothing would secure it from being turned
into mere Superstition to serve the Lusts and Looseness, and yet stupifie the
fears, and delude the hopes of Men Sinfully inclined; one, I say, of the
greatest mistakes is, to think a constant obedience is not to be preferred to
the truest Repentance, or that God will not be more pleased with, and more
highly reward the one than the other; The contrary to which is here plainly
supposed and asserted, Son thou art always with me, and all that I have is
thine. Where plainly the Father who Rejoiced so much at the returning Prodigal,
yet allows a great difference between him and his Innocent Son, who had always
served him, and never at any time transgressed his Commandments. To make out,
and illustrate this, I shall offer the following Particulars,

1. There are a great many I hope in the World, who, as our Savior says, need
no Repentance, Luke 15.7. i. e. no such Repentance as is to alter their whole
state and spiritual Condition, and to change the whole Habit and Temper of
their Minds, and from bad men to make them good ones; for they who by means of
a good Education have been always brought up Virtuously and Religiously and
preserved from any great and wilful Sin, who never erred from the paths of
Virtue nor stepped into those of Sin and Death, these have a Title to the
Character of Zacharias and Elizabeth, Luke, 1.6. that they are Righteous before
God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, and
these who never defiled themselves need not to be washed and cleansed as those
who have made themselves filthy and impure; they deserve not the Character
given to the vile and wretched sinners in Scripture, nor need such exhortations
to Repentance as are given to them, and which some very indiscreetly apply to
all alike, even in their Prayers and Confessions, without considering the plain
difference of the case, such as those spoke to the wicked Jews, and whole
Jewish Nation, The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint, from the sole
of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it, but wounds and
bruises and putrefying sores, Isai. 1.5, 6. and therefore those were Commanded
to wash themselves, make themselves clean, put away the evil of their doings,
v. 16. and they were promised, though their sins were as Scarlet, they should be
white as Snow, though they were red as Crimson, they should be as Wool, v. 18.
which is great encouragement to the worst of Sinners to Repent, but God forbid
that the sins of all should be of so deep a die or deserve so black and sad a
Character; No, many, I hope a great many, have kept their Innocence and
Whiteness, and Purity, and not defiled themselves with any great Sin, since
they came out of the Laver of Regeneration, and these are they who need no
Repentance, i. e. not that great Repentance that a wilful sinner does.

All stand in need, in daily need of Repentance in some sense, and are to pray
God to forgive them their Trespasses every day, i. e. their lesser Sins of
frailty and infirmity, which the best Men are not free from, but this is very
different from such wilful great Sins as destroy a Man's good state, and put
him into a state of Damnation and exclude him out of Heaven if he live in them;
The exhortations and advices to Repentance in the New Testament as well as the
Old, are given chiefly to very Vile and Lewd Sinners, and in this Sense Christ
came not so much to call the Righteous as Sinners, to Repentance. The Jews,
even the most Famous amongst them for Sanctity and Piety were guilty of
wretched Hypocrisy and horrid Immorality, as our Savior charges the Scribe;
and Pharisees; and the Heathens before they turned Christians, lived in all
manner of Impurity and Immorality, Walking according to the course of this
World, according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit that now
works in the Children of Disobedience, having their Conversation in the Lusts
of the Flesh, fullfilling the desires of the Flesh and of the Mind, Ephesians. 2.2,
3. who walked some time and lived in Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate
Affection, Concupiscence and Covetousness, which is Idolatry, Colos. 3.5. who
were Adulterers, Idolaters, Effeminate, abusers of themselves with mankind,
Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners, as the same Apostle tells
them, some of them were 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. In the first Chapter of the Epistle to
the Romans, he gives still a worse and more abominable account of them, now
even these were Washed, were Sanctified, were Justified, by becoming true
Penitents and true Christians, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the
spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11. by putting off the old Man, i. e. the old
Heathenish Sinful life, and putting on the new Man, i. e. a Christian
Conversation, Col. 3.9, 10. they who were once the Servants of sin, being now
made free from sin, and become Servants of Righteousness, Romans 6.18. and they
who yielded their members Servants to Uncleanness and to Iniquity unto
Iniquity, now yielding their members Servants to Righteousness unto Holiness,
v. 19.

Now all this is spoke to those who were vile sinners, and Heathens before they
became Christians, and it must be a sad and lamentable case to apply it to any
that have been bred up in Christianity, their condition must be much worse and
more inexcusable, and not so easily remediable as the others, but none of this
can or ought in any manner, to be applied to those who have lived Virtuously
through the general course of their lives, and have, though with many failings,
never been sinners in a high sense, for in a low one we have all been so; but
many I doubt not, all their lives were not in an ill state, nor committed any
sin to put 'em into it, but like Enoch, walked with God all their lives, and
like Job were Perject and Upright that feared God and eschewed evil, Job 1.1.
that were always Children of God and never Children of the Devil, that were
never Prodigals, but always served their Father, neither transgressed at any
time his Commandments. Now the condition of these is a great deal more Happy
and Preferable to that of the most Penitent sinner, they are more in the savor
of God, and shall be more highly rewarded by him; Son thou art always with me,
and all that I have is thine.

2. The difficulties and hazards and dangers are nothing so great to those, as
to penitent Sinners and Prodigals; Nothing is so hard and difficult as to
overcome old Vicious Customs and root out old Sinful Habits that have been a
great while growing and prevailing upon us, this is plucking out a right Eye
and cutting off a right Hand, for sins grow dear and natural to men by Custom,
and very hard to be parted with; like Diseases that are grown Chronical, they
are hard to be cured; and though with long Courses and many Remedies they may be
cured and abated, yet there will be great danger of having some spices of them,
now and then, and of their often returning, and the sinner's Relapsing again
into them, for there will be a disposition and Inclination to them, and upon
every little Temptation the Fancy and Imagination will be apt to be turned to
them, and put a strong bias upon the Mind, to carry it that way; many a good
Man finds it very hard to govern the Passions, the desires and inclinations he
has given way to before he came to such a full sense of Religion, and how must
a sinner deny all his old Lusts and Affections that he has indulged so long,
and break off the old customs and ways he has been used to, and be always
struggling with those Enemies that he has let in, so that they have made many
strong holds to themselves, and it is now more hard to expel and drive them
out, and though they are sometimes vanquished, yet they will often rally again,
and a Man must keep a perpetual Watch and Guard against them; Vice, when it has
once got possession of a Man, is not easily cast out, but the fancied good and
the imagined pleasure sticks and remains in the Thoughts, Fancy, and Memory,
and the Appetite is not easily weaned from what it has so long indulged, but
the Lust and Inclination is apt to kindle upon every like Object and
Temptation; so hard and so rare it is to recover an old sinner from a long
habit of wickedness, that as Experience gives us but few Examples of this, and
most of the good Men in the World are such as were never bad, so that the
Prophet to show its great difficulty compares it to a natural impossibility,
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, then may ye also
do good that are accustomed to do evil, Jer. 13.23. but with God all things are
possible, and he is said to give a new Heart and a new Soul, and to make us new
Creatures, when he brings us by his Grace to true Repentance, and it is a kind
of creating us again to new works; a raising us from the dead, a quickening, a
giving us a new life, in the Scripture phrase, when from bad he makes us good
ones, which is something greater than creating us at first, because in the
other there is no hindrance and obstacle in the subject, as there is in this.

Many are the hardships and difficulties that a sincere Penitent finds in
overcoming an unruly Appetite, an irregular Passion, a beloved Lust and
Inclination, which were all made so by the strength of Custom and long Habit,
and which would have been much easier mastered, had they not been so long
indulged and grown upon him. Many a sinner when his reason is convinced, and he
sees the evil of his sins, and would gladly leave, if a faint wish would do it,
yet is such a slave to them by long Custom, that they lead him Captive at their
pleasure, and he cannot break the Fetters, and shake off the Chains that he has
made himself, and which are very uneasy to him, now all this a Man is free
from by an early Religion and a constant Obedience, and being never engaged in
the ways of wickedness, which are so hard to get out of.

3. There cannot be that full comfort and security in the Return and Repentance
of a sinner as in a constant and unbroken Obedience all a Man's life, for though
there is certain Pardon promised and assured to such a Penitent, yet no Man can
be so sure that he has fully repented of any sin, as that he has once committed
it, but there will be some fears and doubts and misgivings still in his Mind,
upon the remembrance of it, which he can never be so free from, as if he had
never been guilty of it; and it is fit indeed this should always be, that a
Penitent should be always humble and a little afraid, and should not be fully
confident, as if he had been always Innocent; Fear is the necessary punishment
and consequent of sin and guilt, and the sinner should tremble at the thoughts
of God's Judgments, and the desert of his sin, though they are not inflicted upon
him, and though he has his pardon sealed in the Blood of Christ, yet he ought to
look upon it with tears in his Eyes, and a mixture both of Joy and Sorrow; The
Gospel declares only a general pardon to those who Repent, but no Man can see
his own name particularly expressed in it, nor is he sure of it any farther
than he is of his Repentance, and a man of Fear and Caution, and not of
Presumption, will have some doubts that his Repentance is not so full and so
perfect as it ought to be; and being once a Malefactor condemned both by God
and his own Conscience though he has reasonable hopes of Pardon, yet will be
more afraid to be Judged, than if his Conscience had wholly acquitted him, and
he could never have charged himself with any great Crime; for that will strike
him with more certain fear than he can have certain hopes of his particular
pardon.

4. Neither shall such a penitent be so much in God's favor, or so highly
rewarded by him, as a Man of more constant and greater Virtues: This is a Rule
I think of eternal Justice, and follows from God's rendering to all Men
according to their works, as the Scripture speaks, which would not be if there
were not a proportion of the reward to the work, as well as a reward in
general. God indeed out of his great Grace, will accept a great sinner upon his
Repentance, and receive him into his favor, and pass by and forgive his past
offenses. But it is his becoming a good Man qualifies and entitles him to this;
for God can love no other; and the more any is a good Man, the more he will be
beloved by him, and the more highly rewarded at the last day: it is great Mercy
and Favor in God, and what Christ has purchased for us, to accept of an
imperfect and after goodness, and broken obedience, instead of what is whole
and entire, which is his due; and not punish us for our past Sins and
Disobedience after we have left them, as he might do in strict Justice; but
still it is only our Obedience and Goodness which (being after our Disobedience
and Sin is called Repentance) is acceptable and pleasing to God, and it would
be more so, had it been more constant, unbroken, and uninterrupted; and it is
only for that as a Qualification and Condition in our selves, for which he will
reward us, and the more and greater that is, the greater shall be our reward.

Indeed in case a Penitent is after his sins brought to love much and to obey
much, and to be more abundantly Zealous in good works, and doing his duty, to
make amends as much as he is able for his past failures, and repair the Divine
Honor, and express his Gratitude for the Mercy shown him, and so takes care to
rise to higher degrees of Virtue, and perform more signal acts of Obedience; so
that his fall makes him rise higher, and he redeems his loss with greater gain
and improving more in Grace and Goodness afterward: this shall entitle him to
greater rewards, and to God's special favor; not barely because he Repented,
but because upon his Repentance, he became a better Man, and went faster, and
made more progress in the ways of Virtue, after he had got into them; but he
that never wandered out of them, nor never strayed into the ways of Sin, but
always kept on in the path of Virtue, which he was early entered into, is a
thousand times more likely to go farther, and make a greater progress in
Virtue, and attain to higher degrees and improvements of it, than the other;
and consequently to be more highly rewarded by God, the impartial Judge and
distributer of rewards and punishments at the last day. There are several
mansions in our Father's house, and several degrees of Glory in the Kingdom of
Heaven: those who have been more constantly and more highly Virtuous and
Obedient, or have done or suffered more for Christ and his Religion; these
shall have Crowns of greater weight and brightness, and shall shine in a higher
Orb, among those Stars of Heaven, who differ from one and another in Glory,
according to their different Virtues and Seize.

5. This makes us more truly Christians and more the Children of God, and live
more answerably to the Ends and Designs of our Religion; for though Christianity
is to restore and recover lost and undone mankind, and does it chiefly by the
benefit of Repentance, which is the great Duty and the great Privilege of the
Gospel, which upon the account of Christ and his undertaking for us, puts
sinners into a good state, a state of Favor and Reconciliation with God, who
were Enemies to him before, and makes those the Children of God, who were the
Children of the Devil; for all Men in a state of Sin are the Children of the
Devil in the Scriptures account, He that commiteth Sin is of the Devil, 1 John
3.8. and whosoever is born of God, as every good Christian is, does not commit
Sin, v. 9.

Repentance therefore, which is a passage from a state of Sin and Death, to a
state of Virtue and Holiness, is truly and properly rather a duty antecedent
and disposing to Christianity, than one under it; and therefore it was Preached
both to the Jews and Gentiles, by Christ and his Apostles, as previous and
preparatory to their becoming Christians, Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand, Mat. 4.17. Repent and be Baptized, Acts 2.38. for before Men turned
Christians they were supposed to Repent of their past Sins, and to resolve upon
a new course of life, to renounce all their former evil ways, to put off the
old Man, i. e. all their old acts and habits of Sin, and to put on the new Man,
and to put on Christ, and not to walk henceforth as others, who were not
Christians walked; for though they were accounted as sinners before, yet now they
were to be Saints, devoted to a Holy life and wholly abandoning all Vice and
Wickedness, according to their Baptismal vow. It was far therefore from the
design of Christianity to suppose Men to fall into a state of Sin after their
Christianity, and to be as bad and as wicked as they were before they were
Christians; if they were, and fell into any great Sins, the Christian Church at
first turned them out of its Communion as Apostates to their Religion, and
Renegado's to their Holy Profession; and would not without great difficulty
admit them again to the benefits of Christianity and hopes of Pardon: so that
they accounted not those for Christians who were Penitents and who stood in
need of Repentance for any great Sin; and indeed, he is not a Christian who
does so, he is fallen off from his Christianity, and has quitted his Baptismal
vow, and has forfeited the right of it, and has put himself out of the
Christian state, who is guilty of any mortal Sin, and is in a state of Penance
for it; and the Christian Church at first would hardly have owned and received
him again; no, not in Articulo Mortis: so great a disgrace, and so horrid a
reflection they thought it upon Christianity, for a Christian to be guilty of
any wilful and notorious Sin: I confess this early Discipline was too severe,
never to admit such a Penitent again to Communion, and looked as if no Sins
were pardonable after Baptism; which is a hard and untrue Doctrine, and
therefore the Church altered its first Discipline, and condemned the Novatians
who stuck too close to it, and who would allow the Church no power to grant the
benefit of Repentance and Communion in that case, whatever God might do; but
upon relaxing the Canons too far, and falling afterward into another extreme,
upon the looseness and corruption of Christians, and their degenerating from
the Primitive strictness and genuine design of Christianity, Repentance when it
came to be turned into a slight Penance, became a very common and perfunctory
and easy matter; and Men began the round of Sinning and Repenting, Repenting
and Sinning, and of taking it as a sort of standing Physic, to be repeated
toties quoties, and took perhaps at some set times, or Spring and Fall; and
that this was sufficient, though they lived in their Vices and Debaucheries, and
unlawful Liberties, and never became such good Men and true Christians, as the
Gospel was designed to make them. Now this is like a Man's always using
Physic, but never to be well, and only to do it that he may keep his Disease,
and it may not as he thinks, prove mortal to him (when he is loath to take away
the cause of it) by virtue of a present and easy Remedy. Now this is horribly
perverting and abusing the Notion and Design of Christian Repentance, which is
not a Contrivance to let us be bad Men, and live in our Sins, and yet hope for
Pardon and Salvation upon a little sudden Sorrow, miscalled Repentance, now and
then for them; but to encourage us wholly to leave them upon the hopes and
assurance of Pardon when we do so, and to engage us to the practice of
Obedience and a Holy Life ever after, which is the only thing which makes us
true Christians, and entitles to the Happiness and Salvation of another World.
And let no man deceive himself, and think he shall have the benefit of
Repentance, who is not made a good Man by it; or think Repenting and Sorrowing
at the last will do the business, instead of a good life; or that without
actual Holiness and Obedience, he can see God or enter into Heaven: and let
none fall into that other mistake, as prejudicial to Religion, to think a man
that lives Innocently and Virtuously, and Religiously all his days, and
performs a constant unbroken Obedience to God all his life, shall not be more
accepted by God, and more highly rewarded by him, than he that has lived
wickedly and been a Prodigal, though he Returns and Repents in time, and is
pardoned and accepted by God; for though such an one shall be kindly and
graciously received by his Heavenly Father, and with all Demonstrations of Love
and Compassion, be Embraced and Treated by him, and owned to be his Son, and
received again into his Family; yet he that never left his Father's house, but
was always with him and served him, and never transgressed at any time his
commands, he it is of whom it will be said, Son, thou art always with me, and
all that I have is thine.

I shall only draw a few inferences from what has been said, and so conclude.

1. This allows all that is due to Repentance, and all the Encouragements and
Motives to it: Repentance is the great Gospel Medicine, the Cure for our
greatest Sins, and the most mortal Diseases of the Soul, if it be compounded as
it ought and taken in time; if it be made up not only of sorrow for what is
past, and good purposes and resolutions for the future, but of actual Amendment
and Reformation, Turning away from our wickedness that we have committed, and
doing that which is Lawful and Right afterward, then it is such an effectual
and never failing Remedy as by the merits of it, and the Grace of the Gospel
will take off the greatest and vilest Sins, that the worst sinner ever fell
into; but still, though the Medicine is Good and Infallible for every Disease,
yet it is much better to be always well and have an entire and perfect health,
than often to need it, or make use of it; for though the goodness of it be never
so great, yet it is but in order to an end, which is to recover health that was
lost, and to restore us to that soundness that we wanted.

It Is the great Mercy of God, and the great Grace and Favor of the Gospel, and
the great Purchase of Christ's Blood, to have the Privilege of Repentance
granted to Sinners, in so large and full a manner, so as to be restored to
God's Favor and reconciled to him upon their return, as if they had never
offended him; to have all the guilt and punishment of their past Sins wholly
taken off, as if they had never committed them; to be recti in curia, pardoned,
and in as good state as if they had been always Innocent: This should mightily
encourage and prevail upon Sinners to Repent and leave their Sins when they are
sure of this, as they are by the Gospel; When though their Sins be as Scarlet,
they shall be white as Snow; tho they were red like Crimson, they should be as
Wool, as the Evangelical Prophet speaks, Isai. 1.18. i. e. though they were sins
of the deepest Die, or highest Nature, yet they should be wholly done away and
forgiven upon true Repentance, from which no Person is excluded.

How must this encourage the greatest Sinners if they have any sense of
Religion or another World left upon 'em, to come off from their Sins? how
comfortable must it be to a poor wretch, lying under the sense of his own
guilt, and the fears and horrors of his own Conscience, and the dread of God's
Judgments, and of Eternal Misery, to have these glad Tidings proclaimed to him?
how will this revive his desponding Soul, and cheer his sunk Spirit, and like a
pardon brought to a Condemned Malefactor, in the Cart, or upon the Gibbet,
restore him to life and to unspeakable joy and gladness? Now this is offered to
every Sinner by the Gospel, if he repent and turn from his Sins however great
they have been, and lead a new life, and become a new Man, and a new Creature
before he dies; What can be desired more by any reasonable Creature? or what
more can God offer? Would any desire to live and go on in his Sins, and yet be
forgiven? This is for God to give up his Laws, his Government, and to grant a
Liberty to his Creatures to be Rebellious and Disobedient, and have no Check or
Control upon them; it is the utmost a good God can grant, or a wicked man can
desire, to be pardoned upon his Repentance and Amendment: but his Repenting and
Amending is with sorrow for what is past, doing his duty for the future as he
ought always to have done it, performing that Obedience which he ought always
to have performed; and now this is the best thing next to the having done it
and performed it always, but it can by no means be thought to be so good as
that. Repenting is like a Man's setting up again, that was once broke, and
compounding with his Creditors, and paying a part he owed them instead of the
whole; God is pleased to accept of the broken, and afterobedience of a Sinner
for some part of his Life, instead of that entire and unbroken one which is due
from him all his life. It Is God's great Grace and Mercy to do this, and what he
is no way obliged to, for he might have damned us for every wilful sin, and
never have pardoned us though we had afterward Repented of it; this is mere free
Grace which we owe to Christ and the Gospel, and God was no way obliged to it,
either in Justice or by his natural Goodness, but he might have denied it to
mankind as he has done to other of his Creatures, the Devils and the fallen
Angels: but still the design of God in granting us this Favor and this mighty
privilege by the Gospel is to encourage us to Obedience, to persuade us to
leave our Sins and to bring us to true Holiness and Goodness of Life, when we
have been faulty and defective in these before; it is not to encourage us in our
Sins, or give us any License or Dispensation to commit 'em; because we may
Repent of them; this is a horrid abuse and perverting the Grace of the Gospel
and turning it into Wantonness and Looseness: but the End and Design of all
this is to make those good men who have been Sinners, to make those Obedient
who have been Disobedient, either in general or any instance. Now therefore
it is much better to have been always thus, to have been always Good and always
Obedient through the whole course of our lives; this is the best thing and the
very same End more fully and perfectly attained; this is designed by
Repentance: As Health is the design of taking Physic, and to be well, and
sound, of using Remedies and Medicines; and those who are always healthful,
and always sound, and always well, are in a much better condition than those
who stand in need of a Cure, though it be never so certain and infallible.

2. I speak this all the while of Repentance from great and wilful sins, from
a habit of them in our lives, or at least a voluntary practice of them at some
time or other; and this Repentance, I hope, there are many that need not, who
were never ill persons all their lives, nor ever guilty of any such one great
and mortal sin, as should put them into an ill and damnable state, and exclude
them out of Heaven, had they died. I speak not now of the ill state of all
mankind by the fall, or by our original Corruption and Depravation; for that is
took off by Christ the second Adam, and we are put into a good state by the
Gospel and by our Baptism, so that no Man is in any danger of Damnation, but
upon his committing some wilful and known sins, such as the Scripture declares
are damnable, and exclude from Heaven: He therefore that has been free from
those, though not free from all sins, which no man is or can be all his life, no,
not in his best state, but some Infirmity, some Imperfection, some sin of
Frailty, or Ignorance, or Surprise will beset him; He, I say, that has lived
free from all wilful known sins, and not allowed himself in any voluntary
breach of God's Laws, though he has not kept them so perfectly and exactly as he
ought to do; but has always had a regard to Religion and his Duty, and never
violated them in any great instance; he was always a Child of God and never
forfeited that Title, he was never a Prodigal and run away from his Father's
house, nor wasted his Substance in Riotous living, but like the dutiful and
elder Son always served his Father, neither at any time transgressed his
Commandments: He never wandered out of the paths of Virtue, nor never let his
steps take hold of death; he never defiled his Virgin Innocence, nor sullied
and blemished his Baptismal Purity; nor fell into, nor wallowed in any great
sin, and so needs not to be washed and cleansed and purisied as a sinner in a
higher sense needs; and this is the Happy the Blessed Person, whom I prefer
to the best Penitent and the truest Convert, as the Parable here does.

3. This shows the good of early Obedience and the great Happiness and
Advantage of a Virtuous and Religious Education, and the great Obligation there
is for Parents to take care of this, and the great thankfullness, which those
owe to God, and their Parents, who have had the benefit of it: for nothing
makes Virtue and Religion so easy or so acceptable to us as to have them
taught and instilled into us in our tender year^ when like soft Wax, we are
capable of any impressions, and yet grow hard and retain them afterward. When
the Seeds of Virtue are early Planted in our hearts, before Vicious Habits or
Inclinations are grown up in them, and a sense of Religion takes the first
possession of us, and anticipates and prevents the power of our own Lusts or of
evil Examples; then Virtue becomes natural to us, and Custom makes it both very
easy to be practiced and hard to be overcome: for let the Habit and Custom be
equal, and I doubt not but there is as much difficulty for a Virtuous Person to
become Vicious, as for a Vicious Person to be made Virtuous: It must be with
great violence and reluctance that such an one is brought to commit a wilful
Sin, as well as the other to forsake it; and therefore Scripture represents
both the one and the other as if they were morally impossible: As they who are
accustomed to do Evil, can as hardly learn to do Good, as the Ethiopian can
change his Skin or the Leopard his Spots, so he that is born of God cannot Sin,
1 John 3.9. I doubt not therefore but most of the good men that are, or ever
were in the World, are such as have been Virtuously and Religiously Educated
and brought up; and but few of those in proportion who have been otherwise,
have been reclaimed and brought off from the Lewdness and Debauchery they
contracted when they were young. It Is a very hard and difficult thing to make a
bad Man a good one, the hardest thing in the World, what the powerful
Operation of God's Grace is necessary to, and what it often cannot effect,
through the stubbornness of the Will, and indisposition of the Subject; hence
those complaints and expostulations, I would have healed them but they would
not be healed, Jerem. 51.9. Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die? Oh, that my
people would have hearkened unto me, and of Sinners resisting, grieving, and
quenching the Holy Ghost, and that God's Spirit shall not always strive with
them, and the like; which shows the strength and power of ill habits, and how
hard it is even by all means to get rid of them; and how much happier it is to
be engaged in an early Obedience and determined by a Virtuous Education, than
to be afterward struggling with them.

4. This prevents the common and dangerous mistakes about Repentance, whereby
Men make it a reserve to themselves to excuse them from a Religious and
Virtuous, and Holy life; and think that by means of that they shall avoid all
the mischief of their sins at last, and be as safe and as secure of Heaven and
their eternal Salvation, though they live never so loosely and carelessly, as if
their whole lives had been spent in a course of Virtue and Religion. It Is but
Repenting before they die, and that as little before as they can, if they can
nick it right, and are not cut off suddenly and unexpectedly, which is but an
accident that happens only to few, and the great work and business is done, by
a true Sorrow and some sincere Resolutions, and an Instantaneous change of
mind, as well as by the most entire Virtue and constant Obedience of a Man's
whole life. If so, most Men's Sins and Lusts will persuade 'em to indulge and
gratify 'em the greatest part of their lives; if they cannot wholly bring 'em
off from a sense and belief of Religion, they will thus corrupt Religion and
make it thereby comply with them; and by these false notions of Repentance,
raise hopes to themselves of escaping all the mischief of their Sins and their
ill lives, and saving themselves by virtue of this Repentance at the last,
without leading a good life, which they will therefore be glad to excuse
themselves from, as not absolutely necessary; and so wholly trust and depend
and venture upon the other way. Now this is putting a trick upon God and
Religion, and being too hard for 'em upon their own Terms (as they think) though
it is indeed putting a trick upon themselves and miserably deluding themselves
into destruction; by thus abusing this privilege of Repentance, and making this
Grant and Concession of the Gospel to destroy the Gospel it self, and all the
design of it, which was to make men live well, and bring them off from their
Sins, and not at all encourage them in 'em; whereas by thus perverting the
Grace of the Gospel, and by wrong notions and wretched mistakes about
Repentance, the Obligations to actual Holiness and Obedien^^ are taken off, and
a Man may secure Heaven, and his own Salvation without those by another and
much shorter and easier way; which is by Repentance at the last, which shall be
as safe to our selves, and as acceptable to God, and as well rewarded by him as
the other. Now I know but one way of saving a Man's Soul and going to Heaven,
and that is by a good life and by actual Holiness and Obedience; Repentance is
the bringing a sinner to these; and if he do not do this, though the Sorrow be
never so great, it is not true Repentance nor will be effectual to his
Salvation; it is the Obedience and Holiness that he performs after his
Disobedience and Wickedness, which constitutes and compleats his Repentance and
entitles him to the Divine favor and acceptance, and to the rewards of Heaven
and another World; and the greater and perfecter and more entire this Obedience
has been, the more it will be accepted, and the more rewarded by a Righteous
and Just God, who will be Merciful to Sinners when they Repent and turn to
their Duty and Obedience, and will accept and reward their broken and imperfect
Obedience; but not in so high a degree as the constant and unbroken and early
and entire Obedience of Virtuous and Good men all their lives.

Lastly this Notion of an early Virtue and constant Obedience being prefertable
to the truest Repentance, stands upon the plainest principles of Religion and
secures those evident Doctrines, upon which all Practical Religion and the
obligations of it are built; such as these, that God will reward every one at
the last day according to their works, and therefore in proportion to them, and
therefore those who have sowed plenteously shall reap plenteously, and that
nothing but actual Holiness and Obedience can fit us to see God and enter into
Heaven, and make us meet, and qualify us for the inheritance of the Saints in
light. These are such plain and undeniable principles both from Reason and
Scripture, that no Doctrine which orposes them and is inconsistent with them,
can be true; and therefore a late and dying Repentance that brings forth no
fruits of Obedience, cannot be sufficient for Salvation, as not coming up to
those conditions which are absolutely required by the Gospel to make us capable
of Heaven; since none but good Men, who either always were so, or at least, who
become such after they were otherwise, can go to Heaven; and the more good and
the more obedient and virtuous any Man has been in his life, the greater and
higher rewards he shall have in another World, for as one Star differs from
another Star in Glory, so also shall it be at the Resurrection of the dead, as
the Apostle speaks, where some shall shine in a higher Orb, and with greater
Luster, and have Crowns of greater weight and brightness, who have either done
or suffered more for Christ and God and Religion than others: and therefore
they who have been more constantly and more highly Virtuous all their lives,
shall be more highly rewarded by a Just and Righteous God in that Heavenly
Kingdom, where Christ tells us are many Mansions, and where no doubt are
several degrees of Happiness, according to Men's several Actions and Virtues.
Though the Penitent and the Prodigal shall upon their return be received into
their Father's house, and be kindly embraced and entertained by him; yet their
Portion shall not be equal to the Son that was always Dutiful and always
Obedient, Son thou art always with me, and all that I have is thine. God grant
that all good Men may so persevere in Holiness and Obedience, and all Sinners
may so timely Repent and be brought off from their Sins, that we may all in due
time be received into those Mansions of Joy, where all Sin shall be done away,
and there shall be no more Repentance, and all Virtue and Obedience Crowned
with Glory and Immortality, through Jesus Christ.

The Sixth Sermon.
ACTS XVI. v. 30. latter part. Sirs. what must I do to be saved.


THis great question is asked by one in great trouble and concern, when he was
affrighted in the night by a sudden Earthquake, which shook the Foundations of
the House or Prison where he was, v. 27. and so he was awakened into a sense of
present danger, and this brought him to consider what was future and greater.
God does often rowse up Men's sleepy and senseless and Lethargic Minds, by some
present Terror, Judgment, or Affliction, which brings them to consider the
concerns of their Souls and an another World, when nothing else will: This
shakes off their thoughtless security, and alarms their stupid and unthinking
Minds, to look about them, and see what a dangerous condition they are in; and
fear is a very proper principle for beginning Religion; it is one of the
greatest passions that belong to our Nature; and then there is a good ground
for it, and it only opens our Eyes to let us see a real danger, that so we may
avoid it, and keep out of it: It is very useful and a great branch of that
self-preservation, which is a principle that lies at the root of our very
beings; had we no sense of an Evil coming upon us, we should run into it
blindfold, and leap down the precipice we did not see, which would be never the
less hurtful to us; when fear indeed makes a danger where there is none, or
represents it greater than it is, when it frights the mind with fancied
Specter and imaginary Mormo's, or makes it afraid of its own shadow, it is then
a weak, a mean, an unmanly Passion: but when the danger is real and great and
likely, it is stupid blindness not to see it, and rash madness for that reason
to run upon it. The concerns of another World are both certain and important,
and he whose Mind has no reasonable fear or just dread and apprehension of
them, is like Damocles with a naked and pointed Sword hanging over his head by
a single hair, but he sits securely, and does not see it. The evils and dangers
of a future state are very terrible, and may be, as far as we know, very near
us; and they are never the less near, nor never the less real for our not
believing, or not having a sense of them. It Is very happy therefore if our fear
awakens us to consider of them, whilst we have means and opportunity to take
care to prevent them; that before we feel them we think of them, and do not
like Dives, then lift up our Eyes when we are in the midst of Torments: it is
then too late to have a sense of them, when we cannot get out of them. A wise
man would therefore so consider them beforehand, either out of a just fear or
dread of them, or from a wise care and concern for his own Happiness, that
whether any extraordinary providence startled his Mind, or it were more freely
left to its own thoughts, yet it should frequently and seriously ask it self
this question, what shall I do to be saved? To be saved is strictly to be
delivered from a great danger we were likely to fall into, to be snatched like
a firebrand out of the fire, and like one that was sinking to be caught hold
on and preserved; but it also includes in it a positive Salvation as well as a
negative, and so comprehends that Happiness which is contrary to the misery we
are secured from; he who is saved from death gains life by that means, and he
who is saved from Hell gains Heaven, and so both are meant and included in the
word Salvation: I shall consider at present the great importance of this
question, What shall I do to be saved; and secondly, the true answer and
resolution to it. First, of the importance of it: and it is certainly the
greatest question to us in the World, how we may be delivered from the dangers
and evils of the next World, and how we may escape, as the Scripture speaks,
the Wrath to come, and so secure to our selves that eternal Good and Happiness,
which we call Heaven. We can none of us expect to live always here; there must
be a time, and we know not how soon, but we are sure it is not very long, when
we must take leave of this World and all that is in it; and it concerns us to
think what shall become of us when that fatal minute shall come, as it
certainly will, that shall make this body of ours a cold lump, and put an end
to all our present Enjoyments; When darkness and the shadow of death shall let
down the Curtain, and put an end to all these lower Scenes, and to all the
Actions of this life, we cannot think there is then an end of our being; hardly
any of mankind ever thought so, our own thoughts tell us otherwise, and
Revelation assures us to the contrary, and we have as much Evidence as we can
have, till we come thither, as is consistent with Faith, and comes not up to
Sense. We cannot then but be very sollicitous, what shall become of our naked
Souls when they are stripped of these fleshly Bodies, and what condition they
shall be in in the other world: We know in general how different the state is
there; there are Joys unspeakable on the one hand, and Torments intolerable on
the other; and according as we believe the greatness and reality of both those,
so must we be concerned about this question, How we shall be saved? That is,
how we shall obtain the one and avoid the other. We are very careful here to
make a short life that we know will quickly be at an end, as Comfortable and
Happy as we can; We toil and drudge and contrive all we can to acquire the few
good things that belong to it, and to keep off those evils that are uneasy to
us; and yet when we have done all, we can never hope to be perfectly Happy
here, and our utmost attainment can be only this that we be but less miserable;
we rise early and go to bed late, and eat the bread of carefullness rather than
suffer want and poverty; and we are at infinite pains and trouble to gain an
Estate that we must quickly leave, and whilst we have it, we are not more
happy, perhaps less content than we were before; we are very careful to keep
up our crazy Bodies in good repair, though we know they must quickly decay and
fall into the dust. A Disease alarms us, and we are concerned at the warning of
death, and are willing to endure almost any thing to prevent it, that its a
Suffering a greater Martyrdom for this life than ever Christian did for
another: but how much greater reason have we to be concerned for our future
state; that life is never to have any end and so we should be more careful
about it; it is to continue to Eternity, and what it once is, it is to be ever
the same; if it be happy, it is so unalterably without danger of changing; and
if it be miserable, it is irreversibly so without any hopes of relief. Oh,
wonderful state, how is this life a shadow, a dream, a vapor, a bubble, a
vanishing Nothing in respect of the other! it deserves not a thought, nor is it
worth a thousandth part of that care the other is; how foolish are we then to
labor so much for a moment of our being, and not be more concerned for an
endless duration of it? But the greatness of the thing is as considerable as
the continuance; the things we are saved from are the greatest and terriblest
evils we can possibly suffer, the utmost torments of Mind and Body, despair and
horror and a dreadful sense of Divine Anger and Vengeance, and all the
terrible apprehensions that guilt within and punishment without can bring upon
a Soul that can have nothing else to fly to; and that must suffer greater
torment day and night without intermission, than we can have now any conception
of. Fire and Brimstone and Chains of darkness, and a never dying worm, are but
lesser representations of the unspeakable misery in the other World; and who is
it that dreads a nights pain under a tormenting despair, that knows the
torments of a troubled mind, or has but tasted the gall and bitterness of a
Melancholic humor, who would not be infinitely concerned, how he may be saved
from what we mean by Hell and Damnation? and what would not the hopes of
Heaven, when they are joined with those fears, make us farther do, when the one
is to fright us from the greatest evil and the most perfect misery, and the
other at the same time holds out and invites us to the greatest Happiness, to
endless Pleasures, and Joy unspeakable? Who that does not either secretly
dis-believe, or never consider of this, would not think it the greatest
Question in the World, what shall I do to be saved? And who would not do all he
can, and use all means that are in his power to this purpose? Who would refuse
any pains or labor to accomplish this great End? Who would stick at any
difficulty that he was able to overcome and surmount to gain this point, this
greatest point of his own Eternal Salvation? Had God required us to have toiled
all our lives in the most wearisom drudgery, and to have spent all our days in
the hardest slavery; had he made Religion the greatest burden and uneasiness in
the World, in order to the attaining of this, yet what Wise man would not have
thought it worth his while to have endured it, and gone through it? Had he
commanded us to deny every Appetite, to have offered violence to every
inclination, to have stifled every natural desires and renounced all the
Gratifications and Enjoyments of the Animal life; had he obliged us to quit all
the comforts of this World, and to have retired into a barren Wilderness, or a
Melancholic Cloister, and there have worn out our lives in the severest
Exercises of Fasting and Mortification, or to have made them one continued
station, one constant course of Penance and Devotion; all this would have been
much more tolerable than to have endured the far greater Evils and Miseries of
another World, tho but for a little time, and for much less than half so long
as this life, and therefore a thousand times more so, than to suffer a
miserable Eternity. What shall we think then of God's requiring no such hard
things at our hands, nothing but what is far less than any of those, nothing
that is extremely hard or mighty difficult, or very burdensome and uneasy to
us, nothing but what is truly comfortable and delightful if we rightly
understood it, and what tends to our present Good, Ease and Comfort, Interest
and Advantage, even in this life as well as another? God puts no such hard
conditions upon us as those I mentioned, but we may be saved hereafter, and yet
enjoy at present all the comforts and good things of this World, that a Wise
Man would desire; Religion debars us of none of them, so far as they are
Innocent and Lawful, that is, so far as they are not Evil and Mischievous to
us, and plainly Destructive both of our own good and the good of the World.
There is no natural good forbidden to us, nor any inclination to be denied any
farther than it is foolish and unreasonable and exceeds the bounds of Wisdom
and Virtue; nor has God restrained us from any thing but what like the
forbidden fruit is poisonous as well as pleasant, and it is not the pleasantness
but the poison is the true reason why it is forbidden: so that our future
Happiness is very consistent with our present, and true Godliness may inherit
the promises of this life, as well as of another, as the Scriptures assure us,
^ Tim. 4.8. It is not necessary to part with our present Happiness, in order to
the purchasing the Reversion of that in Heaven, though if it were it would be
great gain and advantage to us; there is but one instance in Religion wherein
this is to be done, and that is in suffering persecution for Christ's sake and
the Gospels, in quitting all our Worldly Interests for the sake of Conscience
and Religion, and rather endure any evils here, than to renounce Christ or any
true part of Christianity: this indeed is bearing the Cross, and is the only
hard part of Religion, for which there shall be an abundant recompense
hereafter; and the hopes and expectations of that with the present Comfort and
Satisfaction of Mind, takes off from the burden and uneasiness of it; and though
without hopes of another life, Christians might be of all Men most miserable in
this, when they fall under those Circumstances, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
15.19. yet with those hopes they are far from being so, but with exception to
that particular case which does not often happen. Religion at the same time
secures to us the greatest Happiness of this life as well as another, and
without losing any one Comfort or true Enjoyment of this World, we may make
sure of the next. We may therefore put that question to our selves, which is
something like to that which Naaman's Servants put to him 2 Kings 5.13. Had God
bid us do some great thing that we might be saved, would we not have done it?
how much rather then when he bids us do nothing else in order to this, but what
is very reasonable and what tends to our Good here, as well as our Salvation
hereafter; We must be therefore very bad judges of our own interest, and very
little understand that, and so be very regardless of our selves, as well as
very ungrateful to the great God, if we do not comply with whatever he has
Wisely and Graciously appointed us in order to our Salvation. What that is, I
shall now briefly consider, and so give the true resolution to this question,
What shall I do to be saved? And it is not very hard to resolve it, God has not
made it any difficult or abstruse thing to understand, but the meanest
Christian may easily comprehend it; it is not a Secret reserved only for the
Wife and Learned, but the poorest Soul if it be but sincere and honest, may
come to the true knowledge of it, and there is hardly any without it, though it
may lie less clear and distinct in their thoughts; Natural light teaches all
men that such and such Actions are displeasing to God, and that those who
commit them shall be punished hereafter. There is no Man who is guilty of any
great wickedness but he finds some inward apprehensions of this in his own
Mind, and his own Conscience directs him in great measure what he must do to be
faved; but Revelation has made this so plain and evident, that a Man must use
great Art to deceive himself, if he ever mistake it; to believe the Gospel and
live according to it, is so plain a pathway to Heaven, that there is no
Christian but must see it: and if he thinks of any other, he cannot but know
that he cheats himself, and wilfully puts a trick upon his own Soul. St. Paul
here told tho Jailor, That he must believe on the Lord Jesu Christ, and he
should be saved, v. 31. but this belief which is made the condition and means
of Salvation must include all that which is consequent and ought to follow from
such a belief; all that Obedience to the Laws of Christ, and that Repentance
for past Sins, and Newness and Holiness of life, which is made as plain and
indispensible a condition of Salvation as Faith it self; and therefore St.
Peter in answer to the same question to those who were greatly concerned and
pricked in heart, and said, Men and Brethren what shall we do? Acts. 2.37.
answered, Repent and be Baptized every one of you in the name of Christ for the
remission of sins. Believing and embracing Christianity, was the only way for a
Jew or a Heathen to be saved, and to have remission of Sins; and when St. Peter
bids them Repent, and St. Paul bids them Believe, they mean the same thing:
Faith is the first great Principle and Foundation of Repentance and all
Christian Virtues; and therefore as including and containing all those it is
made the condition of our being saved by a Metonymy, whereby the cause
comprehends also the effect. Faith in Scripture is not taken only for an assent
to another's Words, or a trust in them; but it denotes a principle that works
by love, and is manifest by good works, without which the Scripture expressly
says it is dead; and then it must be a strange mistake to make a bare faith the
condition of our Justification and Salvation.

It is to be observed, and I think it may be a little useful, to clear that
matter; that when Faith and Believing is made the only condition of being
saved, and nothing else is mentioned, this is always spoken to those who were
not yet Christians or Believers, as when Christ says, John 3.15. Whosoever
believes on the Son of Man, shall not perish but have everlasting Life: This
is spoken to Nicodemus, who then expressed his dis-belief of Christ's words, and
was not brought fully to believe in him, though he was disposed for it? So John
6.40. when Christ says, This is the will of him that sent me, that every one
which sees the Son and believes on him, may have everlasting Life: This is
spoken to the Jews, who murmured at Christ, and were far from believing in him:
and so Christ bid the Apostles preach this to the unbelieving World, Whosoever
believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mark 16.16. i.e. Believing and
Professing Christianity puts them into a salvable state, and if they live
according to this faith, they shall certainly be saved; as if we should say to
a person who desires to know how he may be a Scholar, Go to School or to the
University; this would put him into a certain way to Learning: but he must not
only be entered and enrolled there, but he must study and read, and do such
things as belong to a Scholar. When St. Peter bid the Jews, and St. Paul the
Jailor to believe, and they should be saved, they were such as yet had not
embraced Christianity; and Faith was the only means to bring them to that, and
so put them into a salvable state, which ordinarily they could not be in
without it: but then they must do all those other things which belong to
Christians after they are brought to believe, or else they would lose and
forfeit this their good state; and therefore when Christ speaks to his
Disciples who already believed in him, and St. Paul writes to those who were
already Christians or Believers, they then tell them not only of Faith which is
the first Christian Virtue and the root of all the rest, but of Obedience and
all good works, of living as becomes the Gospel, and of adorning their
profession with all manner of Virtues, which they make as necessary to
Salvation as Faith it self. Thus if ye keep my Commandments says Christ, ye
shall abide in my love, John 15.10. and Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever
I command you, v. 14. and Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, or that
merely believes in me, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that
does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 7.21. So said St. Paul to
the Corinthians Circumcision is nothing, nor Uncircumcision, but the keeping
the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7.19. and to the Galatians, in Christ Jesus, i.
e. in the Christian Religion, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision but a new Creature, chap. 6. v. 15. that is, a new temper of
mind and habit of Life, for by the Gospel the Wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men, who hold the truth
in unrighteousness, Romans 1.19. and, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from Heaven with his mighty Angels, he will take Vengeance on all them that
obey not his Gospel, who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from
the presence of the Lord, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. and those Christians who do any
such works of the Flesh as are mentioned, Gal. 5.19, 21. shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, but for the sake of those the Wrath of God comes on the
Children of disobedience, Colos. 3.6. though they do believe in Christ and have
made profession of his Religion. It is therefore as requisite for such to live
according to all the Laws of the Gospel, as it was at first, to believe in
Christ that they may be saved: What a Christian therefore who already believes
in Christ and owns his Religion to be true, and what we who all do this, should
further do to be saved, and to make sure of Heaven, I shall in one general
Advice direct to, and that is this, That we never allow our selves to live in
any one known sin; that we never wilfully violate any Law of the Gospel, nor
suffer our selves in the Custom of any thing that we know is unlawful; he that
does that is in a dangerous and desperate condition, and is incapable of being
saved by the Terms of the Gospel: for though that allows pardon for every sin we
repent of, yet it allows none to any one of those we do not repent of, but live
in; and therefore as we value our Salvation; let no darling Sin, nor beloved
Lust, nor any the most profitable or pleasing Wickedness whatsoever, be
indulged or continued in by us; it is as much as our Souls are worth if we do,
for every wilful habit of sin does most certainly exclude and shut us out of
the Kingdom of Heaven, without timely Repentance and Amendment; if we have
therefore been ever guilty of any such, and so have forfeited Heaven and our
own Souls, and made our selves liable to Eternal Wrath and Damnation; let us
endeavor with all speed to recover our selves out of that sad state, and to
snatch our Souls out of the Jaws of Hell, and from the very brink of perdition;
and let us bless God that he affords us both time and means and power to do
this; and when we have Emerged out of that wretched Condition, let us not throw
our selves into it again by any new Sins, but let us ever after avoid that rock
where we were like to have split; and let us spend all the remainder of our
lives in perfecting our Repentance, and in bringing forth fruits worthy of it,
and in a constant and unbroken, and uninterrupted obedience to all the Laws of
Christianity; so shall we approve our selves to God and our own Consciences; so
shall we have good grounds of Peace and Comfort while we live, and so shall we
be certainly saved when we come to die; which God of his infinite mercy grant
unto us.

The Seventh Sermon.
JOB XXVIII. 28. And unto Man he said, Behold the fear of the Lord that is
Wisdom, and to depart from evil is Understanding.


THE Fear of the Lord is a phrase often used in Scripture, to express all
Religion by, and it is indeed the true Principle and Foundation of it; for
whoever has an awful sense and belief of a Being above him, and a just dread
of his Almighty Power upon his Mind, will take care to avoid all those things,
that he knows are displeasing to him, and to perform all those duties which
shall procure his favor, and be acceptable to him; for all our Happiness
depends upon his Pleasure, and he can make us miserable when we anger and
provoke him.

Every one, though he may have lost the sense of love, either of God or Religion,
and the desire of Spiritual and Heavenly Happiness, and may be sunk into such a
state as to have no great relish of those things; yet may have the sense of
fear strong upon him, and may be greatly affected with what he thinks may
destroy and ruin and make him miserable: and therefore fear is the strongest
and most powerful passion, and the most deeply rooted in humane nature, for it
arises from a Natural love of our selves and a care and desire of our own
self-preservation; and every Man has this in him, though he has no higher or
nobler principles of Virtue and Religion; and therefore it is the Character of
the most deplorably wretched and wicked Creatures, that they have no fear of
God before their Eyes, Ps. 36.1.

Sometimes the love of God, sometimes the fear of God, sometimes the knowledge
of God, the belief of God is made to express the whole of Religion, and the sum
of our duty; because where one of these is, there are all the rest in some
degree or other, and they cannot be separated or divided: for he that believes
a God, and knows him to be as he is, a Being of infinite Power and of infinite
Goodness, must fear him and love him too; his power makes him an object of
fear, and keeps us from offending him; and his Goodness makes him an object of
love; and so both those do the same thing, and as different causes yet concur
to the same effect; and all Virtue and Religion is produced by them, and owes
its being and original to them: for without respect to God there can be no such
thing as Virtue and Religion, and where there is a true fear of him, there they
will always be as necessarily conjoined as effects are to their causes, and
therefore by an usual Metonymy the one is put for the other. And this Virtue
and Religion which is thus founded in the fear of God, is the greatest and
truest Wisdom in the World; he is the Wisest man who is the most Virtuous and
Religious; and he is the greatest Fool who lives Vitiously and Irreligiously,
and without the fear of God; the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom,
or the first and chief Wisdom, and the Foundation of all other; a good
understanding have all they that do his Commands, i. e. they are the truly wise
Men who live Virtuously and Religiously, and they Fools who live Vitiously and
Wickedly; Behold the fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to depart from evil
is Understanding.

There is no greater blemish, contempt, or imputation upon any Man, than that
he is a Fool, and that he acts as such in whatever he does; for it supposes the
utmost decay and depravation of his Nature, the loss of his Reason, and that he
wants that which makes us to be Men, and is the proper perfection of our Being,
which is Wisdom and Understanding. It will therefore greatly recommend, and be
for the honor of Religion, if that appears to be the greatest and only Wisdom;
and it will justly reproach and expose Vice and Wickedness, if that be made out
to be nothing else but folly in the highest degree; which I shall therefore
endeavor at this time.

1. First then Religion proposes and attains and secures the greatest End, the
chief Good and utmost Happiness that we can desire or are capable of; and this
is the truest part of Wisdom, whereas Vice has but low and mean Ends, such as
are below the excellency of our Nature, and are so far from promoting our
Happiness, that they defeat and destroy it: all beings indeed aim at their own
Happiness, and have a blind and general design to compass and attain it;
self-preservation is a principle lies at the root of our Beings, and we cannot
choose open and barefaced misery; but Vice and Wickedness takes down the poison
that is a little Gilded over, and swallows the fatal hook that is baited with
an appearing pleasure or profit, and Men are led away in the dark, and deluded
with a shadow till they are brought into the deepest misery; Vice proposes
either bodily and sensual pleasure, or worldly gain, or some such present End
and Design to be its greatest Happiness; but alas, it often loses those, and
Virtue and Religion picks up what the other drops, and lets go; and secures
those by ends a thousand times better than Vice does, whilst it looks yet
further, and still aims at greater ends, and a more true and complete Happiness
than any of those can yield to it; for what is the most gustfull and luscious
sensuality of body to an unquiet and uneasy and disturbed Mind? Is not that
worm of Conscience, that gnaws it within, and is bred from the filth and
putrefaction of its own sins, a greater torment than all the pleasures of sense
can make amends for? And what could a Man hope for if by his wickedness he
could gain the whole world, which yet many have even lost by it, if thereby he
loses his Soul, the peace and quiet of it here, and its Eternal felicity
hereafter? All the ends we can aim at, and all the objects we can wish and
desire, are very little and inconsiderable without Religion, and such are all
the things and enjoyments of this World; but Religion has great and noble aims
and designs, to make our Minds as well as our Bodies pleased and easy, and to
give a pleasure and satisfaction infinitely above the highest bodily delights,
which the Brutes are capable of as well as we; to perfect and improve and fit
our Souls for the greatest pleasure and happiness here, and for that which is
endless and unspeakable hereafter; and to see this more particularly, let us
consider,

2. Secondly, that all Ends and Designs but those of Religion, are consined
only to this World, whereas those of Religion reach beyond this to a never
ending Eternity; how little and short and narrow are all the poor designs we
can have here, when in the compass of a few years, they all cease and perish
and come to an end; when but a small time hence they shall be as useless and
insignificant as if we had never been, or never had any of them. Death, which
we all expect, and which will certainly come in a little time, whether we
expect it of no, puts a speedy end and conclusion to all other projects and
designs but those of Virtue and Religion; it covers all worldly Pomp and
Grandeur with a cloud of night and darkness, and draws a sable mantle over all
it is glistering and shining vanity; its honors lie here buried in the dust,
it is riches take leave of it at the Grave, and all its bodily pleasures are
exchanged for stench and noy fomness, and its greatest strength and beauty is
turned into weakness and gastliness. This mortifying consideration should, one
would think, make this World, and every thing in it be very contemptible, and
all ends and designs but those of Virtue and Religion, which teach beyond this
World, to be very poor and little, and inconfiderable; for like a Dream, they
are all quickly past and gone; and when we awake into another World, into a
better and more substantial life, all these images and shadows and fancies of
happiness will then vanish and disappear, and we shall be no more affected with
them than with a last nights dream, or the past visions of slumber and
imagination; but then Religion and Virtue will stand us in stead, then they,
and a good Conscience will stick by us, and attend and bear us Company into the
other World; and there we shall meet with those Ends and Designs which Religion
has proposed to us, and our greatest hopes and wishes shall be turned into
greater fruition and enjoyment; then a long Eternity shall reward and
recompense our short Labors here, and we shall never lose or be deprived of
that great End and complete Happiness which Religion recommended and directed
us to. Vice with all its delights is but for a very little time, and the
pleasures of sin are enjoyed but for a Season, Heb. 11.25. Men not only lose
those, and be for ever deprived of the End it aimed at, but shall receive its
sad and miserable portion laid up for it, and be eternally tormented with
unexpressible misery; And what extreme Folly will it then be found to have
pursued no other End, nor aimed at no other Happiness but that of this World,
which is so soon gone and at an end, and for the sake of that to have exposed
it self to a misery that shall never have end; to have preferred a present
moment before an endless Eternity, and to gain some poor and little Ends here,
which yet are often lost rather than attained by Men's Vices, to lose Heaven and
everlasting Happiness.

3. Religion and Virtue secure the Comfort and Happiness of this life as well
as of another, much better than Vice and Irreligion; so that here is the
extreme folly of Wickedness, that whilst its dosigns are confined to this World
and (...) aims at the present pleasure (...), and good things of this life, it
loses even those, and misses of that present Comfort and Happiness, which is a
thousand times more likely to be met with in the ways of Virtue and Religion,
than in a life of Vice and Wickedness: for as the one deprives us of no real
pleasure or proper enjoyment fit for a wise Man, but rather sweetens them and
enhances their relish by keeping them Pure and Innocent, and free from the
filth and bitterness that Vice mixes with them; so wickedness brings a great
many evils and mischiefs upon it self here, and most Men's Vices make them
miserable in this life, as well as in another. Godliness, says Saint Paul, is
profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. and it was the wise Man's observation long
before, that the most desirable blessings of this life belong to Wisdom and
Religion, Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and
honor, Prove. 3.16. whereas nothing does more generally shorten Men's days than
Vice and Debauchery, and though those Men value nothing so much as life, yet
they prodigally squander it away, and spend it too fast and consume it upon
their Lust and their Lewdness; and these make shipwreck of their Estates as
well as of their Consciences, and bring Poverty and Beggary very often along
with them, so that the ruined Fortunes of most Men are owing to their vicious
and ill Courses, and they are undone by their Vices here, as well as hereafter;
an indelible Character of shame and reproach is hereby fixed to their Name and
Memory, which stains and blemishes their Repute and Credit among Men, and their
mind reproaches and smites them from within, and they feel most of the outward
and inward evils which are the most grievous and uneasy to us in this life. So
that besides the misery in Reversion, which is due to them and unavoidable,
there is a present one which they seldom escape, but generally befalls them; so
foolish are they whose fondness to their Sins makes them hug and embrace them,
though they at the same time Wound and Poison them; so infatuated are they, and
almost fascinated by them, that they stick to them, though to their manifest
ruin and against their plainest interest; and make themselves such Martyrs and
Confessors to their Vices, that as they wear their scars always about them, so
they will endure any thing for their sakes, and make their way to Hell, through
the greatest sufferings and evils that their sins bring upon them here.

4. Roligion is the truest Wisdom, as it best provides against all the
Accidents and Contingencies of this uncertain world and against all the
infirmities of our present state and nature. A good man may not be secure here
that he shall not come into the same misfortune, and be plagued like other Men,
either with some Affliction, or Sickness, or other common Calamity, which the
greatest Virtue and Religion may be no protection against; but the same chance
may happen both to the Sinner and to the Righteous, and without respect either
to their Vice or to their Virtue: a Disease or a Misfortune, a Loss or a
Trouble may come upon either of them, which nothing can keep off or prevent, in
this uncertain state; but here Religion gives us the best relief, and stands us
in the greatest stead, and is the most useful to us; it takes care, as we may
say, of the main chance, and makes the best provision for whatever may or can
befall us; it supports and revives our drooping Spirits, under any afflictions
of this world with the cheering thoughts of a Heaven above us, and a Providence
over us, and the gladsom reflections of a good Conscience within us, and a
Comfortable trust in a good God without us; whereas when any of the troubles
and misfortunes of life fall on a wicked Man, he has nothing to keep up his
mind under them, but they sink and crush him into the utmost despair and
disconsolateness, and he has no whither to fly for ease and comfort; sad and
miserable must be his case, who, when his body is sick and uneasy, has his
mind so too, and feels as much anguish and anxiety in the one, as he does pain
in the other; when his body is under the strugglings and agonies of death, has
his Mind and Conscience under greater; and when he sees death come up behind
him, sees Hell open before him, as ready to devour and swallow him up. Though
nothing can secure us against one of these, yet Religion does against the
other, which is ten times the greatest; and so in all other the unavoidable
accidents and misfortunes of this worldly state, Religion does wisely prepare
and provide against them, and make the best defense and security for us against
all the dangers that may in this hazardous world come upon us; and without this
a man lies always open to every uncertain accident, and shall be miserable at
every turn of Fortune, and shall have no Happiness but what shall be at the
will and pleasure of outward Contingencies; and shall have no soundation or
root of Happiness within himself, which nothing but Religion and Virtue can
ever give him.

5. Religion makes us wise for our selves and for things of the greatest
importance and concern to us; makes us wise unto Salvation, which is the only
true Wisdom, that deserves so to be called or accounted: for it is a Wisdom
salsely so called, and no other than great folly to be wise about all other
things, wise in our Notions and Apprehensions and Judgments of things, wise in
the Managery and Conduct of all our outward Affairs, wise in searching the
policies and fathoming the most cunning Intrigues, wise in the greatest
Mysteries of Knowledge and researches of Learning, so that both our selves and
others applaud us for our great Wisdom; and yet be a Fool, in what is more
valuable and more concerning to us a thousand times, which is the everlasting
Salvation of our immortal Souls. He that is not so wise as to take care of
that, is with all his other Wisdom the worst of Fools and Mad Men; and more
void of common Prudence and Discretion, than he that while he pretends to
understand the great secret of being Rich and turning all into Gold, yet is
Poor and a Beggar; or like him in a Frenzy, who thought himself an Emperor, and
to have the greatest Territories and Dominions, when he had only a Chain and a
little Straw; or him who while he was viewing the Stars and observing the
Heavens above him, did not mind his way, but fell into a Pit.

6. I shall show the Wisdom of Religion from the two causes of sin and
wickedness, which are only two sorts of folly and weakness of mind.

The first is heedlesness, rashness, and inconsideration; the other is
infidelity and ignorance, or inapprehensiveness of the truth of things. All
Irreligion is owing to these two Causes; for either Men do not mind and
consider as they ought to do, those principles of Religion, which they own and
believe, as that there is a Heaven and a Hell, and an Eternal state of Bliss
and Misery after this Life, so as to let these have that full, force and
influence which they ought to have upon their minds; or else they do not really
believe and apprehend those to be true: which are both high degrees of Folly
and proceed from a great defect of Understanding and want of Wisdom.

As to the first of these, what can be a grosser folly than to act contrary to
those principles which we own and allow? to believe that there is a God, and
that the Soul is immortal, and yet to live as if there were no God, and as if
there were no other Life but this? This is certainly the most desperate folly
and madness to run upon the greatest danger that we see evidently before us,
and to leap into Hell with our eyes open; when Men do really believe they shall
be damned for a wicked and ill life, and yet still continue in their sins. It Is
folly one would think, even to the height of distraction to live thus contrary
to their belief and let their principles and their actions thus disagree; and
to condemn themselves in their acting contrary to their own knowledge, belief
and understanding, in a matter which is of so great moment and concern as they
must acknowledge this to be. Of the two, the other, one would think, were more
excusable who do not believe these things, though that is great ignorance and
folly; for it is dis-believing that which all mankind have in all Ages believed
in some degree or other, and which we have as much reason to believe as we can
have, if the thing were never so true and certain; and which it is impossible
we should ever know, or have any reason to believe to be false; and which if it
were only doubtful and but merely probable, or indeed possible, yet a wise Man
would not run a great hazard or venture upon it, but would take care to save
and secure himself against the worst and utmost possibilities that might
happen: I shall not now consider the great weakness and folly of infidelity
against the clearest reason and evidence, and the utmost demonstration the
thing is capable of, and requiring more than a thing of that nature can have;
nor how Religion is Wisdom as being established upon the greatest foundations
of truth and certainty. It Is the other folly that of inconsideration by which
most men perish, by not attending to the power and force of those truths, which
they do believe; but rashly and inconsiderately following the career of their
Lusts and violence of their Inclinations, against the reason and belief of
their Minds, and the conviction of their Judgment and Understanding; for could
any Man that seriously considered and believed an everlasting state of rewards
and punishments, and let his mind duly attend and be affected with those
considerations, which he really believes to be true; could he be wicked without
the greatest folly and madness? and can it appear to be any other than the most
foolish and unreasonable thing in the World to believe all those great and
important things which Religion teaches us, and yet to live as if we believed
none of them? This is such unaccountable folly as wants a name, and can have
nothing to palliate or excuse it. Indeed a wicked life is the greatest folly in
the World, and appears to all to be so upon reflection and a little serious
consideration; no body but repents of it afterward, and is sorry for it one
time or other, though perhaps it be too late, and when he cannot retrieve or
amend it, unless he be stupefied and hardened and have lost the use of his
Judgment and Understanding; which is a plain owning it to be Folly and
Unadvisedness even upon Trial and Experience, and a wishing they had done
better, and that they had been much wiser.

No Man Repents of his having done Virtuously and lived Religiously, but is
pleased and satisfied in himself upon his reflecting upon it; which shows that
he acted wisely and prudently: but the direful agonies and sad reflections,
and horrors, and disquiets that a Man feels in his mind upon his having lived
wickedly, shows the height of his folly, and how he is forced to condemn
himself for it, and to bewail and lament his extreme weakness and madness, and
this is truly Hell; when he must do so to all Eternity, then I am sure it will
appear, whatever it does now, that Vice and Wickedness is the greatest folly,
and that Virtue and Religion are the true and only Wisdom, and that what the
Psalmist says, is true; The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom.

The Eighth Sermon.
ROMANS XII. 21. Be not overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil with Good.


IT is a question with some, whether Christ have added any thing to the law of
nature, or required any higher and more perfect Virtues than are founded in
that. As for the Law of Moses, he has taken away the Ritual and Ceremonial part
of it; and as to the Moral, he has cleared it from the false glosses and
corruptions and errors of the Scribes and Pharisees, who had expounded it into
a meaning contrary to the true sense and intention of the Law: for that to be
sure coming from God could have nothing immoral in it, and therefore whatever
corrections were made by our Savior were only of the perverse and corrupt
interpretations of others, and not of the Law it self. But whether he has not
added any new and more perfect Laws both to the Law of Moses and that of
Nature, and required higher instances of Virtue of us Christians, than of the
rest of mankind, is a great question. On the one side it seems more for the
honor of Christ and his Religion, in which there are some nobler precepts that
excel any that are to be met with in any other Moralist; as against Lust and
Revenge, for loving Enemies, and not retaliating injuries, and the like. On the
other side, if Christ has added any new Laws not founded in nature, they must
be merely positive and alterable, and not have any natural or intrinsic good
in them, but be owing to the mere Arbitrary will of God, and not to the
original settlement and constitution of things; for if they have a foundation
either in the nature of God, or the nature of things, they cannot be new, and
so added to those of nature; but I think this Controversy may be thus
compounded and resolved, that those Laws, though they were founded in nature
and had a natural and intrinsic and eternal Goodness in them, as all moral
Virtues have, yet could not be so well known and discovered by the dim-light of
nature, nor were so fully promulged by the Law of Moses, as they are now by the
Gospel or the Christian Revelation. One of the highest and noblest Virtues of
Christianity is that advice, precept, or duty given here in my Text, Be not
overcome. Concerning which, though there be no such thing hardly to be found in
the Law of Moses, and the quite contrary to be often met with in the best
Heathen Moralists, who reckoned Revenging an Injury as a part of Justice, and
among the number of their Virtues; yet it is certain, if we consider of it, it
is very reasonable, and has a natural and intrinsic Goodness in it, and tends
very much to the peace of our minds and the comfort of our lives among the many
Evils, Injuries, and ill usages from others we may probably meet with in this
World; the best shelter and security against which, and the best and most
perfect Virtue a Christian ought to learn, is that of the Text; which though it
be so much against the practice, and therefore seems to be against the nature
of mankind, yet it is not; but is a most excellent duty in it self and what we
are always indispensibly bound to, both as wise Men and good Christians: Be not
overcome of evil but overcome evil with good, from whence I shall first show
you what it is to be overcome of evil: Secondly, the good and excellency of not
being overcome of evil, but overcoming evil with good; First, what it is to be
overcome of evil, i. e. the evil that is done to us by others, not that is done
by our selves, for that overcomes us whenever we fall into it but we may suffer
a great deal of evil or injuries from others, without being overcome by it; for
it may be said to overcome us only by these several ways, 1. When it so takes
away the peace of a Man's mind as to make him sink under it: now no evil ought
to do this, but the evil of sin and guilt, and the sad Consequences of those
which are the wrath of God and Eternal Damnation; these are so dreadful that
nothing can bear or stand up against them, and therefore they are not to be
born but to be avoided, and wrought to take care to escape them by Repentance
and a good Life, for there is no mastering and overcoming them; they are so
great and intolerable that humane nature cannot grapple with them or endure
them with any degree of courage or patience. But now all the evils of this
World may be bravely withstood or overcome, and we can rally up power and
resolution sufficient to contend with them and hold out pretty tolerably
against them, so as to preserve an inward ease and comsort, peace and
tranquillity of mind under all, or any of them; and that strength and vigor,
and firmness, and constancy of a Man's mind, may not be broke or dissolved by
them: and this is true Courage and Bravery, and Greatness of mind, which was
most eminently in the first Martyrs and Christians under all their sufferings,
wherein they were more than Conquerors through Christ, who strengthened them,
Romans 8.37. And many others have bore Sicknesses and Adversity, Reproach and
Calumny, and other misfortunes of this World with great evenness and Equanimity
and cheerfullness of mind, and have not been sunk or depressed by them; they
have not lain down under the burden, but though it has been heavy and hard, and
they have felt it so, and not been without the sense of it, yet they have born
up under it, and with putting forth their strength and patience, made it less
than it otherwise would have been, or if they had fallen down under it. Ill usage
and Injustice from others are not the least of evils, nor the easiest to be
born; but when we consider they are no more in our power to prevent than
Diseases or any other Accidents that may befall us, the peace of our mind
should not be much affected with them; since that ought always to depend upon
what is in our own power, and upon our own voluntary choice and actions, or
else we can never have any security of it, but it will be at the mercy wholly
of every chance or accident without us. And secondly, the way not to be
overcome by them, is, not to dwell too much upon them in our thoughts, not to
chew or ruminate upon them, nor keep them in our thoughts too morosely, for
that is to roll the bitterness of them, as it were up and down in our mouths
and to taste them over again; whereas to spit them out, to pass them by, to
neglect them, and not think of them, is the speediest way to have done with
them: if they lie heating and boiling upon our stomachs and the Choleric and
Revengefull humor be fermented and put in agitation by them, it will greatly
trouble and annoy us; but when we check and suppress it at first, we are at
ease presently, and have none of those tumultuous and disorderly disturbances
that are in the breasts of Revengefull and Malicious Men, that can never forget
or pass by an injury, but let it like a thorn in the flesh always pain them, and
go in further and deeper, and cause an Ulcer that shall throb and burn within,
and be very troublesome; whereas all might have been cured by plucking it out
presently and throwing it away, and not letting it stick long or enter deep
into our thoughts. 3. Not to have any thoughts of Revenging it is the best way
to overcome it; for this lessens the trouble of it, and puts a quick and speedy
end to it, whereas the other puts a Man upon a thousand uneasy thoughts and
contrivances, sets his head upon working like the Devil how to do mischief, and
like him is all the while tormented with his own mischievous designs, whether
they succeed or not; and is always restless and uneasy least they should sail
and he should be disappointed: and if he is not, yet he procures no manner of
good to himself, but only mischief to another, which is all the Diabolical
pleasure of the most successful Revenge: and he is certainly overcome by an
injury who is thus provoked to return and retaliate it, and will give himself a
vast deal of trouble for no manner of good, but merely to do ill to another;
much good may do these Men with the sweets of their Revenge, as they call it;
the Devils themselves may be pleased and delighted in the midst of Hell if
there be great and true pleasure in this. 4. We are overcome by evil when we
are brought to commit the same evil, and do the same thing to others which they
did to us; when we are brought to render railing for railing, cursing for
cursing, evil speaking for evil speaking, and the like; i. e. when others treat
us in this rude manner, and we return them the same again, and give them, as we
say, as good as they bring. Men's Tongues are the most ready Instruments of
their malice, by which they who are otherwise never so weak and impotent, and
like a Serpent, crawling upon their bellies, as malice often does, yet can dart
out their stings, even bitter words, and with their forked and poisoned Tongues
spit abundance of their venom at others which is in themselves; and so
plentifully disgorge that filthy and corrupted matter of their own exulcerated
minds. They consider not that for all these evil and idle words (for it was
chiefly of those words of Calumny and Slander our Savior spoke) they must give
account in the day of Judgment, Mat. 12.36. and that they are as answerable for
such words, tho they pass away as the wind, as they say, as for the more
lasting actions; For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned, v. 37. A Man may be damned as well for injurious words
as injurious actions and they may often do as much mischief not only to the
person himself, whose credit may probably be as dear to him as life, and as
great an injustice to take it away: And it may do a much greater mischief to
Religion, and hinder all the good, or a great part of it, which a Man might be
otherwise capable of doing: And all this they are answerable for, who are the
causes of it, and not the Innocent Person who is thus used. When the Jews
slandered our Savior, as a wine bibber and a drunkard, as a friend of
publicans and sinners, as a deceiver and impostor, and so kept others from
hearing his Sermons and receiving his Doctrine, they were answerable not only
for themselves but for the Souls of others, who thus perished by their means;
and our Savior was no way blamable for not doing that good which others
hindered, and which he, though unsuccessfully, yet heartily endeavored. 5. We are
overcome by evil when we are brought by it to neglect any necessary duty, or to
do any unfit and unlawful act that otherwise we should not have done; as they
who will neglect Prayer, or coming to Church, or attending upon God's word,
because they are offended with some of their Brethren who come there, or with
their Minister, upon which they will fall out it seems with God himself too:
they who will give nothing in Charity, because they who collect or distribute
it, agree not with them in all things; and so they will revenge the supposed
injury of another upon those poor wretches who never could be supposed to do or
think them any at all^ they who will show spite to the public, and oppose the
Government, because some are in it they do not like or care for; and so their
hatred to them shall make them do all the mischief they can to the whole, and
they will Sacrifice the Peace of the Kingdom to the private piques and
animosities with some particular Men. If the little injuries of others drive us
to this, we are sadly overcome by them; they overcome those greater
indispensible obligations we stand in, which nothing can or ought to rescind;
and they make us do that which otherwise the sense of our duty and conviction
of our mind would persuade us not to do, if we were not thus blinded with
passion and hurried with rage and anger, and had our understanding darkened and
clouded with those storms of passion and resentment, which arise in us. The
best way to allay those is to check them at first, and put out the first sparks
of the glowing flame, and not suffer it to kindle to any height in our breasts,
but to quench and stifle it immediately with wise thoughts and steady
resolutions, and with a designed neglect and passing by of the supposed injury;
if we would lessen that or wholly take it away and destroy it, if we would
overcome the evil of it, the best way is by doing good for evil, by returning
Offices of kindness for those of ill will, of Love for those of Hatred,
Friendship and Civility for Rudeness and Unmannerliness, Blessing for Cursing,
speaking well of others for their speaking evil of us, and not rendering railing
for railing, nor injury for injury, but overcoming evil with good: How
excellent a Virtue this is, what advantages and benefits belong to it, I come
now to show; nay how necessary a Christian duty it is, without the performance
of which, in such measures as are required of us, we forfeit Salvation and
Pardon of our sins at the hands of God. For no particular Virtue is made so
much, and so expressly the condition of our Pardon in the Holy Scripture as
this; but how hard is it to persuade our selves or others to it, for want of
getting a power over the first risings of passion, and being able to check the
Brutish inclinations that belong to us with thought and reason; and for want of
considering the excellency and perfection, nay, the ease and pleasure of it,
and the many obligations we have to perform it. As First, It must be owned that
the quiet of our lives, and the peace of our minds very much depend upon it;
for it cannot but be supposed that we shall sometimes meet with very ill usage
and treatment from other people; the best of men have not been free from it,
though they no way deserved it; as our Savior, one of whose sufferings it is
accounted, that he endured the contradiction of sinners against himself,
Hebrews 12.3. and the Apostles, who often complain of unreasonable and perverse
and wicked Men, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. and the greatest examples of Virtue before and
since them, such as Socrates, Cato, Seneca, and the like, have had the same
measure; and it is often the Lot and Portion of the best of Men, and that which
has made them so as much as any thing; and God has suffered it for a Trial and
increase of their Virtue. Now if a Man must be always uneasy and unhappy, and
have a great disturbance and disquiet in his mind, when he meets with this, it
will not be in the power of God and Religion, nor of Virtue and a good
Conscience to make a man happy, as it certainly is, and to give him ease and
satisfaction in himself, however others shall use and wrong him; if every rude
and ill natured Person, whose Tongues are their own, and who will use them as
they please without any regard to Truth, Manners, or Religion, shall task away
a Man's peace and quiet; or their unjust and undeserved usage shall make a
breach upon the steadiness and firmness of a Man's mind, and he shall be
disturbed and unhappy, because others are uncivil, humoursome and ignorant;
there will be no such thing as inward peace and quiet, nor will our Savior's
words signify any thing, My peace I leave with you, John 14.27. In patience
possess ye your Souls, Luke 21.19. Blessed are ye when men shall speak evil of
you and hate and reproach you, Luke 6.22. But a Man must mind which way the
wind sits or the Weathercock turns, on which side the Birds fly, or which is
as uncertain, what is the opinion of unthinking Men to judge of himself by.
Indeed the opinion of good and wise Men who are able to judge, is very much to
be minded, and is truly credit, which is to be preserved next to Conscience;
but he that is not above the little noise and the ignorant censures, and the
brutish Clamours, and the petty injuries of others is a very weak, and will be
often a very unhappy Man. 2. It Is one of the greatest and most pleasant Virtues
to gain a Victory over our own passions, and to overcome the brutish
inclinations of Anger and Revenge, which are apt to rise in us at first upon
the sense of an injury. He that can calm and quiet those, and by wise thoughts
subdue the boisterous rage and furiousness of an angry spirit, is a greater Man
and a greater Conqueror than he that Conquers whole Countries and Cities, and
fenced Places, and overcomes many thousands of Enemies by the Sword, as the
Wise man observes, He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he
that rules his spirit, than he that takes a City, Prove. 16.32. This is the
true Virtue of a Man that masters the beast, the brutish Appetites and
Inclinations that are in him; which if he let loose, they will rage and tear
and devour him, and hurry him to revenge and madness, and all the dismal
effects of them. Nothing is so rash and inconsiderate, and shows so much
impotency and weakness of mind as those passions which are apt to rise up in
us; and nothing shows greater Wisdom and more true greatness of mind, than to
Command and Conquer them, and bear a provocation and forgive it, instead of
being set on fire, and overcome by it; nor can any thing be more pleasant than
to gain this Victory over our passions, for they are very troublesome and
uneasy, and all find them so who are under them: but it is the greatest ease
and pleasure of mind and body too, to be free from them, and to be in a calm,
and gentle, and meek, and undisturbed state. Anger and revenge are the most
uneasy, and vexatious, and tormenting passions that belong to human nature,
that fire and inflame the spirits, put the blood into an Unnatural and Venomous
Ferment, and the whole Man under the gall of bitterness and the greatest
uneasiness; so that his mind can enjoy nothing, but is restless and tumultuous,
and under a thousand fearful and vexatious thoughts how to contrive and how to
accomplish it is Mischievous and Revengfull designs upon others. But to lay all
these aside, and to pass by, and forgive an injury, and let our passions be
quiet without any great resentment of it, is to be at ease within our selves,
and has more sweetness and comfort in it than all the revenge in the World. 3.
As this is overcoming our selves, so it is overcoming our Enemies too, and the
best and the least troublesome, and the most generous way of Conquering them;
for first it disappoints all their malice and avoids the blow they intended to
give us, for this puts by the injury which was thrust at us; or at least takes
off the smart, and the sense of it, which is the greatest evil that they
designed by it, and they have lost their design if they see us not concerned at
it. But further, if we can bring our selves to return kindness for injury, and
overcome evil with good, this, if any thing, will overcome an Enemy, by making
him become a Friend, which is the greatest and perfectest Victory in the World;
and subdue him with such powerful force and conduct that he cannot but yield
to it. A soft answer will turn away his wrath, as the wise man speaks, Prove.
15.1. and showing the kind offices of love and kindness and civility to him,
will not only heap coals of fire upon his head, if he still continue to injure
us, but in all probability melt him into kindness and goodness; for he must be
a very barbarous wretch, and void of all sense of humanity, beyond the rate of
most Men, who will not be obliged by a generous kindness from an Enemy; and he
must be a mere Savage, who is not to be wrought upon by civility and good will.
Revenging an injury is the way to double and increase it and to keep up the War
and Hostility, with vast trouble and expense; but the other presently procures
a Fair and a Comfortable and an Honorable Peace and Reconciliation. Many think
it will draw more injuries upon them if they do not revenge themselves for
those past, and make it cost others dear to hurt them, so that it is their
Motto, nemo me impune lacesset: but this for the most part fails, and is the
worst and longest, and most troublesome way to get rid of them; every Man may
indeed preserve his right if it be valuable and not better to part with it than
to lose it, and yet keep up fully to this temper of doing any good in his
power, to those who would do this evil to him: but to return evil for evil,
injury for injury is no more the best way to overcome it, than it is to heal a
wound by cutting it deeper and lancing it wider, when otherwise it would
quickly close of it self; and love would be like oil poured in to supple and
heal it. 4. The overcoming evil with good is so like to God, who does good
every day to us and all mankind, though we injure and provoke him; that our
having such usage from him, should teach and learn us it, and incline us to
practice it to our Brethren. If God should be presently enraged and resolve to
revenge himself upon us for every injury we offer to Heaven, i. e. for every
sin we commit, how sad and lamentable a case must we be in; we therefore that
live by virtue of this good principle, that owe our lives, and all the mercies
we enjoy to this virtue in God, whereby he spares us, though we provoke him; and
is slow to anger though we sin against him, and revenges not himself upon us weak
and impotent, and yet bold and daring Enemies: How should we feel the good of
it to our selves and not practice it to others? Did not God deal otherwise with
us, than revenge and anger inclines us to deal with others, how might he
consume us every moment; and never wait to be gracious, nor let his goodness
lead us to repentance, nor never let us enjoy the blessings of his common
providence, but shut up the Heavens that they should not rain, and put out the
Sun that it should not shine upon such evil and unjust, such sinful and
rebellious Creatures as we are? Nay, had he not been disposed to this Vittue,
which is the very perfection and excellence of the Divine Nature, he had not
shown so much love and done so much good for sinners, as to send his own Son
Christ into the World to die for us, even when we were Enemies to him, and to
God that made us. We then that had perished for ever had it not been for this
Virtue, how should we love and value it and endeavor to imitate it, and deal
with our Brethren as God dealt with us! What an example of this our Savlour has
left, appears by his whole life, which was a perpetual suffering of injuries
and doing of good; and especially at his death, when he prayed for his Enemies,
and being reviled he reviled not again, but as a sheep led to the slaughter he
was dumb, and opened not his mouth, unless to pray for those who barbarously
used and murdered him: and in this he left us an example that we should follow
his steps. But Fifthly and Lastly, This is not a mere Christian perfection and
a Noble Heroical degree of Virtue, which it is matter of advice to attain; but
it is a necessary Christian duty, without which we shall not go to Heaven, nor
be capable of Pardon and Salvation at the hands of God. If we revenge the
injuries that are done to us, God will not forgive us the sins we commit
against him: he has expressly told us so, Matthew. 6.15. Mark 11.26. Luke 6.37.
and that with the same measure we mete to others it shall be measured to us
again, even by God in another World, who will show himself merciful to those
that are merciful and froward to those who are froward; and to those who are
revengefull and inexorable to their Brethren, he will be so too, when they
stand in more need of mercy and forgiveness than any of their Brethren can at
any time do of them. What are the degrees and measures of exercising this
Virtue, I cannot now exactly show you; but in general, to forgive an injury and
not return it by another, to overcome it, not with evil but with good, is so
much a duty to every Christian, that he shall not come to Heaven who does not
in some measure perform it, and who notoriously and plainly acts contrary to
it. Let us therefore, for the present Peace of our Lives, for the quiet of our
Minds and for the everlasting Peace and Happiness of our Souls, endeavor to
learn this Virtue, and not be overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.

The Ninth Sermon.
LUKE XVI. 31. And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.


AMongst all the many Arguments that there are for Religion, and to persuade
men to a good life, there are none so strong and so forcible if well
considered, as those which are drawn from another World, and from a future
state of rewards and punishments: There are indeed a great many that lie near
and arise from several other considerations, from the tendency of Religion to
make us happy in this World; from the miserable effects that most Vices have
upon Men's Fortunes and Enjoyments; from the natural and intrinsic Goodness
and Amiableness, that is in Virtue and Religion, whereby it recommends it self
to our minds, and the abominable filthiness and ugliness that is in Vice, and
it is contrariety to right reason as well as our true interest: by these and
many other considerations Religion is strengthened on every side and planted
round with such Arguments as are enough to defend it from most of the assaults
that Vice and Wickedness can make upon it. But its strongest Hold, its main
Fort wherein lies its greatest and impregnable strength, is the thoughts of
another World, of a Heaven and a Hell hereafter; this will hold out if all the
other should fail, and if Vice should be never so Fortunate and Happy, as it
sometimes is in this World; if Wickedness should have as many Prizes as Virtue
in this Lottery of things that is here below: yet there it would be sure to be
the loser, and could have no pretenses to vye and contend with Religion; there
the account between 'em appears manifestly and notoriously different, without
adjusting it by particulars, and making such abatements as we must often in
this World. This is a plain and obvious, an universal and undoubted, and one
would think, an irresistible Argument for Religion, that depends not upon long
reasonings and many observations, as some others do, but may be easily
understood, and will strongly work upon all mankind; and therefore the
Scripture does chiefly make use of it, and every where presses and suggests it
to us, as the strongest sanction of the Divine Law, and that which is the
likeliest to prevail upon us, when it is fully believed and considered. The Rich
Man here in the Parable, thought there was so much strength in it, now that he
selt it, that he questioned not, but it would prevail even upon his wicked
Brethren, if it were offered with all its advantage to 'em; if one went from
the dead and told 'em what he suffered, and what they would certainly do, if
they took not care in time, not to come into that place of torment: and
therefore he seems to have picht upon the likeliest way for this, when he
requested Abraham, that a Messenger might be sent from the dead to 'em; if that
might be granted by the Laws and Polity of the other World, there was no doubt
sure but it would attain the effect and bring 'em to Repentance; such a Message
as he would send 'em, such an account of things in the other World as he would
give them, should surely work strangely upon 'em, and make 'em amend their
lives. This he made no question of, for had it been his own case, were he to
have lived again, after he knew so much as he did now, he would have been quite
another man, and so should his Brethren one would think by such a way as this
was; but Abraham tells him the quite contrary, If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rise from the dead. This
seems very strange, and will do much more so, when we consider particularly
what Arguments a Messenger from the dead would bring along with him, to
persuade a man to Repentarce; such as it is impossible sure not to be overcome
by them; such as if they will not do, nothing else will: I shall offer some of
them to you, and then endeavor to give you an account of what Abraham here
says, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead. And,

First, let us consider what strong and powerful Arguments a Messenger from
the dead would bring along with him to persuade a wicked man to Repentance; and
in the

1. First place, he would satisfy him of the truth and certainty of such a
place; that there is really a future state; that there is not an end of us when
we go off from this Worldly Stage and Theater, but that there is another life
to succeed this, wherein we shall receive as we have behaved our selves here.
That the Soul when it is released from the Body, and puts on a thinner and a
lighter Vehicle, passes to the vast Regions of Eternity, and there has a very
different life from what it had here; when naked of all earthy matter, and not
wanting any of the Conveniences of its mortal state, its thoughts are more
vigorous and sprightly, and it understands more clearly and wills more freely,
and acts more nimbly and expeditely and unrestrainedly. He could tell us how it
feels it self, when it is first loosed from the Body, and stripped naked of its
fleshly Clothing; whither it will betake it self next, and to what place it is
conveyed; what reception it has at its first coming into the other World, and
how it is provided for, when like a stranger it arrives at that unknown place.
He would acquaint us how it was brought before the bar of God, and a Divine
Judgment immediately passed upon it, and so was Sentenced to its sinal state
and irreversible doom, according to what it had done in the flesh whether it
were good or evil; and therefore in the

2. Second place he would acquaint us with the Happy and Blessed state of good
Souls there: If he were Lazarus as was desired here by the rich man, one that
lay in Abraham's Bosom, and tasted of the Joys and Pleasures that are at God's
right hand, what a ravishing account would he give us of those things, which no
Eye upon Earth has seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of any Man who has not enjoyed 'em to concieve what they are. He that had been
an Inhabitant of the new Jerusalem, the Glorious City and Beautiful Palace of
the great God; what a Description would he give of all the Glories of it, of
all the Riches and Heavenly Treasures that are there laid up, of all the Crowns
that are worn by every Citizen there, of all the mansions that are there for
every Soul; of all that blessed Society of Angels and glorisied Spirits, of all
the Orders of Cherubims and Seraphims, and all the Armies of Martyrs; of the
Glorious Throne of the Heavenly King, and of the Lamb that sits upon it; of the
luster and brightness that shines in every place, and the Joy and Gladness that
dances in every heart, and sparkles in every eye, and appears in every face; of
the great Complacency and Delight that they have in one another, and the most
inflamed Love and Charity, with which they meet their fellow Saints; how they
are infinitely Happy in themselves, and double all their Happiness by the sweet
relish and taste they have of that of others as well as their own; how they live
all in Raptures and Ecstasies of Joy, and have their Souls overflowed with those
Rivers of Pleasure that are at God's right hand, and for ever stream from that
Spring and Fountain of all good. In a word, that they enjoy such Pleasures and
Delights, that he which selt 'em one moment, would be willing to endure all the
Racks and the Tortures of the cruelest Persecutors that he might but once taste
of 'em again: That those short afflictions are not worthy to be compared with
them; that the greatest Pleasures and Delights in this World, are but saint and
empty shadows and poor resemblances of 'em; and that he long, to be enjoying
'em again, and that he is impatient to be so long absent from 'em.

3. A Messenger from the dead would testisie also of the Misery and grievous
Torments of Men wicked and sinful. Lazarus that had seen the slames of Hell,
though asar off, or Dives that had felt and been in the midst of them, would give
a Tragical description of that place of horrors; he would tell us what a Dismal
and Disconsolate place is that dark Prison, where they are shut up with hellish
Fiends and accursed Spirits, who affright and insult over the wretched Soul;
how they are there bound hand and foot with chains of darkness, not able to
move any way for the least ease, nor call to any Friend to pity or comfort 'em;
how they are always sinking into a dark and bottomless Pit, and lie for ever
scalding in a Furnace of fire, rolling and scorching in a Lake of burning
Brunstone; where the raging flames with unexpressible pain enter the tender
parts, and pierce through the Soul with their keenness and sharpness; how in
the extremity of their Torments, the miserable wretches cry out and roar, and
gnaw their tongues for pain, and blaspheme the God of Heaven because of their
pains, Revel. 16.10, 11. How with Rage and Fury against themselves, cursing
their own folly and madness, and swallowed up with bitter despair, the
remembrance of their own Guilt stings their enraged Conscience, and the never
dying Worm gnaws and eats at their very hearts; and the anger of an Almighty
and Incensed God lies always heavy upon 'em, and his wrath presses 'em fore,
and fills their Souls with all the dreadful Ideas of sear and despondency: and
in the midst of all this anguish there is one thing more terrible than all
this, than all they feel, and that is the Apprehension, that it shall last for
ever, that there shall be no end of those Torments that they are not able to
bear for one day; This, this is the bitterest and most sad circumstance that
confounds the wretched tormented Soul, and sharpens every pain it feels, and
fills it with unexpressible Horror and Despair, that it must endure all this to
insinite Ages, to a boundless and never ending Eternity; and that after it has
lain many thousand years in that place of Torments, it will still have as many
to go through as it had at first. Oh, sad and dreadful state! how grievous and
intolerable does it appear to us, and how would one that had been in it
represent it? How if he had but as much Charity as Dives, would he warn us not
to come into that place of Torments? how unwilling would he be to go back to
it, how loath to end his message, and how desirous to give us an Eternal account
of them, rather than endure 'em?

And now would a wicked Man be able to resist this message? could he stand out
against such Arguments as these are? would not these cool the heat of his
Lusts, and damp all the Jollity of his most tempting Vices? Would not this
spoil all their Charms and sully all their enticing Peauty and Gayety? Would
not such a Ghostly Messenger appearing before him make his blood chill, and his
joints tremble, and the heart of the most hardy sinner be afraid at the sight
of him, when he brought the terrible news to his brethren in wickedness, from
one with whom they had often laughed at Religion, and the stories of Hell, and
another World; with whom they had been often merry and that with those very
things that they now hear the truth of, who thought them if not mere Bugbears
and Fables, yet things a great way off and at a great distance, that they
should not much trouble themselves withal; when now they find all these are
true, and are put in mind of 'em by such a way as this is, and they so nearly
concern them, and are like in a little while to be their own Case? Surely by
all these they will be persuaded and brought to Repentance; I believe there is
no sinner but thinks he himself should be persuaded by these means, and if God
should use such an extraordinary way to convert him, this he questions not, but
would do it; though now he is of another mind, and has no thoughts of leaving his
sins, yet that he thinks would certainly work upon him. He I doubt may be as
much mistaken of himself, as Dives was of his Brethren, of whom Abraham,
assures him, that if they heard not Moses and the Prophets, neither would they
be persuaded, though one rose from the dead. And that I may give you some account
of the likelihood of this, and of the truth of what Abraham here says, I shall
offer you these five considerations.

1. All the Arguments which a Messenger from the dead would bring along with
him, and which are indeed so strong that when one seriously considers them, one
would think it impossible to resist them, these we have already, and they have
been offered to us with their full strength and advantage; we have been made
acquainted with the immortality of our Souls, and a future state, with the Joys
of Heaven, and the torments of Hell, these can be no new discoveries to us,
that we never heard of before.

God in the Scripture had laid open the other World before us, and shown us the
two vast and different parts of it; he had given a general notice of this to
all Men by the light of Nature, by that they could discern that there was
another Country that lay off from this; another state after this life, wherein
good men would be happy and wicked men miserable. This was known to all the old
unskillfull World, before ever there was any Revelation, any pixis nautica, or
any such Map or Chart, as we have now of the other World: they had not only a
kind of guess or probable conjecture of it, like Columbus of America, but
something more that made it a received Article of the Heathen Religion; but
this is made plainer to us by the Scriptures and Gospel Revelation, by which
Life and Immortality is brought more clearly to light; so that all those
Arguments are set before us, and that with the same strength and advantage that
they could have been by a Messenger from the dead; He could bring us no more,
nor any new ones, but only what we have already; God has informed us of what
belongs to another World, so far as it is of any concern to us, and so much as
is sufficient to make us take care about it; we cannot have better and fairer
warning about those things, and we can have no stronger or more powerful
Arguments than we have already.

2. We have so much reason to believe the truth of those things, that they who
will not be satisfied with that, neither would they be persuaded though they had
a particular Messenger to certify 'em about them; we have a Divine Revelation
added to natural light, and the universal suffrage of mankind; we have had a
number of Miracles and extraordinary Effects of Divine power, to assure us of
the truth of that Religion, that delivers us the belief of those things: We
have had many Prophets sent from God, and with sufficient Credentials to
satissie us that they were so, to Preach these things to us: We have had one
come from Heaven, and after he was dead, rise again, and so become even a
Messenger from the dead to us, and testisi'd all these things to be true. And
if we will be such Scepticks as still to entertain doubts and disbelieve all
these, we should be the same I fear, though we had one come from the dead to us;
we should be apt to think it but a Spectre, a mere Image of Air or of Fancy, a
Melancholy Mormo, or a waking Dream, and be inclined to think that we were
imposed upon by our own active Imaginations, and the many reports and stories
we have heard of such things running in our minds; he that can disbelieve all
the undoubted Arguments for the truth of Scripture, and revealed Religion may
run so far into Skepticism, as to dis-believe his senses, and to think every
thing that appears to him to be fantastic and imaginary.

3. If he did believe it at that time, and were never so much startled and
affrighted at the surprising apparition, yet in a little time the sense of it
might wear off and he be never the better for it; it might put him into a sit
of horror and consternation, as the hand on the Wall did Belshazzer, Dan. 5.6.
so that his Countenance should change, and the joints of his loins be loosed
and his knees smite one against another; but the sright might work upon his
Body more than his Mind, and when that is over they might both return to their
former and natural temper. Is it not usual for a great many, who by a dangerous
sit of lickness, are brought so near the other World, that they can almost see
into it, and have at that time as firm a belief and as strong a sense of it, as
if not only a Messenger from the dead came to them, but they were there
themselves; yet these when they rise as it were from the dead, and return from
the borders of another World, when they have recovered their health and are
come into their old Company, their former Circumstances and course of Life, how
do they lose the sense of what they had in their sickness, though it were never
so strong, and become the same Men they were before. Like persons in a
shipwreck, when the next Wave is likely to be their Sepulcher, and they think
themselves every moment sinking into the deep below; then they are greatly
concerned, and make a great many Vows and Resolutions, which at that time they
question not to keep: but when the storm and the fright is over, they forget
all their good Intentions, and their Religious Temper goes off, and they return
to their former Temper of Mind. It must be a calm and gentle, a sedate and
composed method that generally works upon a Man's mind, and brings by degrees
new Thoughts and Dispositions into it, rather than a sudden and hasty fright,
that only startles and amazes it; and it is that is more agreeable to the nature
of a free and reasonable Creature, which is to be dealt withal by such a
suitable and kindly procedure, rather than that which has nothing in it but
force and violence.

4. As God does seldom humor Men by doing any thing that is Miraculous or
Extraordinary, when they have sufficient ordinary means, so if he would do it,
it would hardly cure their perverse obstinacy and infidelity; God is not
willing to gratify the wantonness or infidelity of mankind, and prostitute his
Almighty power to their Lusts and Follies by doing extraordinary things when
there is no need of them: he will not work Miracles as fast and as often as the
Atheist is pleased to call for 'em, when he has given him other sufficient
demonstrations of a Divine power; he will not send an Angel to Preach his Laws
over all the Earth, or to speak to men every day with a voice of Thunder, when
he has otherwise sufficiently made known his will to them. Our Savior would
not come down from the Cross to satisfy the Cavils and unreasonable Request of
an unbelieving Jew, when he had done sufficient Miracles before to convince
him; he would not give such a sign as was desired by an Evil and Adulterous
Generatition, Mat. 12.39. when they had other signs enough. As this would make
his Almighty power Cheap and Contemptible, to let it be at the pleasure and
call of every unreasonable and humoursome person; so if he should exert it
never so often, it would not have that effect we imagine upon them: for he, who
is so unreasonable an Infidel and so obstinately unsatissied as to shut his
Eyes against full Evidence and just Conviction, will never be wrought upon in
all likelihood by any thing that shall be done farther; though Heaven should be
at a farther expense and tire it self as it were to do Miracles without End or
Number, yet it would be still the same. Of this we have a very great instance
in the Old Testament; Pharaoh, who had so many Miracles wrought before him, and
as many Plagues as Miracles to make him Obedient to one Command of God, when he
saw the Rivers and all the Water in his Country, turned into Blood, Exodus 7.19.
when all his Land was covered with Frogs, and they came into his presence
Chamber; when the dust of the Earth was become Lice, and he could not but
confess, that this was the singer of God; when a great many more Miracles, of
which he could not but have a very great sense, were done before his Eyes, yet
still his obstinacy was too hard for 'em, and a Miracle beyond all the rest.
Indeed when he was under the present smart of a Judgment, it would awaken him
for a moment, Exodus 8.28. but as soon as it was removed, and he had respite, he
was immediately hardened. And thus probably would an obstinate and hardened
sinner, when a Messenger from the dead was talking with him, he would melt and
soften, and cry out as Pharaoh, did, I have sinned, Exodus 9.27. and resolve at
that time to let his sins go; but yet in a little time he would harden again
and resolve not to part with 'em. Of this there is an instance as great and
strange also in the New Testament, and that is not in a single Person, but in a
whole Nation. The Jews in our Savior's time tho they saw him do such works as
never man did, such as out-did all that were recorded of any of their own
Prophets; though they saw him raise the dead, and cure the sick, and were
Eyewitnesses of the daily Miracles he wrought amongst them, yet all this would
not cure 'em of their obstinate Infidelity; nor could the Son of God use any
remedy for their perverseness and wilful incredulity: which plainly shows that
men may arrive at such Stubbornness and Infidelity, that even Miracles and the
most extraordinary means will not work upon them. Where there is not such an
obstinacy of the Will, but only a more innocent Ignorance caused by want of the
same means that others have enjoyed; there those extraordinary Miracles would
have another effect, as if the works which our Savior did in Galilee had been
done in Tire and Sidon, they had long ago repented in sackcloth and ashes, as
he tells 'em Mat. 11.21. and so if a Messenger had come from the dead to those
that had never heard of Moses or the Prophets, or never had any Revelation or
Means of knowing those things another way, they would probably have been
persuaded by him; but when Men have once stood out against the ordinary means
that God has afforded them, there extraordinary ones will seldom prevail upon
them, if God should think fit to make use of 'em; and that

5. As another reason why, if they heard not Moses and the Prophets, neither
would they be persuaded though one rose from the dead; because the mind is so
blinded by the love of its sins, and the Will so depraved and corrupted by
them, especially by a long custom and habit continued in against all the
ordinary means of Grace, and all the powerful considerations of Religion, that
it becomes utterly incurable. The love of Vice darkens a Man's mind, and blinds
his reason and judgment, it bars up his Understanding against the plainest
Truths, and makes him resolve not to believe that to be true, which it is his
interest should be false; and from hence it is that a great many who would be
glad that there were no Heaven or Hell hereafter, are brought to question the
truth of them, and pretend not to be satisfied with that Account and Evidence
that the Scripture gives of them: and if they had more, and the same that they
do now require, to see one from the dead; yet the love of wickedness would
still make 'em very unwilling to believe it, and their corrupted Wills would be
too hard for their understandings; it would be very hard to convince them that
that was true, which they had so great an inclination and so great a desire
should be false. And from hence it is, that Men's Infidelity springs in matters
of Religion, not from want of sufficient Conviction to their understandings,
but from a corruption, and pravity of their Wills, by which means their
understanding has a cloud and a film drawn over it, so that it is quite darkened
to the clearest and most evident light; they grow senseless and stupefied, and
their intellectuals are besotted, and their reason depraved and the whole mind
sunk into such a miserable state and condition, that they are become such of
whom the Scripture speaks, John 12.40. He has blinded their eyes and hardened
their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with
their heart, and be converted so that God should heal them, and that neither
with all the ordinary nor the extraordinary methods which he can use toward
them. Let us therefore take care not to fall into such a sad state and
condition, by indulging our selves in the love or the practice of any wilful
sin; which may by degrees so strangely harden and deceive us, so fascinate and
bewitch us, that when it has baffled and overcome all the ordinary remedies of
the Divine Grace and Providence, it shall be past all cure, and all possible
recovery. We see how strangely some Men are enslaved to their sins, though they
see the greatest mischiefs that will certainly follow from them, that if they
should see Hell it self even open before them, yet it would hardly prevail upon
them: but let us consider the great arguments of Religion, contained in Moses
and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles. God has given us a standing Canon
and Revelation of his Will, which we may be sure contains all things in it that
are necessary to persuade all Men to Repentance and carry 'em to Heaven; and
it is this is the most proper and most perfect method that God has thought fit
to make use of to that purpose, and much better than sending Messengers from
the dead to do this, which would signify nothing, unless they were sent in
every particular Age, and to every particular Person: and what that could do,
this the Holy Scriptures may do now, if we consider and attend to them. The
Papists indeed seem to be something of the rich Man's mind, that the Scriptures
are not sufficient, nor the best way to convert Men; and therefore they have
taken away those from the people, and instead of them, have put their fabulous
Legends, their stories of Purgatory, and of Men coming from the dead into their
hands: but a well attested and consirm'd Revelation has infinitely the
advantage of all those, and therefore by those and by what is contained in
them, let us be persuaded from a course of wickedness and impiety: Let those
powerful considerations of another World, which are there laid before us,
prevail upon our hearts; and let us not hope if we neglect those ordinary and
sufficient means, which God has appointed for that purpose, that we shall be
made good, or converted by any miraculous or extraordinary methods of Divine
Grace; for if we hear not Moses and the Prophets, and much more Christ and his
Apostles, neither should we be persivaded though one rose from the dead.

The Tenth Sermon.
ACTS XVII. 22. latter part. I perceive that in all things ye are too
superstitious.


ST. Paul speaks these words to the Citizens of Athens, in their great Court of
Judicature, whither he was brought by the Philosophers and Learned Men of that
University, v. 19. the Epicureans and the Stoics, with whom he had been
disputing about his Religion, and they were willing to bring him to that
public place, and to those great men that used to be there; not to have him
Judged or Accused before them, as Socrates was formerly, for that appears not,
and St. Paul had free liberty and went away without any restraint, v. 33. but
only to gratify their Curiosity, and to hear of the new Religion and the new
God that they supposed he Preached, for the Athenians, as they were desirous of
all other news, v. 21. so especially in Religion, being the most forward to
admit all fort of Gods they heard of, into their Worship, and the most inclined
to Religion, such as it was of all the Greeks, (...), as Josephus and Pausanias
speak of them. It is thought therefore by some, even Chrysostom and Oecumenius,
that St. Paul means the same here by (...), and took occasion here to commend
'em, and so the better to insinuate himself, and like a skillful Orator
persuade 'em to the true Religion, and that these words of his were designed as
a Compliment to 'em, and may be taken in a good sense; but then he did not
continue it, but spoke against the Idolatry that was amongst 'em, and their
representing the Godhead by gold or silver, or stone graven by art and man's
device, v. 29. From the Altar indeed that he saw among the other (...) v. 23.
or the Images they worshipped, with this inscription To the unknown God, he took
a fair occasion of Preaching the true God to them, supposing at least that they
meant him, and that they ignorantly worshipped him that was the Creator, and the
Supreme, though it is hard to conceive how they meant, or knew him to be so, when
he was the (...) the unknown to them by their own Confession; However they
acknowledged that there was a Deity, which they wanted among those of their
City, and that they were at a loss for him; and therefore St. Paul made use of
this, and thought it a seasonable opportunity to Preach the true God to them
whether they meant him by their Altar or no.

There have been disputes about this among Learned men, but I intend not to
consider 'em or the particalar superstition of the Athenians, which consisted
probably in a Religious and Ignorant forwardness of worshipping all manner of
Demons and Deities, that they could hear of; and all the Heathen Polytheism
was such a superstition, and arose from that ground: but I intend to discourse
to you of superstition in general, and that not of the signification of the
word and its Etymology, but of the thing it self, and what is truly meant by
it, what is the nature of it, and wherein it consists. Superstition is a word
that has made a great noise in the world, and, like other words of ambiguous
and uncertain meaning, it has been clapped upon whatever men pleased, and been
made a phrase to denote whatever they dislike in a Religion, whether they have
reason for it or no; it has stood for a mark of what is to be hated, though they
cannot tell why; to beget an aversion to a thing and a suspicion of something
ill in it, though they cannot clearly see or understand it. Indeed superstition
has been the great Discase of Religion, it has like a Canker eat into the heart
of it and consumed it, it has put it generally into a great heat, but often
into a Frenzy too, and grows sometimes to a Religions distraction. It Is that by
which the Devil when he cannot destroy the natural sense of a God and Religion
out of Men's minds, yet so darkens and disorders it, that it may be of no great
use to them, nor do much to destroy his interest or Kingdom in the World; it is
too apt to grow up in weak, and not seldom in good and pious minds; it sadly
overrun all the Heathen World, and too soon crept into the Christian Church;
it sticks like a secret Leprosy to many, even holy things, and the Priests
themselves do not discern it; and it is as common as any where among those who
are the loudest and fiercest in exclaiming against it. But that we may
understand what is the true nature of it, I shall endeavor to give you as
clear an account of it as I can, in the following method.

1. By giving a general Definition or Description of it, and explaining the
parts of that.

2. By considering some particular instances of Superstition, and examining
others that are accounted so.

3. By enquiring into the true Causes of it, and the right means to avoid it.

I. By giving a general definition, etc. Now I would thus define superstition;
It Is such a mistaken apprehension of God and Religion, as makes us worship him
in an undue manner, and place Religion in those things in which it does not
really consist.

1. It Is an apprehension of God. The superstitious have a great sense upon
their minds of a powerful being above 'em; that there is a God who is the
invisible Lord of the World. This is the common belief of the religious and the
superstitious. The Atheist, who thinks there is no such Being, no spiritual and
invisible Powers above him, but that these are all the Specter of fear and
fancy, and the melancholy Images of our own scared Thoughts and Imaginations,
he calls all Religion Superstition, and thinks it the best way to free Men's
minds from the slavish fears of a Being above them, to deny either him or his
Providence, and clear his mind if he can from all the thoughts of Religion,
that so horribly oppress it and keep it in bondage.

This is a mad and an extravagant project, and what he was encouraged to from
the folly and wildness of superstition, and the mischief that it had done in
the World, and from laying all the scelerosa, atque impia facta, all the
Villainies which that had committed, to the charge of Religion. This is very
dis-ingenuous and unjust, and the other is a very false extravagance to expel
the thoughts of a God, in order to the quiet and ease of our minds. There is no
such reason for fear and melancholy in the belief of a God, if we have true and
right Conceptions of him; it is matter of the greatest Comfort to us, to think
there is an Almighty Being to take care of us, and to do us good; to keep the
World orderly, and to govern all things below. We have all reason to rejoice in
our having such a common Father to provide for us, and such a Governor to
protect us, who is wise and good as well as powerful, which is the Notion of a
God: sad would be our Condition if there were not such a being, and I know no
such melancholy consideration, as that which the Atheist supposes to be the
remedy for all his fears and disquietudes, the believing there is no God; for
then we take away all true hope and comfortable trust, and have nothing at all
to support our sinking minds, nor to relieve the necessities of mankind; so
that though superstition believe a God, yet the belief does not make Men
superstitious; but,

2. It Is a wrong and mistaken apprehension of this God, the believing him to be
a severe and cruel Being, armed indeed with irresistible power, but arbitrary
and wilful in the use of it, and that may probably do infinite mischief, and
only ruin and destroy his innocent Creatures with it; that may make them only
to be the pastime of his rage, and the sport and entertainment of his Almighty
revenge, and may damn the greatest part of 'em to Eternal flames, only to show
his Groatness and incontrolable Power over them: or if he be not thus Cruel and
Tyrannical, yet that he is froward and pettish, hard to be pleased and easily
provoked; that it is next to impossible to please him, and utterly so to be
reconciled to him when be is angry: such thoughts as these of God, may very
well produce a superstitious and uncomfortable dread of him, and sill the mind
with nothing but terror and astonishment, and a dismal uncertainty and
perplexity; and in these black colors superstition always draws him with
ghastly look and terrible visage; with a brow always threatening, and a hand
Armed with Thunder, and ready to strike without any regard to the merit or
behavior of those that are under him. And were God such a Being as this,
without natural Justice or essential Righteousness, were not his goodness as
infinite as his power, and were not one as much his nature as the other, then
indeed we might live as miserably under the thoughts of him, as the most
timorous Slave does under his merciless Patron, or the poorest Prisoner under
his insolent Keeper; and what will not such fearful wretches do to appease the
anger of such a God, as they think is over them? what is so mean and base, what
so foolish and silly, what so cruel and barbarous, that they will not perform
to satisfy this devouring Moloch? It is very strange that ever Men should
think the burning their Children alive, should be an acceptable duty in
Religion; or that cutting their own throats should please their Gods; but when
they have had such dreadful apprehensions of them, no wonder that these cruel
things were made the offices of their Religion, which were so suited to the
conceptions of their Gods; For in the

3. Third place, these mistaken apprehensions of God, will put Men upon
worshipping him in an undue manner; the acts of worship and offices of Religion
will be suitable to the conceptions we have of the Divine nature, if we think
God is a severe and a cruel being, we shall think he delights in nothing so
much as in bloody Sacrifices, and in having his Altars reek with Human gore,
which was become a very general custom, and a common office of the Gentile
Religion; and the Devil, without doubt, endeavored to bring mankind into this
abominable superstition, by representing God to be such an one as himself, and
by making his own Diabolical temper, to be the Image and Character of the
Divine nature, by thus setting up himself as the Idol of God; this horrid
worship did terminate in him, and what the Gentiles thus offered they
Sacrificed to Devils and not to God, 1 Cor. 10.20. But if we have other
conceptions of God very unsuitable to his nature, if we think he is not a wise
and righteous, but a vain being, that will be pleased with little and outward
things, with affected Formalities and studied Compliments, with officious
Addresses and appearing shows, with adorning Images and pompous Processions;
then all our Religion quickly runs into those trifling things, and to be sure,
it will some way be defective, if it have not a very right Foundation, a true
conception of God and his Nature.

4. This will necessarily bring Men to wrong apprehensions of Religion, and to
place it in those things in which it does not consist; it will make them think
God is pleased with what is no way agreeable to his nature, or else displeased
with what is no way contrary to it: God's Love or Hatred to any thing, is
founded in his Nature, and if we mistake in that, we shall do so in his Will
too, which is always Regulated and Conducted by the essential rectitude and
perfections of his Nature; and this, as it is the truest Original, so it is the
best Interpreter of the Will of God: but superstition that knows not God
aright, as it is afraid of him, as of a Friend in the dark, so in other things
it fears where no fear is; and yet thinks to oblige by such pitiful things as
would hardly please a wise Man, and much less a wise God; it will keep off from
some very innocent things, as if all the bane of the seven deadly sins were in
them, and yet will swallow down many a Camel, whilst it strains so hard at a
single Gnat; it will be as punctual and zealous in some little performances as
if they were the sum and substance of Christianity, though they are perhaps
hardly the shell and outside of it: and what is the main and the substantial
part of it, that it shall think of little worth, in Comparison to the other; it
shall fall short of the plain and moral duties of Religion, and over-do it in
the positive ones to make amends or commute for the other; it shall seem in
some things to be an excess of Religion, as some have defined superstition; but
it is but as the Rickets is an excess of Nourishment in some parts that want it
not, whilst the others do consume and pine away; it is really the defect of
Religion. It shall seem to court God and flatter him, but not love him; for
superstition is often a sort of religious flattery that make; more than
ordinary pretenses, and gives greater shows of kindness to Heaven, but yet
fails in performing that true and honest service which it ought; it is for
offering something of its own, and thinks to please God with its little
Inventions, whilst it denies him that which he requires of his; but these are
but general Characters and Descriptions of superstition. I proceed in the

2. Second place to consider some particular instances of it, and to examine a
few of those that are accounted such and are not so. And

1. I account all the Heathen Polytheism, and Worship of many Deities, Heroes
and Demons, and their Inferior Gods to be the first and truest part of
superstition, this is (...) in the strictest sense of that word, and was such
as the Athenians were greatly guilty of, and charged with it here by St. Paul;
for all Idolatry, though it be a breach of the second command, yet is truly
superstition, which is said to be a breach of the first; it arises from a very
mistaken notion of the true God, and from an immoderate fear of all those other
beings that it supposes under him; and next to him in power and other
perfection; it thinks them worthy of Divine Honor and Veneration, and that
they are the Authors of very great blessings and favors to mankind; and that
they ought to have addresses made to them, to be prayed to in sickness and in
danger, and under any affliction or extremity: and so makes it self a Pensioner
to them, and lives not only under the fear and awe of those, but under
expectations from, and dependencies upon those as well as the supreme and the
great God. This was the true ground of the Heathen Polytheism and Idolatry:
They took the inferior Deities to be the Ministers of State and Governors of
the World under the Supreme, and they Worshipped them as their immediate and
particular Patrons; and as is plain from Maximus Tyrius, they accounted them
their Mediators, by whom they made their addresses to the greatest God; this
was thought by them to be an humble deference to him, who was too great to have
immediate worship or prayers offered to him, by persons so much below him, and
therefore they made use of others; and so in time forgot the supreme, and paid
no Religious offices to him at all, but gave away that honor and worship that
was due only to him, to the meanest, and to the worst of his Creatures, and
even to the wicked Angels and to the Devils themselves: and how sad was the
superstition of the Heathen World, and how the knowledge of the true God was
almost quite lost among 'em, before the coming of our Savior, who came to
destroy all false worship and superstition, both the Scriptures and the
Heathens themselves sufficiently inform us.

2. The next instance of superstition to the Heathen Polytheism and very near
of kin to it, is that of worshipping Saints and Angels, Images and Relics,
which is too notoriously practiced in the Church of Rome: This is so rank and
open a superstition, that it comes up to the truest Etymology of the Greek and
Latin word, (...), which if good Beings are Angels, and the Souls that are
departed, being the superstites that they suppose now living in Heaven, which
agrees with the account that Tully and Lactantius give of it. This worship of
Angels was a very ancient superstition of some Heretical Christians, which St.
Paul cautions against, Colos. 2.18. Let no man beguile you of your reward in a
voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels. This it seems was supposed to be
a point of humility upon some account, I suppose upon the principle of the
Gentiles, that they thought it too great a thing to address to the Majesty of
God, without the Angels as Mediators: but besides that, this is an Encroachment
upon the Office of Christ, who is the only Mediator between God and Man, 1 Timothy
2.5. to choose other Mediators for our selves: It is the putting the Angels
upon an Office, they were never appointed to by God, and a superstitious trust
and confidence placed in them, without any manner of ground, and intruding into
those things which we have not seen, Col. 2.18. and a new sort of worship which
the Scripture has no where Commanded or Countenanced, but expressly forbidden,
Rev. 19.10. And such is the superstitious reverence given to Images and
Relics, as if there were any thing Sacred in them; or any Virtue to be
expected by them, or the relation they had to the Person or Prototype were a
sufficient ground of giving religious Honor and Worship to them; I know not
whether the folly of this superstition, or the sin be greater, it is as low in
many cases as any almost among the Heathens: and the Egyptians worshipping the
spots upon the Apis, the Ibis and the Herbs of their Garden, as thinking a
Divine Virtue resided in them, is very near as innocent and defensible.

3. Another instance of superstition, is to think to please God with greater
acts of severity and mortification than he has required, and to place a higher
perfection in those things, than in all the other parts of Religion, which God
himself has commanded.

This was a very early superstition in the very beginning of Christianity, when
some of the Heretics were not contented with the plain and excellent duties of
Faith and Love, and Meekness, and the like; but they must be for something more
singular and extraordinary, that made a greater show of more abstinence and
severity and self-denial, and had, as the Apostle says, a show of wisdom in
will worship and humility and neglecting of the body, Col. 2.23. and they would
deny themselves all the Lawful and Innocent pleasures of Life, and would
abstain from all manner of Wine and Flesh, and use greater Watchings and
Fastings than the other Christians generally did, and forbid all Meats and
Marriages, with a touch not, taste not, handle not; so Epiphanius tells us the
Gnostics did, and the Ebionitos, who were every day baptized and carefully
abstained from all Flesh, and were so afraid of Wine, that they celebrated the
Eucharist only in Water, and so were called Aquarii: And thus did Marcion and
Montanus, and the Manichees pretend all to very great abstinencies and
severities, and affect something very singular and self-denying that
Christianity never required of them; they thought that was too low in those
things, and they were therefore for adding to it some purer and higher precepts
of strictness, which neither Christ nor his Apostles ever required. It Is from
these Schools of the Heretics, that our Roman Catholics have learnt their
rules of Perfection, and have set up their Monkish Societies, like those of the
Essens and Pythagoreans, wherein they pretend to greater abstinencies and
self-denials, and to a higher sort of Christianity than what the Gospel has any
where commanded: but surely our Savior knew as well as these Men wherein the
perfection of Religion lay; and he has given us as perfect and sublime Laws and
Directions of Virtue, as could be; and however these greater severities look
more plausible and more self-denying, yet they are forced and unnatural, a sort
of Stoical or Cynical Institution, rather than Christian, a taking Men off from
doing greater good and being more useful to the World, a Reflection, a
Disparagement upon the Gospel as not giving us the best rules and the most
perfect precepts, but that we can invent better and higher our selves; and, in
a word, a superstitious and ungrounded belief that there is any thing evil or
unlawful in the Natural and Innocent Enjoyments that God has no where
forbidden and restrained us from; and that the abstaining from those is a way
better to please God and to recommend our selves to him, than by living up to
the plain and honest duties of the Gospel. This part of superstition which lies
in a show of greater humility and severity, and abstinence, is mighty apt to
cheat the World, and therefore it has been made use of generally by those who
would draw people into their Communion and Party; and it has done no little
service to the Papists on one side, who tell us of their vows of Poverty and
Chastity, their hair shirts, and their other severities; and the Quakers on the
other side, who affect a show of humility and singularity in their Garb and
their Words, and think that it is Religion not to speak or be habited as other
people, nor to use the common expressions of Civility and good Manners; but no
where has Christ or his Religion Commanded us to be Cynicks, nor did he give us
any such example by any affected singularity in his own life; but has bid us
live innocently and love one another, and told us that this is the perfection
of Christianity, whereby we shall know that we are his Disciples, and not by
any Monkish severities or superstitious abstinencies and self-denials of what
is Lawful and Innocent; We may use those upon account of Prudence, or by
reason of some particular Circumstances, but to place Religion in doing so,
that is superstition.

I might name a great many other instances of superstition in the Roman Church,
in their Pilgrimages and visiting of Shrines, in their whipping themselves, and
going barefoot, in their Penances, their Masses and Indulgencies; whereby they
place Religion in very foolish and ridiculous things of no manner of worth or
value, and think to please God and atone for their sins, and reconcile
themselves to Heaven, by such performances as God has no where commanded, and
are no way proper for it.

4. A great part of superstition lies in ascribing a Divine Virtue and Power to
such things as are merely natural and have no such Virtue in them; as the
making every accident a sign of something, as the Heathens did the flight of
Birds, ((...) in Homer) and some now a Hare's crossing the way; as if these
Natural Accidents were Divine Omens, and portended any evil, and that God made
them notices of his mind to us, which we have no reason to believe; so the
feeding of Chickens, croaking of Ravens, the (...) striking a staff against the
ground, to which the Prophet is thought to refer Hosea 4.12. (...), and the
other auspicious signs, as Lightning on the right hand, (...) in Homer, and
with us the falling of the Salt, which Suidas calls, (...) to be superstitious
observers of signs, as if they were made such by a secret Divine signification,
when they are not: So the observing Ominous and Auspicious days, as if there
were any secret Virtue in them, is an old Heathenish superstition, as we may
see in Hesiod his (...) one of the oldest Heathen Poems. And generally it is the
same natural superstition, and ascribing Occult and Divine Virtues to such
things as have no such thing in them, to which God has no way annexed any such
Virtue or Power, as the using Spells, Charms, Magical knots, and Ligatures, and
the like, which St. Austin calls, execranda superstitio; and the observing
dreams and such natural things, which proceed only from natural causes, as if
there were something Divine in them; this is a great spice of the Heathen
superstition.

5. A great part of Superstition lies in placing the main substance of
Religion, in some positive and external duties, that are only of lesser value,
as the Jews did in their keeping Fasts and Sabbaths, and offering Sacrifices
and observing Circumcision, and the other Rites of their Law; which though they
were commanded by God, yet the placing Religion chiefly in them, and not in
inward Goodness and Righteousness, was what the Prophets always condemned and
reproved them for, as you may see, Isa. 1.11. To what purpose is the multitude
of your sacrifices to me, says the Lord? I am full of the burnt offerings of
rams and the fat of fed beasts, and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or
of lambs, or of hegoats. When ye come to appear before me, who has required
this at your hand to tread my courts? bring no more vain oblations, incense is
an abomination to me, your new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies I
cannot away with, your new moons and appointed feasts my soul hates; v. 16.
Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed,
judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.

6. Superstition may lie in the opinion of indifferent things that are used for
order and decency in religious worship, as if there were any true sanctity on
one side, or any real sin on the other in the use of them. To say that no
Indifferencies and Ceremonies must be used in the worship of God, but what he
has commanded, is to condemn the Jewish and the Christian Church, and even all
Parties in Religion, who can never worship God without some such; and therefore
it is true superstition to think there is a sin in those, and that God will be
displeased at what is no way sinful and unlawful in it self, and is confessed
not to be so before it is imposed, when it is imposed for mere order and
decency: so on the other side it is superstition to think there is any real
sanctity in those, or that they are true parts, and not merely Circumstances of
worship; that there is a real Goodness in the things themselves and that they
are a means to please God and procure his favor; and that there is such a
Virtue in them to do this merely for themselves, though there were no human
authority required them of us; As the Jews thought of the Traditions of their
Elders.

But the charge of superstition is brought nearer to us, and laid to our own
Church, and it concerns us rather to vindicate our selves than to lay it upon
others. We blame the Papists for placing Religion in such things as God has not
commanded, and for a superstitious use of several Rites and Ceremonies no where
prescribed in the Gospel; but do not we our selves commit the same fault in
using a great many Rites and Ceremonies in our worship, which are no where
commanded of God, and are only human inventions and impositions, and therefore
superstitious? This therefore I design to enquire into, which is a great
stumbling block to many who do not well understand superstition, and are
superstitiously afraid of it, where there is no such thing; nor are well
acquainted with the nature and design of those Rites which are used in the
Church of England, and what it self teaches concerning them.

I shall therefore in this place examine whether to use any thing in the
worship of God, which he himself has not commanded, be superstition; and to
vindicate our Rites and Ceremonies from such an imputation, and particularly
those bodily acts of worship, which are most suspected to be so, kneeling at
the Sacrament, and the like; and that I may do this to the satisfaction of all
persons who do not resolve that they will never be satisfied; I shall offer
these several things about this matter.

1. If it be superstition to use any thing in the worship of God, which he
himself has not commanded, and which is not prescribed by a Divine Law, then
the Dissenters themselves, be they of what Party or Denomination soever, are
very guilty of superstition; for they all of them use a great many things in
their worshipping of God, for which there is no Divine Law or Command; as for
Example, where is it Commanded that they shall use a conceived prayer of their
own and not pray by a form? Where is it Commanded that they should receive the
Sacrament sitting and not kneeling? Where is it Commanded that the Minister
shall be clothed in black, and shall not wear a Surplice when he Officiates?
those things that are in use among them are no more Commanded by a Law of God,
than those among us.

2. If it be superstitious to use any thing in the worship of God, that God
himself has not prescribed, then what shall we think of several things that the
Jews used in their worship, which God had not Commanded, and yet, both our
Savior and his Apostles complied with them, in 'em; as for Example, in all
their Synagogue-worship, whither our Savior and his Apostles often resorted,
and yet they had no Command for it in their Law, but only for their worship at
the Temple or Tabernacle; They had no Command in their Law for Reading and
Preaching Moses there every Sabbath day, as was accustomed, Acts 15.21. nor for
that form of Prayer and Liturgy which they used there, and in which, no doubt,
but our Savior and his Apostles joined with them; Nay, there was no express
Law for all their Temple worship, nor for building their Temple, nor for their
Prayers and their Hymns there, which were a great many of them appointed by
David and their other Governors; there was no precept for their hours of
Prayer, which were observed by the Apostles, Acts 3.1. there was no Divine
Command for the Feast of the Dedication, at which our Savior was present, John
10.22. and yet he never in the least reproved those unappointed usages as
having any thing of superstition in them; but complied with them and
countenanced them by his own Example: So in the Passover which is a very
considerable rite and part of Jewish worship, our Savior used the posture of
lying and discumbency in the eating of it, though that was not the posture
Commanded in the Law, and at the first institution of it, Exodus 12.11. but
taken up afterward by the Jewish Church, when they were settled with ease and
liberty in the Land of Canaan; and the Cup of Charity also, that was not of
Divine institution, yet this our Savior used also, after the manner of the
Jews, Luke 22.17. and was pleased to conform to many innocent and inoffensive
rites of the Jewish Church in their Divine worship, though they were not all of
them expressly Commanded or Prescribed by God.

3. The whole Christian Church did use some things in their worship, which were
no way Commanded by Christ. The Holy kiss or the kiss of Charity, which is
mentioned Romans 16.16. 1 Pet. 5.14. was an outward symbol of Love and Charity,
which the Christians used at their meeting at Prayers and the Sacrament; and
such were their Love Feasts or Feasts of Charity, which were Celebrated
together with the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.^0. Jude 12. These were only such
rites, as the Christians, without any Command of Christ, thought fit to join
with the most solemn parts of the Christian worship; and yet they were of so
indifferent and alterable a nature that the Christian Church has thought it
matter of prudence to lay them aside; And whoever is acquainted with the state
of the Christian Church in its purest times and immediately after the Apostles,
knows there were several Ecclesiastical rites appointed by the Governors of it,
and several Canons made in their Synods and Councils concerning indifferent
things; as there was before by the Apostles in the Council of Jerusalem, Acts
15.29. prudential rules and orders concerning blood and things strangled, which
they then imposed upon the Gentiles for that time, but yet the obligation of
them does not continue: And he that will defend that Doctrine, that nothing is
Lawful in the worship of God, that is not prescribed by himself, must not only
condemn all the Reformed Churches abroad, who both practice and teach otherwise
in all their Confessions; but the whole Catholic Church ever since Christ and
his Apostles, which has found it necessary to appoint many external rites in
their religious service.

4. It is impossible in the nature of the thing to perform Divine worship
without some rites and usages, that God has now here Commanded; nor is it
possible to make Laws concerning these to reach all places, for they must alter
according to the several Manners and Customs of different People and Countries.
We must worship God with all signs of Honor and Reverence, with respect and
decency becoming so great a Majesty; but the marks and outward signs of Honor
alter and change according to Customs, and Places, and People, that it is
impossible particularly to determine them. As for Example, pulling off the Shoe
is a sign of Honor and Reverence in the Eastern Countries, as pulling off the
Hat with us; and to this it is thought the precepts of the wise man alludes,
Eccles. 5.1. Keep thy foot when thou go into the house of God, i. e. be
careful to show all manner of Reverence in his presence, as the Jews did, who
always went barefoot into God's house, as the Mahometans, I think, do still
into their religious places; but this would be a very odd and irreverent thing
with us. It was no irreverence among the Jews to have their heads covered in
Divine worship, at their Prayers and Sacrifices, when the Priests constantly
wore their Caps and Bonnets, and sometimes Veils and other coverings; and so
Plutarch says it was accounted comely among the Romans to be covered at their
worship, but among the Graecians it was quite otherwise, and at Corinth, where
St. Paul declares it to be an act of irreverence, for the Men to Pray or
Prophecy, having the head covered, 1. Cor. 11.4. though it was otherwise for the
Women. And therefore since matter of decency and order depends upon particular
Customs and Places, and Circumstances, and is in it self variable and mutable;
there cannot be a Law given to determine it in all places; nor is it possible
to have all the little Rites and Circumstances of religious worship be
comprehended in a Divine Law; and therefore in the

5. Fifth place, God has left those to be determined by particular Churches and
Governors, and has only commanded the substantials of his worship, and given
general Rules for all things to be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40.
and for mutual edification; and the lesser circumstances and adjuncts that
belong to Divine worship, those he has lest undetermined and indifferent; and
those to whom he has committed the Government of the Church, they are to settle
those for prevention of confusion and disorder, according to the rules of
Prudence and those general measures which God has given in the Gospel. It is
plain he has no where Commanded them himself, nor can there be any particular
directory for them produced out of the Scriptures; and as plain it is that
there would be perpetual confusion and disorder in the Church if these were not
appointed in several places, by those who are Governors of it: and when they
are so they are to be obeyed and observed, when there is nothing in them that
is contrary to a Law of God; they cannot be unlawful, when no Law forbids
them, but they may become necessary in their use, when they were indifferent in
their nature, by a Lawful Authority 's commanding them; and surely there can
be no sin or superstition in them upon that account. Which that I may then
clear the particular Ceremonies and Impositions of our Church from, I shall
very freely and openly give you my thoughts in some farther particulars, about
the lawful and the superstitious use of these things in the worship of God.

1. I own that there ought to be no new parts of worship other than what God
himself has appointed; there may be new circumstances and adjuncts appointed,
but no real and substantial parts of Divine worship: As for Example no human
Authority can institute new Sacraments, as the Church of Rome does, or more
Sacramental parts of worship, than those two which Christ himself has
appointed, to wit, Baptism and the Lord's Supper; but whether Baptism shall be
performed by sprinkling or by dipping, that is but a circumstance which the
Church may determine, according to the difference of the Climate or the
strength of the Child, or the season of the year; and is left to every
Minister's discretion in his own Church, and so also whether it shall be by
single or a trine immersion; this, as not being an essential of Baptism, has
been variously determined. So in the other Sacrament none can add or take away
from an essential part of Christ's own Institution, as the Papists do in
depriving the Laity of the Cup; but whether we shall take this in a posture of
sitting or kneeling, or (which is very ancient) standing, is not essential to
it, but what the Church may appoint, as it thinks most becoming so solemn a
Duty, and most suiting the Prayers and Devotions that are joined with it, which
no doubt kneeling is. So farther to use Adoration and Invocation to God alone,
and not to Angels or Saints, is a necessary duty; but whether we should pray to
God with a form or without it, this is not necessary, though the former be much
more convenient in public, to prevent the many faults and undecencies of
extemporary effusions: so whether we adore God by bowing, or by prostration, or
by kneeling, or by standing, as the ancient Church did between Easter and
Pentecost, is only a new manner or circumstance of adoration, not a new act or
part of it. And this I have the more carefully illustrated, that we may see the
difference between parts of worship, and only accidents and appendages and
circumstances of worship; The Church of England appoints only the latter, not
any substantial worship or any parts of it, but what God himself has appointed,
as will appear farther.

2. That which is in it self very Lawful and Innocent may become superstitious
by the opinion which he that uses it, has of it; as if he thinks it is a means
to please God, and procure his favor, and that it has such a virtue in it self
to do this, as that God would be pleased with us for the doing this, and
displeased with us if we should not do it, merely for it self, though there were
no human Authority that required it of us; as the Jews thought that their
washing of their hands would please God, and that it was a defilement of their
Consciences to eat with unwashen hands, which was the mistake our Savior
reproves them for, Mat. 15.20. their superstitious opinion of that Ceremony,
and the Tradition of their Elders to think that it was a piece of Sanctity and
Religion to wash their hands, and that it was a sin and real defilement of
their Consciences, not to do it; to ascribe a true spiritual Virtue to an
outward Ceremony, as that it expiated inward guilt, and was not a mere
indifferent matter of decency, which was the true fault of the Jews in that
matter. And such a superstitious opinion the Papists have of their Holy Water,
that it cleanses them from venial sins, and drives away the Devil; as they also
say of the sign of the Cross, that it has a proper efficiency against the power
of the Devil; and that their Ceremonies have a real efficacy, and produce
spiritual effects upon those that use them; that they are operative of Grace,
or that they have any proper and real goodness in them, antecedent to the
Command of Authority, and their being subservient to meet order and decency,
and to the external solemnity of Religion. This indeed makes them
superstitious, and this the Pharisees thought of their Traditions, and
therefore taught for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, Matthew 15.9. i. e.
their own commands and impositions, as if they had had a like Divine Authority
and Institution, and had had an equal Authority if not superior to the Laws of
God; for they sometimes made void the Law of God by their Traditions. But this
the Church of England wholly disclaims, and therefore in the

3. Third place, its own declarations concerning the nature and use, and design
of all its Rites and Ceremonies do sufficiently vindicate it, from the least
shadow or semblance of superstition. It declares that it looks on the Rites and
Ceremonies used in the Liturgy, as things in their own nature indifferent and
alterable, and that changes and alterations may be made as seems necessary or
expedient to those in Authority; and that every Country is at liberty to use
their own Ceremonies, and that it neither condemns others nor prescribes to
them. These are its own words in the Preface to the Common Prayer, and there is
most excellent Temper and Wisdom in them; it declares that they are appointed
only for order and decency, and not for any virtue or spiritual efficacy; it
declares concerning kneeling at the Sacrament, that it is only a decent
posture, and that it is not designed to give any Adoration to the Elements.
Concerning the Cross in Baptism it makes it no part of the Sacrament, but owns
the Child to be Baptized without it, and requires it not in private Baptism,
and that it is only a sign that the Child is become the Disciple of the
Crucified Jesus, and is not ashamed to wear his Badge upon it; it attributes no
peculiar holiness to its Ceremonies as the Papists do to theirs; it ascribes no
spiritual virtue and efficacy, nor makes them operative of Grace, but declares
that they are only for order and decency, and are indifferent in their own
nature, even after they are determined, and that they are required only by
virtue of that general obedience that we owe to lawful Authority. And he that
will think there is any superstition in these, may in time come to the Quakers
principle, and think it superstition to pull off his hat; but so far is the
Church of England from all the superstitions of the Roman Church, and so wise
and moderate in its whole constitution, that as I believe it in my Conscience
to be the best Church in the World, and the farthest from Superstition; so I do
not at all doubt but the Papists themselves as well as others have raised and
promoted this loud outcry of superstition against it, as knowing that it is the
greatest Enemy to their superstitious worship, and that it is impossible to
bring in their fopperies and superstitions, till the manly and decent worship
of the Church of England be run down and destroyed; which God in his mercy
prevent, and which, I hope, our Dissenting Brethren will endeavor to prevent
also, if they are truly Enemies to superstition. But in the

4. Fourth place I must plainly tell 'em that they are more guilty of
superstition in avoiding the Communion of our Church for the sake of those
indifferent Rites and Ceremonies, than that is for imposing 'em; for it is as
truly superstition to think God will be offended at little things, and
displeased with us for doing what is no way sinful or unlawful, as to think
he will be pleased with us for what is indifferent, and no way good in its
self. Superstition does as often proceed from an anxious and ungrounded fear as
from a fond and vain hope; and as he is superstitious in the outward things of
Religion, who lays a greater stress upon them than they deserve, who thinks
Religion lies in them, and that God is pleased with them merely for themselves;
so he is as truly so, who thinks there is a great evil or sin in them, and
avoids them upon that account and thinks he should displease God, if he should
observe 'em. This is not only disobedience to our Governors, and to lawful
Authority which is a great sin, when they command nothing that is unlawful,
that is contrary to any law of God; for if we must not obey them in such a
case, we must obey them in nothing at all, if we must not obey them in thing;
indifferent; and if it be a sin to obey them in such a case, it is a sin that
neither God nor Man have made so, but the quite contrary. Besides this I say,
and the breach of Christian Unity, and the horrid guilt of Schism and
Separation which can never be justified but where things unlawful and not
things indifferent are Commanded and made Terms of Communion; besides this, I
say, it is truly superstition to think it unlawful to Communicate with us, for
the sake of indifferent Ceremonies; to think God is offended or displeased at
what is in it self very innocent, and is confessed by themselves to be so in its
own nature before it was imposed.

3. I come now to consider the last and third head of discourse; that is the
Causes and the Cure of superstition. And as to the Causes they are as many and
the same, as of false Religion or false Worship of God, for that is the notion
of superstition; it is a religious sense of the mind mixed with great error and
darkness; nay, it is not only Religion blind, but crazed and distempered too; in
some it is come to a perfect rage and distraction; as in the bloody and
barbarous superstitions of the Heathens, who offered up their Slaves and
Children as Sacrifices to their Deities, and thought it Religion to murder
themselves and sprinkle the Altars with human gore; in others the frenzy is not
so high nor does it work so strongly, but puts 'em only upon foolish, and
antic, and silly ways of worshipping and pleasing God, and discovers it self
in lesser symptoms. It is the design of superstition to please the Deity, but
it uses wrong ways, and does something that is very improper in order to its
Design. It is very forward in Religion, and like the Clown that would be very
mannerly and over officious, but knows not how, and so commits a thousand
rudenesses and indecencies in his awkard deportment; so does the superstitious
make shows and appearances of courtship to Heaven, but he is out in all of
them, and does not what is proper, what is really obliging and acceptable to it.

The Devil not being able to destroy the religious sense that is in our minds,
not being able to root out that which Nature has planted in every man's breast,
a sense of a God and a Divine Being above us; he endeavors to spoil and
corrupt that as much as he can, and to sow such cockle and tares among the good
and natural seed of religion as may quite choke it and make it unfruitful; as
may alter its kind, and make it produce such fruit as is not true and genuine,
but quite of another nature, as looks like religion, and like the Apples of
Sodom seem more fair outwardly, but is another thing within; because he cannot
hinder men from being Religious, but there is something within themselves will
make them so in spite of all his attempts and designs to the contrary,
therefore he will make 'em superstitious; because he cannot stop the religious
instinct and inclination of their minds, he will determine and set it wrong;
because he cannot dry up that natural spring of Religion that rises up in every
ones breast, he will poison and corrupt it; and because Religion is so deeply
and strongly rooted in human nature, that it can never be wholly plucked up by
him, therefore he will graft upon it such false and superstitious principles as
shall quite alter it is nature; and though they are fed and nourished by a
religious sense at the bottom, yet this vine shall bring forth Thorns, and this
Fig Tree Thistles, and from this sweet Fountain shall come forth Salt and
bitter Waters: by a superstitious mixture Religion shall be changed and
perverted, both in its nature and its effects; This is the saddest mischief to
true Religion, that it should be thus made to destroy it self, that its force
and power should be turned upon its self, and it should be consumed like some
Animals by what grows out of it self: It Is thus the Devil most successfully
countermines God, and destroys Religion, by turning it into superstition, which
how it is done, and by what means effected, I shall endeavor to show you in
three prrticulars.

1. By making Men vicious and wicked, for though superstition may often grow up
in weak and silly minds that may be innocent and far from being guilty of very
great and notorious vices; yet I believe the first and most general cause of
superstition in the World is Vice and Wickedness; the Devil has first drawn Men
to that, and then has led them into all manner of errors and falsehoods; he has
first debauched their morals and then their understandings; he has first
wrought upon their Wills and Affections by abominable Lusts and Vices, and then
he has quickly corrupted their Judgments and led 'em into all manner of
mistakes in Religion. The superstition of the Heathen World arose, I doubt not,
from that horrible corruption of manners that was among them; they would never
have set up such a Religion as they did, made up of nothing almost but
obscenity and filthiness, cruelty and blood, apishness and folly, had not they
been as the Apostle represents the Heathen World, Romans 1. Vain in their
imaginations and filled with all manner of unrighteousness, implacable and
unmercifull in their own tempers, and given up to the most beastly Lusts and
unnatural Lewdnesses; these Vices in themselves naturally lead them to such a
false Religion and such superstitious abominations as they were guilty of. But
as their manners decayed so did the true Religion and the right worship of God,
and as vice got ground so did superstition, and they always grew up and
increased, and like Hippocrates his Twins, lived and died together. What hidden
cause thus linked them together, and how they came to be such inseparable
Companions may seem strange when superstition owns and acknowledges a God, has
a great sense of him upon the mind; but if we consider that this sense of a
God, when it has not had such a due effect as it ought upon it, so as to
preserve it virtuous and Innocent, but Lust and Wickedness and the Temptations
of the Devil have overcome it; this sense of its own Wickedness joined with the
sense of a God, does very naturally and easily bring it to superstition. If it
had no sense of a God, nor no belief of such a being at all; if it could get
rid of that, which it never can, then indeed there would be no ground of
superstition, and this way the Atheist would free himself from all
superstitious fears: or if it were not vicious and so not sensible of its own
horrid guilt and wickedness and its obnoxiousness to this God above, neither
then would it be superstitious; but when it is thus sensible of a great and
just God, which is the avenger of such crimes as it knows it has been highly
guilty of, this is the first thing that brings it to superstition, because in
the

2. Second place this causes a dreadful fear and terrible apprehension of God
upon it; its own guilt scares and affrights it and draws terrible Ideas and
Images of God upon its mind, so that it looks upon him only as a Malefactor
does upon his severe Judge, his Jailor, or his Executioner: it sees nothing but
frowns in his face, and anger in his eyes, and Thunder and Lightning in his
hand, and fancies all the Instrumenes of Torture and Punishment ready to be
applied to it; And in such a case as this is, what would it not do to pacify
and appease this Deity that it thus dreads? what a dreadful fright and passion
must it be in, when it can think of nothing that will do it? how will it be
trying every thing it can think of? Come before his altars and bring thousands
of rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil, if it were rich enough, and give its
first born for its transgression, and part with the fruit of its own body for
the sin of its soul, Micah 6.7. and shed its own blood for to make some
expiation for its guilt? Nothing is so mean and servile, nothing so cruel and
bloody, so shameful and scandalous, but a Soul overwhelmed with a
superstitious fear, will be attempting and trying, be it never so unagreeable
to the Divine Nature, and never so unfit and unsuitable to please him: there is
just ground of being afraid of God, when we are sensible of our guilt, and it is
not this is superstition; but when this fear puts Men upon foolish and undue,
and abominable ways to appease him, and gives us such a dreadful Idea and
Apprehension of him as quite excludes all the thoughts of his Goodness and
Mercy, and puts the mind only into an excessive fright and fit of horror, then
it is so. I cannot think that ever mankind would have formed such a conception
of God, had not their guilt been the medium, through which they beheld him; there
is nothing in the Divine Nature should cause this superstitious dread of him,
nor draw him in such black and ghastly features as these are; but no wonder
that God looks very terrible to a very wicked and a very guilty mind;
especially in the

3. Third place, when it is ignorant of any true and certain way to please or
appease God, to procure his favor or avert his anger, which is the other cause
of superstition; the superstitious are a sort of timorous persons that are
always in the dark, where they have frightfull Images always before them, and
black and ghastly apparitions rise up in their fancies, and they know not which
way to turn themselves, nor how to avoid the furies and specter of their own
thoughts; They cannot tell how to deliver themselves from this sad state, and
thus anxious and perplexed, they apply themselves to any Saint or any Demon,
be it good or bad, that they are told can help them; they run to the altar, and
throw on any thing that may free 'em from punishment: like persons in a
Tempest, they will part with their richest goods to save themselves; they will
perform every Rite and go through every Mystery, and undergo any kind of
Penance; they will whip themselves and walk barefoot, and run to the shrines of
any Saint; and whatever superstitious ignorance shall advise 'em to, this
they will comply withal, and all out of great fear and silly ignorance, and not
knowing what it is that will truly recommend 'em to Heaven and procure the
Divine favor. And therefore as to the Cure of superstition, which is the last
thing I am to speak to, I account a right knowledge of Religion, and a true
conception of the Divine Nature to be the cure and remedy for superstition; and
by this way our blessed Savior, who came to destroy all superstition and false
worship out of the World, has most effectually accomplished his design, by
assuring us that God is a Being of infinite Goodness and Compassion to his
Creatures, who is not apt to be angry nor provoked with little matters, and who
is very placable and willing to be reconciled whenever we have done a great
fault that truly offends him; who is not a peevish and angry Master whom it is
impossible to please, but a kind and gentle Father whom nothing but wilful
disobedience and impudent undutifullness will anger and displease; who though he
is not a soft and easy Being, who is to be flattered with shows, and imposed
upon by little tricks and sorry performances; yet we may be sure to oblige him
by being honest and sincere and doing what lies in our power; who, though we have
a great many imperfections and a great many frailties, yet will accept whatever
we offer him in the integrity of our hearts; and will not be extreme or severe
to mark what is done amiss; or take advantage of the unavoidable failures of
Human Nature: who is so far from that, that he has provided a certain remedy
for our most wilful miscarriages, and declared himself ready to pardon the
most heinous offenses of the greatest sinners upon the most equitable and
gracious terms that can be desired. Such a representation of God and the Divine
nature, as this is which Christianity has given us, is enough to banish all
superstitious fear and unreasonable dread of him; this will remove all that
anxious and perplexing astonishment, which we might otherwise be oppressed
withal, when we looked up to an Almighty power above us, and were uncertain how
he would deal with us, and would not tell by what ways we should either
purchase his good will or avoid his displeasure. Now we know very certainly how
we may do that, by living virtuously, and observing the eternal Laws of
Goodness and Righteousness, by a hearty penitence for all our past faults, and
a sincere obedience for the time to come; by living up to the excellent rules
of the Gospel, and the excellent Example of our Blessed Master. By a true
understanding and an honest practice of the Christian Religion, we shall be
delivered from all the fears and uncertainties, from all the darkness and
ignorance of superstition; and that we may be so, I shall add further two Rules
or Advices to this purpose.

1. Let us bring our minds truly to love God: This the superstitious person
does not, he is afraid of God and trembles at the thoughts of him, as a Slave
does at the sight of his merciless Patron; but he wishes there were no such
being as he fansios God to be, and it would be the most joyful thing in the
World if he could get out of his irresistible power. He finds indeed that is
impossible; and so he crouches to him, as a Captive does to his Insolent
Conqueror, that has him in Chains and leads him in Triumph tied to his Chariot
Wheels; but he hates him in his heart even while he prays to him; and when he
bows the most submissively before him, his heart within rises up against him,
and there he curses him, whilst he flatters him with his lips. Such a black and
dismal apprehension the superstitious person has of God, whom he fancies to be
a cruel, severe, angry, touchy Being, an Almighty power without goodness; which
is to make him an infinite evil, instead of a good, and an Almighty Tyrant,
instead of a Righteous God. This makes it impossible for him to love him; he
may worship him, but it is as Plutarch says, some saluted those Tyrants and
built Statues to them whom they would have killed and dethroned, had it been in
their power; he may come to the Temple, but as he says, it is as if it were to
the nests of Dragons, or the Caves of wild Beasts, for he imagines the God that
dwells there to be as hurtful and mischievous as any of those, only more
powerful, and he has just such a conception of him, as the Indians of the
Devil whom yet they worship. I know no greater blasphemy to the Divine Nature,
than to conceive thus of it, as the superstitious person does; nor no worse
Idolatry than to set up such an Idol of fear and terror in our Souls, instead
of the great and good God. I will not say as some do, that Atheism is better
than this, to deny a God than to think thus ill of him; but this is certain
that the superstitious would be an Atheist if he durst, and it is much against
his Will, his Wishes, and his Inclinations, to believe there is a God; and
therefore to prevent all superstitious and undue fear of God, let us avoid all
such false notions and misapprehensions of him, as will make it impossible for
us to love him.

2. Let us love and practice Virtue and Goodness, and only by that means hope
to commend our selves to God, and fit our selves for Heaven, and so we shall
avoid most of the little tricks, the cheats and devices of superstition; the
design of those is to supersede honest Virtue and inward Goodness, and by some
other ways to think to purchase the Divine Favor and the Happiness of Heaven.
It Is very hard and difficult to men to be inwardly good and exactly virtuous,
to drive out every known sin, and live in the practice of every duty, which is
the plain and the honest pathway to Heaven; and therefore superstition would
find out other by-roads and easier passages, and would have Religion lie in
more easy and outward performances; and would relieve it self against that
strait and narrow way, which the Gospel directs us to, and would have it
suffice to be sent to Heaven by an Absolution or an Indulgence. Thus by a Pass,
as it were, by the Priest or Pope to the other World, by making a short
Confession, and being a little contrite and absolved and anointed on the
Deathbed, the work is quickly done, and as well he thinks as if the Man had
lived a Saint, or died a Martyr; or if he had been so Religious in his life
time, as to tell over his Beads every day, and carry a Crucifix always about
him, and perform the Penance of his Confessor, and gone a few Pilgrimages to a
few Saints, then he has done such works as are very meritorious, though his
Savior never Commanded one of them; and he must be thought to be very
Religious, though it is such a Religion as the Gospel is a perfect stranger to.
But Superstition is for placing Religion in some other things than the Gospel
does, in some inventions of its own, in some little and easy and trifling
performances, in some of the externals and shadows of Religion; in a strict
observance of some lesser duties, and a zealous concern for inconsiderable
matters, in being over forward for the little adjuncts and appendages of
Religion, but very negligent of that, which is the true life and substance of
it; and in vainly believing to please God by some other things than by a
righteous and good mind, and the practice of universal Holiness. Thus did the
Jews think that often washing their Hands would make their Souls clean; that to
observe the lesser duties of the Law and the Rites and Traditions of their
Elders, was the way to render them extraordinary Holy and Religious, though
they foully neglected the weightier duties of Judgment, Mercy and Truth.
Superstition will often overdo in some parts of Religion, and therefore puts on
the face of greater sanctity, and is a kind of excess in Religion; but it is at
the bottom a great defect, a want of true and inward goodness, and it would
supply that defect by other shows and appearances, and a mighty zeal in little
things; it would compound as it were with Heaven, and commute its sorry and
worthless performances for actions of true and substantial goodness: It always
lays too much value upon the little things of Religion, and does but little
esteem and not heartily love Morality and inward Goodness; and therefore the
truest principle to free us from all superstitious follies and mistakes in
Religion, is this, That nothing will please God, but being truly and inwardly
good; that nothing will commend us to his favor, but a Virtuous Mind and a
Holy Life, and the sincere practice of all the moral substantial duties of
Religion; and that without those all other little things in Religion will be
vain and idle and insignificant, which is the truest principle in the World,
and the best preservative against Superstition.

The Eleventh Sermon.
ACTS XXVI. 8. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God
should raise the dead?


THe Resurrection of the dead is an Article of our Faith, of that weight and
importance, that as it confirms and strengthens all natural Religion, (for if
Men's bodies rise, most undoubtedly there is a future State) so it is the very
Basis and Foundation of Christianity, without which our Faith in Christ is, as
the Apostle says, vain and ungrounded. It seems not so necessary indeed for the
truth of Religion in general, to believe the Resurrection of the flesh or body,
since the Soul without that may be capable of Happiness or Misery in another
state; and the belief of this alone may be sufficient to the designs of Virtue
and Religion: But Christianity lays a very great stress upon it, makes the
Resurrection of the body as necessary and fundamental an Article upon some
accounts, as the immortality of the soul; and this because of the Resurrection
of our Blessed Savior, which as it is the great demonstration of the truth of
our Religion, so it is an Argument of the Resurrection of all other Humane
Bodies; for if he be risen again with the same Body, with which he lived, and
with that is gone into the Heavens, it is fit we should follow him thither with
our bodies too, with our whole Humane Nature, which he was pleased not only to
assume upon Earth, but to carry up to be an Inhabitant of the mansions above;
if he our head be raised, we his Members must be raised with him; he the first
fruits from the dead, has by his Resurrection Consecrated our Bodies to Life
and Immortality. It would be very strange if he should carry his Humane Body
into Heaven, were there no others of the same nature to follow him, so that as
the Apostle argues, 1 Cor. 15.13. If there be no Resurrection of the dead then
is Christ not risen. It does therefore highly concern us to maintain and defend
this main post, and strongest hold of our Religion, by which our Christianity
must either stand or fall; and that the more, because Infidelity and Irreligion
is most apt to be making its attempts and assaults upon it in this place, the
weakest as is supposed which belongs to it, and to represent this article above
all others, as an impossible and incredible thing. There were found not only
among the Athenians some of the Sect of Epicurus probably, who when they heard
of the Resurrection mocked at it, Acts 17.32. and Pliny, I remember, reckons it
among one of the things that exceed the power of God, revocare defunctos; but
even amongst the Jews, there were some known to St. Paul, who thought it a
thing unreasonable and unfit to be believed, to whom he directs himself in this
his defense of Christianity; the Sadduces were a numerous and prevailing Sect
among them, who say there is no Resurrection, neither Angel nor Spirit, Acts
23.8. There are too many of their mind in our days, who cannot believe or
conceive any spiritual or immaterial substances; and who cannot think that a
body after it has been dead, and lain rotting so many hundred or thousand
years, and been dispersed into ten thousand atoms, and scattered into as many
different places, and had a thousand other bodies made out of it, that this
should be brought together again and rise the same body it was before. Against
these modern Sadduces and Unbelievers, these pretenders to Reason and
Philosophy, who expose the articles of revealed Religion, and especially this
of the Resurrection, I shall endeavor to vindicate Christianity, and to make
good St. Paul's question to them of old, Why should it be thought a thing
incredible that God should raise the dead; or what that question plainly
implys, The Resurrection is not in it self an incredible thing. And this I
shall do by these following considerations.

1. There are a great many other things which we see and know to be true and
have no manner of doubt of, which if we consider and endeavor to give account
of them, they seem as puzling and difficult to our reason as the Resurrection.

2. If we take in the almighty power and infinite Wisdom of God, this will
remove all the difficulty and incredibility that seems to be in the
Resurrection.

3. We must take in this, the power and wisdom of God, or else we cannot be
able to give account not only of the Resurrection, but not of any the most
commonland ordinary appearance in nature.

4. Our not knowing the particular uses and purposes that our bodies shall
serve for after they are raised, should not make the Resurrection incredible to
us.

5. If we consider how far the body which is raised, is to be the same with
that which is buried and corrupted, we shall not think it so incredible that
God should raise the dead.

1. There are a great many other things, etc.

These unbelieving Sadduces and wary Philosophers, who dare not let their
thoughts go beyond visible nature, nor step any thing farther into revelation
than reason shall guide and go along with them, may yet find a great many
things there as puzling and unaccountable as the Resurrection, and which they
would think as incredible too, were they not common and frequent; They cannot
imagine how a body when it has been corrupted many years and turned into dust,
and all its parts separated and divided, and mixed with a great many other
things, should have all those again united and brought together into the same
vital frame and lively Compages: and can they imagine how this body of theirs
could be formed at first, and have all its various and different parts made out
of a principle as unlikely for an humane body to rise out of at first, as out
of the dust afterward? Can they comprehend how the Pullus or Chick should be
hatched out of the Egg, how the Colliquamentum should be set on moving, and the
Cicatricula begin the first race of life? and what should guide the unthinking
matter to draw every vital part without any error? and besides, all other
things how Bones, and Claws, and Feathers should grow out of a mere fluid? As
well one would think might we conceive a Ship with its Keel, Sails and all its
Tackling to be made out of the Water, in which it sloats; and the strongest
Castles to be built, if not in the air, yet out of it, as all the strong and
solid parts of an Animals Body, its Bones, and Muscles, and Cartilages to be
formed as they are. Thou who think it incredible for a dead and corrupted
body to arise again, thou would think it as incredible to have any animals
body formed as it is, if there were not every day a thousand instances of it.
Thou who know not how that can be done, know as little what is the way of
the spirit, as the wise man speaks, Eccles. 11.5. or how life is first given to
the Embryo, or how the Bone; do grow in the Womb: Nay thou as little know
the manner how this body of ours can be nourished and repaired; how that which
is in continual flux by perspiration, and has some of its parts dying as it
were and departing every moment, so that we are not the same in a less time
than every seven years; how this should be made new, and the Milky Chyle repair
all the wasted parts of the Body, and consequently be turned into Bones and
Sinews, it is not easy to account even for this daily Resurrection, as it were,
and continual restoring of our decaying bodies. But I need send these doubters
and unbelievers of the Resurrection, only to that Emblem of it which the
Apostle has given, 1 Cor. 15. that of Corn sown or buried in the ground, which
seems there first to die and corrupt, and then it passes through abundance of
alterations, shoots into a stringy root and grassy top, grows into a stem, a
stalk, an ear, and some of the least of Seeds waxes a great Tree, so that the
Fowls of the air may lodge in the branches of it; and yet these after they are
so altered and quite lost, one would think in the various Metamorphoses they
have passed through; have every Seed its own body given it again, as the Apostle
expresses it, 1 Cor. 15.37. and rise as it were again the very same sort and
species, though it be mixed with a thousand others. This seems almost as strange,
if we reflect upon it, as the Resurrection of our bodies after all their
corruptions and alterations; and it might be thought as incredible too, if it
were not frequent and familiar to us: As there are a great many appearances in
nature, which though common and unregarded; yet to those who are strangers to
them, they seem impossible and no way to be believed. The works of God and
Nature have so much of wonder in them beyond all humane Conception and
Understanding, that if they were not daily before our Eyes, we should think
them as incredible as those difficult matters which some complain of in
Revelation. But I need offer but one Phenomenon of Nature, to represent the
Resurrection by.

And that is that Revolution of Nature which we call the Spring, which is the
general Resurrection as it were of terrestrial nature; in which after it has
grown old and hoary in Winter, dead as it were and stiff with cold, and every
part of it was shrunk, and crept into its grave, and been locked up there as in
a cold Sepulcher, yet how in the spring does it recover life again? how is a
vigorous warmth diffused into it? and how on a sudden is all the beauty and
gayety, all the strength and vigor, the health and fruitfullness of youth
bestowed upon it? every Plant and Herb and Flower, revives and flourishes and
puts on as it were a new and glorious body, and yet every one its own body. And
how this should be, and how every dry tree should bloom and blossom and have
life and say conveyed to its withered branches, and the same juice turned into
leaves and buds and fruit of so many kinds; This seems as strange as how dry
Bones should live, and how flesh and sinews should again come upon a Skeleton,
Ezekiel. 37.8. and all we, who daily see these wonderful things before our Eyes,
these constant Miracles of Nature, which if we consider and endeavor to give
account of, are as puzling and difficult as the Resurrection; Why should it be
thought a thing incredible with us and especially with any curious searcher of
Nature, that God should raise the dead?

2. If we take in the almighty Power and Wisdom of God, this will remove all
the difficulty and incredibility that seems to be in the thing: So that the
very first principle of Religion will make all the difficulty of the
Resurrection vanish; the considering that there is an infinite Being who has
power sufficient to do every thing that implies not a contradiction, and is not
in the nature of the thing utterly impossible or contrary to some standing and
fundamental principle of truth and certainty, nor does any way reflect upon his
other perfections of Wisdom, Justice and Goodness; this will make the whole
thing very easy to us: for how easy will it be to him who put every part of
matter into that regular order that constitutes the Heavens above and earth
below, and all Plants and Animals that are upon it, he who founded the Earth by
his power and stretched out the Heavens by his understanding as the Scripture
speaks: He who tells the number of the Stars, and calls them all by their
names, as the Psalmist expresses it, Ps. 147.4. He who made and moved and
knows, and permeates every part of matter that is in the vast Creation, and
ranks and orders it in its due place; how cannot he put and bring together all
the scattered parts of our dead bodies? He from whom our substance was not hid
when we were made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the
Earth, Psam. 139.15. whose Eyes did see our substance, yet being unperfect, and
in whose Book were all our members written, which in continuance were fashioned
when as yet there was none of them, v. 16. how cannot he also as easily know
and rejoin all the parts and members of our corrupted bodies; He by whom the
very hairs of our heads are numbered, how easy will it be for him to know the
body of every man, and every part and Member of that body; he who gives life to
every little Creature, and to those innumerable Animals that are in the World;
who preserves so many thousand Essences by a continual influx derived from
himself, and has millions of Angels and other Souls, who live and move and have
their several beings in him: In a word, he who made and preserves all things by
a word of his mouth, and needs nothing but the mere willing of a thing to make
it; how great is this our Lord and of great power; his understanding is
insinite, Psalm. 147.5. and he can do any thing that implies not a
contradiction, nor is contrary to the reason and nature of things, nor contrary
to his own other perfections of Wisdom, Justice and Goodness, as I shall show
briefly the Resurrection is not. 1. Then there is no incapacity in the subject,
nor no contradiction in the nature of the thing to make the Resurrection
incredible: A dead body is no more incapable of life than a body at rest is of
motion, or than a torch put out is of being kindled again; and the soul may as
well be united to it afterward, as is was at first. It may be brought into it
when raised from the Grave, by the same Laws of the Universe, or the same vital
Congruity by which it came into it, when it was first formed; and every soul
may as well be directed to its own body then, as it was before: the greatest
difficulty in the subject is this, That the parts of the body are so scattered
and divided in several places, and made the parts perhaps of other bodies, that
its hard to conceive how they should all come together and be united to their
proper bodies; but though they are scattered they are not lost; every Atom, be it
never so small, is still to be found in the vast mass of matter: and whatever
alterations it may have past through, yet has its being and subsistence some
where in the World, and so may with Power and Wisdom be put together again;
like the many little pins and small pieces of a great Machine, though they are
all taken to pieces and misplaced, yet they may all be set together again by a
skillful hand. Every part of matter is pervaded and filled with a spirit that
governs all its motions and knows the minutest particles of it, and can range
and order them as it pleases, and there is nothing hid from the power thereof:
There is not the least appearance of a contradiction for a thing that was
destroyed or dispersed to become the same it was before; it seems nothing so
hard as for a thing to be that was not before. So that the Resurrection cannot
be thought by any so incredible as the Creation, and he that is but a Theist
and owns natural Religion, cannot with reason stick or boggle at this Article
of Revelation, and he that believes an Almighty Power, could make all things
out of nothing, need not doubt his power to make a thing what it was before.

2. Neither is the Resurrection contrary to any certain principle of truth,
which the God of truth has established in the nature and reason of things; if
it were, it could be no object of Divine power, for God's power must not
destroy the truth of things; there are certain principles of truth and
knowledge which must be kept inviolable, or else we run into boundless
Skepticism, and can never know any thing to be true or false: and therefore we
must not call in the Almighty power to destroy those, as the Papists do in
Transubstantiation, which must be as certainly false as we can know any thing
to be certainly true; so that neither infallibility can uphold it, nor infinite
power effect it, without destroying those certain principles by which we can
know any thing to be true; by destroying the nature and properties of a body;
by making the whole no greater than a part; by taking away all evidence of
sense about its proper objects, and if we remove those we have no way left to
know whether any thing be true or false. But the Resurrection is no way liable
to any such absurdities, nor is it in the least contrary to any certain and
natural principles of truth; for then it would be not only incredible but
absolutely false, and impossible to be true: no Article of Christian Faith is
or can be so, but as we say, though it be above our reason, yet is not against
it. The blessed Trinity in Unity, though it be of another nature, of an infinite
and incomprehensible being, which may communicate it self in such a manner as
we know not; yet however it be too big for our Conception, is not contradictory
to any thing we certainly know to be true; and though it be an Idea by it self it
destroys none of those Idea's we have of other things.

3. That the Resurrection is no way inconsistent with any of the Divine
perfections (which are the bounds also which the Divine power can never
violate) is so plain, that it rather seems to follow and be fairly inferred
from them; for what more agreeable to Gods goodness than as that he gave us our
Souls at first, and put those Souls into curious and well framed bodies, which
are the other part of Humane Nature, which makes us to be Men and Beings of
such a rank and order in the Creation; so that he should continue the same
entire nature to us, as long as he is pleased to continue us in being. It would
be a charge methinks upon the Wisdom of God, that he should give Man so curious
a body above any other Creatures, and yet suffer that to continue and last a
much shorter time than the bodies of many other, not only Animals, but Plants
and Trees do; if he did not design that this noble fabric should be rebuilt
and repaired again after death; and that the Soul should have a longer term of
abode in it afterward and in reversion, than it enjoys in this present life.
It would seem strange if these two Friends should be so closely and intimately
united here, but for a few days if they were not to meet again and dwell
together for ever; and that God should make us of such a compound nature in
this life, and of a quite other nature in the next, this would not be to keep
that wise order and regular course of thing, that he does in the whole System
of the Creation. As to the Divine Justice, that seems to be more exactly
answered by raising the same bodies, (without which, we are hardly the same
persons) that every one may receive in his body according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.10. that not only
the same Souls, but the same Bodies, which have either glorified God by
Suffering or any other Virtue, or have been the Instrument of any sin, should
be glorified or tormented in another World; and that the whole of Humane
Nature, and not only a part of it, which the Soul is, should be made capable of
the everlasting rewards and punishments that are proper to it. The Resurrection
then is every way consistent with the perfections of the Divine Nature, and is
no way contrary to any natural principle of truth, nor implys any contradiction
in it; and therefore is a proper object of God's Almighty Power, and, by the
help of that, may be easily effected and accounted for.

4. And without this power of God nothing else can be effected in nature; we
must take in this, not only to give an account of the Resurrection, but of
every thing else we see done before us, and of every effect and appearance in
the visible World: how we were made at first and how our bodies were formed, is
as perfectly unaccountable without taking in the Divine Power and Wisdom, as
how we shall rise again; and so is every other Mystery of nature, if we well
consider it, and follow and trace it through all second causes, it will
necessarily bring us to the first; and we must resolve all at last into the
Power and Wisdom of that. How we move our bodies by the thought of our minds,
we know no more than how God shall raise them; what directs the spirits into
such Tracts and Muscles, and by what pullies they draw up the heavy parts, is
so admirable a Mechanism that it requires the same Divine Wisdom as to raise
the dead; how we live, how we think, and how we speak, is to a Philosopher as
curious and as secret as how we shall rise: every thing indeed is so in the
Volume of Nature, which has the plainest Characters of Divine Power and Wisdom
every where writ upon it, as being to teach every one that there is a God. To
look upward we see the Sun shines, but can we tell what light is, or how it
streams from the Sun to our Eye? how such a mass of sire should so long hold
together without being quenched or lessened? do we know how the Stars are sixth
to their Orbs? how those glistering gemms are set and fastened to the fluid
firmament? can we imagine what Pillars there are, upon which the Earth is
founded, and what it is supports the heavy Globe, and keeps it from sinking?
what it is that poizes, and makes it swim in the liquid Ether, and keeps it at
so just and exact a distance from the heavenly Bodies, so as to be neither
frozen nor burnt up? and can we be able to know what it is makes their motions
so regular and harmonious, so useful and serviceable to the World? what guides
their mighty bodies in such even Tracts? what draws the crooked Zodiac for the
Sun or Earth to move in? and keeps the violent and rapid matter from going on
in an infinite straight line, or some other way sallying and running out of
order? Can any man, who justly considers these things, give any account of them
without a wise God and Almighty Intelligence? not only a Sparrow cannot fall to
the ground without our Heavenly Father, as our Savior speaks, Matthew. 10.29.
but not a stone can sall thither, nor a spark fly upwards, however necessary
and natural that be, without, such a frame and such laws of matter and motion
as nothing but a wise Being can establish or cause to be observed. Why matter
is thus figured and disposed, and why such effects come from it we cannot tell;
as why grass is green, blood red, and not the quite contrary: as we cannot of
our selves make one hair white or black, as our Savior says, so neither can
we tell why it is so; but every Phenomenon must at last be resolved into the
Will and Wisdom of the first cause, and thither all true Philosophy must bring
us; and the same Divine Power is required in every the most common effect of
Nature, as in the Resurrection. But,

5. Our not fully knowing the uses and designs our bodies shall serve for after
they are raised, should not make the Resurrection incredible to us: What use,
some say will there be of the body in another World when the Soul alone is
capable of the rewards of it? I answer who can tell but the body may be of
extraordinary use to us in another World? perhaps it is a necessary part of
Humane Nature, and we are not our whole selves without it; perhaps the Soul is
never to be quite naked and wholly stripped of all matter and bodily indowment,
and that it is clothed with a thinner Vehicle when it puts off the thicker and
grosser flesh: perhaps no Beings in the World but God himself are to be pure
spirits, which was a very ancient opinion of some wise Men; perhaps the Angels
themselves have material vestures of a slaming fire, and a resplendent
brightness as they used always to appear; and if the Human Souls are not to be
uncloathed but clothed upon with our house which is from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.2.
What more fit than that the materials of this house should be taken out of its
former body, though greatly improved and advanced, as I shall show immediately?
who can tell what proper pleasures God shall fit for our bodies, and make them
such noble Organs for the Soul as shall be mighty useful to it? and who knows
whether that can enjoy all that alone without the body as with it, and that
there is not some new faculty or satisfaction resulting from its animating and
being united to a body, the Scripture representing the happiness of the other
state not to be complete till the general Resurrection? God alone can tell what
faculties and powers are fit for his Creatures in any state; and while we are
in this, we can know no more what is proper for us in the other, than an Embryo
not yet born can conceive what it shall need when it comes into the world: were
it not absolutely necessary, yet it seems very agreeable to Justice, to have
both the body and soul that were partners in Sin or Virtue, to be sharers in
the rewards of it. And if Christ the Captain of our Salvation is to be perfect
Man as well as perfect God in Heaven, and his glorious body is probably to be
the visible Shechinah of Heaven it self; the bodies of all good Christians
ought to rise and attend him, and be partakers with him of the same Glory, that
so human Nature even in its weakest and frailest part may eternally triumph
over death and the grave, and over him who had the power of both.

5. And Lastly, To take off the incredibility of the Resurrectionn, let us
consider how far the body that is raised is to be the same with that which is
buried and corrupted. We must not be too rigorous and exact in insisting upon
the same body; if we be, we cannot be said to have the same body two days
together: Our bodies are always in flow, and several parts of them are always
going off by insensible Transpiration, and others come in the place of them;
like a River, we call it the same, though its Water be always running and passing
away, and scarce any drop of it be exactly the same the next Tide: or as we
call that the same flame of a Candle all the while it is burning, which yet is
wasted every moment and supplied with other new parts of oil, so we have the
same body in our old Age that we had in our Youth. And this very body of ours
that was some time animated by our Souls, that this shall rise again the
Scripture is too plain to have it denied, as it is by the Socinians; the very
word Resurrection, supposes it to be in some sense the same body; and they
which rise again are said to be the same that were asleep, and lay in their
graves: so that if we had quite another new body given us at the day of
Judgment, this might be said to be new made or created, but not to rise again.
But yet it is not necessary that every part of matter which made up this Body
of ours at our Death, and was buried in the same Grave, should go to the making
up of our raised bodies. It is sufficient if this Earthly body of ours which we
had in this World, be the seed or seminal body as it were of the Resurrection
body, out of some part of which it is as truly raised, as the new Corn or Fruit
is out of the Corn or Kernel which was set or sowed; so the Apostle gives us
an account of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.36, 37, 38. in answer to that
question, How are the dead raised up? or with what bodies do they come? i. e.
how are those whose parts have been so variously mixed with other bodies, and
turned into the substance perhaps of other men, whose very bodies are again to
be raised, how shall every part of these men be raised up; when perhaps several
men might have parts of the same body, and therefore in the Resurrection whose
body shall it be, since many had some of it to be their body? and with what
body shall every one come, if it must be exactly the same, and yet that is so
very hard, if not some time impossible? To this the Apostle answers, Thou Fool,
that which thou sowest, is not quickened except it die: and that which thou
sowest, thou sowest not that body which shall be, but bare Grain, it may chance
of Wheat or some other Grain: But God gives it a body as it has pleased him,
and to every seed his own body: God does give every Man his own body, but not
so exactly the same, as not to be at all altered; but as a building is the same
which is repaired, though with a great many other materials; and as an ear of
Corn is the same with its seed, though it has taken in a good quantity of the
moisture of the Earth, and turned it into its own body. Those who have
curiously examined the Anatomy of Plants and Seeds, tell us, that in the little
Gemm or Eye of the Seed is contained the whole draught and the perfect Stamina
of the Plant, with its bark and leaves, and fruit, and all the lines of it
exactly drawn in little, which are after to be filled up and extended by the
heat of the Sun, and moisture of the Earth. And if so little a seed or kernel
can contain all the parts of a large stalk or great tree, who knows how much of
our present bodies may be sufficient to raise the same bodies out of again? and
how small a part of this corruptible matter may be the Embryo, as it were, of
our Heavenly bodies? It is certain these our bodies shall be so much altered,
that that which is sown in corruption, shall be raised in incorruption; and
that which is now a natural body shall be then a spiritual; not that it shall
be turned into a spirit, and lose its corporeal nature; but that it shall be
refined and made pliable to the Soul and Spirit, and to all its motions, and
stand in no need of those things that belong to the animal life. And yet it may
still be the same body for all those new modes and qualities, as a Jewel is the
same substance of the Earth, which was once a common fluid, and is now turned
into an Orient Pearl; and the most clear Crystal Glass is the same matter that
was before Sand and Ashes. The best Philosophy tells us there is no specific
difference in matter, but it is the same in substance, though its outward figure
color and other accidents be altered, which are but several modifications of
the same matter; and I can conceive God as easily to change these our mortal
corruptible bodies, into immortal and incorruptible ones, as he turns the
substance that every Animal eats into blood and spirits; and the moisture and
filth of the Earth that nourishes every flower and fruit into the most
beauteous color and most delicate taste. Cannot he give the Soul a shining and
a glorious body even out of this corruptible one, as well as he made the Sun
and Stars and all those luminous bodies out of the dark and gloomy Chaos?
Cannot he make our bodies to shine as the Stars of glory, as well as the Stars
themselves, which, though Heavenly bodies, yet are of the same substance with
Earthly matter? Cannot he make our bodies which are now a clog and burden to
the Soul, to be but like so many fiery Chariots to carry us up to Heaven? or
like so many Wings to move us nimbly wherever we please, and fleet us through
all the Heavenly Regions that are above? Cannot he do this, as well as he has
given Wings to the flame, and made that which arises out of smoke and foot to
cast forth rays and luster, and mount upwards? The glorified bodies of Men or
Angels are generally in Scripture compared to flame and light, their
countenance is then like lightning, and their raiment white as snow, as the
Angel is described, Mat. 28.3. and, as our Savior, when his body was
transfigured his face did shine as the Sun, and his raiment was white as the
light, Mat. 17.2. and so shall the bodies of good Men after the Resurrection,
be turned into such pure and glorious bodies, that they shall raise splendor
and beauty all about them; which though it be a great transmutation, yet by many
the like instances I have given, is neither impossible nor incredible to
conceive. The bodies indeed of wicked Men will be very much altered and lose
their animal and mortal nature, but they will be gross and heavy and sink their
Souls into the regions of Hell and Darkness; they will be like so many dismal
and filthy Dungeons to keep the Soul in chains of everlasting Darkness: or,
like so many poisoned shirts, like that of Hercules, that will scorch and
inflame and torture them beyond expression, and sticking close to them burn
them with poisonous flames, and fill them with the perpetual stench of sire and
brimstone. How the bodies of wicked men may be made the Instruments of torment
to their Souls, is easy to imagine from the exquisite pains they often give
them here; from whence we may conceive how they may be contrived to be the
dreadful racks of eternal death, where the miserable wretches may be always
suffering the pains of death without dying; and on which they may be made to
lie for ever, raging and gnawing their Tongues for pain, and blaspheming the
God of Heaven, because of their pains and their sores, to wit, of their bodies,
as they are described, Revel. 16.10. And here I could stop, and offer one
thought to those who are so fond and tender of their bodies here, who are for
indulging them in every Lust and every Pleasure, and think Happiness lies in
the mere delights of the body; what they will think of having these precious
parts, these dear bodies thus eternally and exquisitely tormented for the sake
of a few paulcry sins which are but for a moment: but having defended and
consirmed this article of our Christian Faith, the Resurrection of our bodies,
I must name but one general use of it, and that is, Let us all of us so live as
if we heartily believed it without making any the least doubt in our minds
about it; let no mists of. Infidelity overcast this Faith of ours, which as it
is certain by Revelation, so is far you see from being incredible by reason,
which was the point I was to consider and make out. It is a great satisfaction
to ease our thoughts from some difficulties about it, and have the
understanding as the eye, see things clearly without a film over it. But these
articles of faith are not only for Contemplation and the Entertainment of our
reason, but like Principles and Theorems in other Sciences, they are to be made
use of in practice, and to be drawn out and improved into use and action; no
truth in Religion, no Article of Faith is worth making out or proving, or
satisfying our selves about, if it be not some way or other useful to the
practice of Religion, and be not influential to the making us good and virtuous
in our lives: but the Resurrection has such a direct and immediate tendency to
do this, as it carries in it the assurance of a future state both of Soul and
Body, that if we fully believe it and are undoubtedly persuaded of it, it will
do its own work, and will necessarily promote Virtue and Religion; and be
effectual upon all our lives, did not a secret Skepticism and Insidelity, which
is the Vice of our Age hinder and defeat the power of it: Let the belief of it
therefore be firm and unshaken upon our minds, and let the efficacy of it be
powerful upon our Lives and Conversations; there is nothing more incredible in
the thing that our bodies should rise hereafter than that they were once formed
and born: there may be difficulties perhaps equal in the account of both, but
as no Man doubts the one, so he that well considers will have no reason to
dis-believe the other, or to think it incredible that God should raise the dead.

Let it raise us to thoughts and to things above, whither Christ is raised and
where he sits with his glorious body at God's right hand. Let us often ascend
thither in our minds now, whither we hope to ascend hereafter with our bodies
as well as our Souls: Let us consider that these Bodies of ours, as well as our
Souls, were made for higher designs and better enjoyments then any here of this
World, and that they ought to be the subjects of Purity and Virtue now, as they
are to be of Happiness hereafter; The Resurrection will raise our minds to a
great many noble thoughts, if we thoroughly consider it and really believe it,
and I hope we may be satisfied by what has been said.

The Twelfth Sermon.
HEB. III. 13. latter part. Lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin.


THE Author of this Epistle advises in this Chapter, those Jewish Christians he
wrote to, to take care that they fell not into that sad state and temper of
mind, their forefathers were in in the time of Moses. Not to harden their
heart: now as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness,
v. 8. when though they saw the mighty works of God forty years, and had daily
Miracles before their Eyes, and were fed and maintained by them, and lived
under a constant dispensation of them; yet still a spirit of Insidelity and
Obstinacy was amongst them, and their hearts were hardened and they would not
hearken unto God, nor obey his voice; but were kept out of the good Land, by
reason of their monstrous and unreasonable belief: so it was also in the times
of our Savior, when notwithstanding all his many Miracles done before their
Eyes, they were yet so blinded and hardened by their sins, that they continued
Insidels; so that the utmost, and one would think, irresistible evidence could
not prevail upon them. Human Nature is still the same it was then, and liable
to the same corruptions and depravations, and when it has suffered its Lusts
and Vices, and unreasonable Inclinations to grow upon it, and have power over
it, they will quickly bring Men to a wretched blindness of mind and hardness of
heart; so that the best evidence for Religion, and the strongest arguments and
demonstrations for the Truth, or the practice of it shall not prevail upon 'em;
but whilst they indulge themselves and continue in their sins, this will
corrupt their Minds and deprave their Faculties, darken their Understanding,
and spoil their Judgment, bring them to hardness of heart and a reprobate mind,
and to gross and unreasonable Insidelity, and at last to a total defection and
apostasy from all Religion: Take heed therefore, says the Apostle, Lest there
be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God,
v. 22. and the way to prevent that, was not to be drawn in by any sin, nor
deceived by any Vice or Lust that should bring 'em to this; but to take a
present and immediate care to free themselves from every such sin, and to
persuade one another to keep close to Religion, and not to give way to any Vice
or Wickedness deluding them at first, or growing afterward more upon them;
Wherefore exhort one another daily while it is called to day, lest any of you
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. From these words I shall consider
these two things.

1. How sin deceives at the beginning. 2. How it hardens the mind afterward.
How it first cheats and horribly imposes upon us, and then how it brings the
mind into a more wretched and depraved and hardened state.

1. Of the deceitfulness of sin. One would think that either Human Nature were
not so rational as we pretend it is, and that this were not our inseparable
property; or else that Vice were not so foolish and unreasonable, so pernicious
and destructive as we suppose it to be; when we look into the state of the
World and see Vice every where prevailing and abounding, and most Men choosing
and preferring it before Virtue; as Men are rational Creatures that act as from
principles of Liberty and Judgment, so always from an instinct of self good and
self preservation which seems to be a natural principle that prevents all
reason, and which we can never with all our choice and freedom act wittingly
and willingly against. We can never choose evil as evil, but under the color
and appearance of good; but our nature is made with an inward spring that runs
of it self from a naked evil, but always pursues what we apprehend is good for
us, what appears to us, as conducing and tending to our Welfare and Happiness;
and therefore we must bring Religion and every thing else to this, if we would
have it fall in with Nature, and be lastingly and surely sixth in our Minds.

But either Vice is not so great an evil, so destructive and contrary to the
good Welfare and Happiness of Humane Nature; or else our reason must be very
much cheated and deluded, and imposed upon, when we are drawn into it; and we
must be mightily deceived by some false reasoning or other about it in our own
minds: for there is a sort of reasoning and arguing, judging and concluding
however short and quick, and precipitate and mistaken this be, in every moral
action we do; and some process there is in the mind and thoughts, even when we
are led never so much by our senses, and act not upon thoughts or reason; else
the action would not be Voluntary or Criminal, or capable either of guilt or
blame, as proceeding from a misuse of our reason and choice, our judgment and
fieedom.

Our understanding and reason must therefore judge amiss and be grossly deceived
and imposed on, when, contrary to our good and interest, we are drawn into the
practice of sin, and seduced by its temptations, and inveigled by the
deceitfullness of it; for though it be against our reason in one sense, i. e.
against the right use of it, yet it carries our reason along with it at that
time we commit it; and our judgment determines for it at that instant, though
very rashly and unadvisedly, as we find when we come to consider it over again.
The deceitfulness of sin lies therefore chiesly in these following things.

1. In having too high an Opin on, Fancy, and Imagination of those little
Goods, Pleasures, Profits, or whatever present sensual and worldly Enjoyments
any of our sins may yield to us, or that we can hope to reap by them. These are
the three Lusts the Apostle mentions, Of the Flesh, of the Eye, and the pride
of Life, or rather the objects of those; these are the gilded bait, the fair
fruit, the alluring charms and inviting temptations that draw in and inveigle
every sinner; for no Man would be wicked or serve the Devil for naught, nor
commit any sin out of pure malice to God and Religion, and mere hatred to
Virtue; at least not till he is arrived to a very high degree of diabolical
wickedness. No, it is to purchase and attain some fancied good and imagined
pleasure or advantage; something grateful and desirable to the senses,
Appetites and Inclinations of our nature, that tempts and allures us. Now there
being a small natural good in many of those sinful temptations, for such it
must be allowed bodily pleasure and worldly profit and other enjoyments are,
which therefore good men may desire and partake of within such bounds and
limits as are allowed by God and Religion; and those are even the blessings of
God's left hand, as the Jews phrased them; and it is an unnatural piece of
Stoicism, and an Hypocritical affectation to renounce them wholly, and declaim
weakly against them. Riches, and Honors, and Pleasures, are Lawful objects of
our desire in some degree, and may have a proper good allowed to them suitable
to our present state and nature, and their contraries may be called evils; else
it would be no Virtue to deny them, or forgo them in any case, nor would have
any reward at God's hand; but they are not the great goods our nature was made
for, nor those that can make us truly and completely happy, though we had never
so many of them; nor are comparatively any goods, because nothing so great as
Wisdom and Virtue, as Peace of Mind and Tranquillity of Soul, as an inward Sense
of God's Favor, and cheerful hopes of Heaven; these will make a Man truly and
inwardly happy without or with a very little of the other, and give him the
true perfection and happiness of his nature, and make him eternally blessed,
when all others are perished and gone, and signify nothing.

It Is an ignorance of the true nature of good and evil in relation to our
selves, as well as to the World, that is the prime and general cause of Men's
being deceived into sin; and the first part of its deceitfulness, is by the
immoderate and salse Opinion of those little Goods or present Enjoyments we may
obtain by them; Thus when our Fancies and vain Imaginations represent Riches
and a great Estate, as the greatest Good, as the greatest Security, Credit and
Comfort, and what will afford and bring in all other good things of this World;
this makes a Man make Riches his God, and put his trust in 'em, and Sacrifice
every thing to Mammon, and use any means to attain 'em, because he thinks
nothing so evil as to be without them, and nothing else so good as having
abundance of them. So another fancies no happiness like that of being Great and
above others, of having the knee and the head, and the outward marks and
acknowledgments of superiority given him, or to appear in State and Grandeur
with a rich Train, and splendid Equipage always attending him; and he despises
poor and contemptible Virtue in respect of all this, and thinks as meanly of
the greatest Wisdom without those, as that does of him; and therefore rather
than part with those, he will part with his Conscience, and change his Religion
rather than his place, and will stick at nothing either to keep or gain his
ambitious Ends and Designs. Another who is a Voluptuary, and thinks Pleasure
the summum bonum, the chiefest good he can taste or feel; he hunts after it
through all the Scents and Paths of Sensuality, Luxury, Lewdness and Debauchery,
and either Bacchus or Venus is the Deity he worships; and the greatest Good and
Enjoyment he fancies and imagines, and has an Idea of, is the Wine sparkling in
the Glass, or the Charms of Beauty, or the other objects of sensual Pleasure:
and by heating his thoughts and inflaming his fancy, his desires of those
things grow impatient, excessive and ungovernable. Now if a man had used
himself to consider seriously how little there is in all those things, how very
little in respect of the greater pleasures of a wise and easy Mind, a good
Conscience, and the hopes of Religion; and that all the true Pleasures of Life,
that are desirable to a Wise Man, may be otherwise enjoyed within the bounds of
Virtue; and that the going beyond those is an unavoidable mischief to himself
and to the World; and that all those little sensual and temporary goods he is
so fond of, are at best but short and transitory, empty and unsatisfying
things, but poor trisling satisfactions, and mere gilded decaying Vanities,
that will all quickly perish and pass away, so that our proper happiness cannot
lie in them. This would give us such true Opinions and right Apprehensions of
all carnal and Worldly things, in which the whole strength and temptations of
sin are placed, as would disarm and weaken it of all its power, strip it of all
its fine dress and false attire, wash off all its paint, spoil all its beauty
and shining luster, whereby it imposes upon our vain fancies and weak
imaginations; and deceives us with a false Opinion of those small Goods,
Profits, or Pleasures it can afford us.

2. We do not at the same time compare with those the great evil that is in
them, and so do not judge rightly and impartially on both sides, but determine
hastily on one, and so are deceived; whereas to make a true Judgment and
Estimate, we should set the evil against the good, and so weigh the matter, and
set the balance right between them; but, Alas! Men are in too much haste to do
this, when they are so hotly and eagerly pursuing their Lusts; when, having the
fancied good Pleasure and Enjoyment of their sins only in their Eye, they never
think or consider, or take into their accounts the much greater and more
numerous and more certain evils that belong to them, and are inseparably annexed
to the commission of them; if they did, no Man would swallow the thin bait when
he saw the satal hook under it; None would eat the forbidden fruit, though never
so fair and pleasant to the Eye, if he knew and certainly believed that Death
was its bittter sauce, and in the day he eat thereof he should die: No Man
would drink the sweetest draught, or take down the most delicious morsel, if he
thought it would kill him. Nature without any great deliberation refuses
immediately, and abhors what it apprehends to be evil, as it is extremely fond
and desirous of what appears good and agreeable to it; and the fear of the one
is perhaps more strong and affecting than the love of the other; as the sense
of pain is greater and quicker than that of pleasure; and therefore did it spy
the Snake in the Grass, the Serpent hid under the Bed of Roses and Violets, it
would not be invited by all their beauty and sweetness to lie down upon them;
and it would be quickly frighted and run from the tempter, though he appeared as
an Angel of light, if it saw his Cloven Foot. Vice therefore always uses art to
conceal its worst side, hides its deformity and rottenness under a false paint
and counterfeit color, and varnishes over its real evil with the fucus of some
seeming good; so the unwary sinner is drawn into its deadly embraces with its
meritricious Looks and false Charms. The venomous sting lies covered under the
sweet honey, and the sinner perceives not the Dagger of the Treacherous
Assassin, till he is stabbed with it to the heart. But a little Wisdom and
Observation, and looking about us, would plainly discern the innumerable evils
that sin carries in its bowels, and is big and productive of; which grow out of
it, as fruit from its proper root, and are inseparably annexed to it as effects
to their causes; that can no more be divorced or rescinded from it, than light
clipped from the Sun; and are unalterably settled upon it, by the nature and
constitution of things, and the will, and appointment of the first cause and
Author of them. How do many not only shipwreck their Consciences, but their
Fortunes too by their Vices in this world, where we see abundance of those
broken Vessels, who have split themselves upon Laziness or Luxury, Lewdness or
Prodigality, or some other wickedness, by which they have ruined themselves
here, as well as hereafter? How have others wasted their Bodies by the same
courses as they have done their Estates? And have sinned particularly against
those as the Scripture speaks, as well as against their Souls, and been a kind
of Martyrs in the service of the Devil, and their own Lusts, and endured more
pains in their bodies to go to Hell, than other Martyrs have done to go to
Heaven? How do they whose hopes and designs are only in this Life, and who fear
nothing so much as Death, and think nothing so happy as to live long; yet
shorten their lives by their Vices, and by living as they call it too fast,
that is, running on in the full Career of wickedness, and galloping as hard as
they can to Hell. How do they, I say, Not live out half their days? and they
are sometimes so hasty to die, that their bodies are often rotted before they
come into their Graves, and their sins in some measure prevent death. How have
others stigmatized their names with their Vices, and brought a lasting reproach
and real infamy upon themselves and families; where yet nothing has been so
dear to them as titular Reputation, and the false Image and Idol of Honor? How
have they madly Sacrificed their Souls and their Lives to redeem that, which
yet they have basely thrown away by a scandalous Life, which has made them base
and contemptible to all wise Men? Thus, how plain is it that sin, besides the
vast and amazing miseries of another World, brings most of the evils of this
upon us; A blot and reproach to our credit and good names, sickness and
diseases to our bodies, and often beggary to our selves and families; and above
all spoils and corrupts the Mind, takes away the Peace and Improvement of it,
fills it with inward discomposure and uneasiness; and often so impairs a Man's
reason and understanding as to leave the old and wretched sinner only the shape
of a Man, with the nature and qualities of a Beast. Now all these a blinded
sinner either sees not, or considers not; either quite forgets, or does not at
all mind in the hot pursuit of his Lusts, and the hurry and tumult of his
unruly Appetites; he feels not the Wounds that are given him in his hot blood,
though when he grows cool a little he will be very sensible of them; his thoughts
are wholly taken up with the sancied good and pleasure, and he looks to nothing
but that, nor considers the much greater evils and mischiefs of them; so he
pursues his Game and follows the Chase, and sees not the pit or the precipice
just before him, 'till he is fallen into it; he leaps into certain danger without
looking into it, and without any fear or foresight, runs upon Death and
Destruction, as the horse rushes into the battle, as Scripture represents it,
Jer. 8.6. An inward heat and ardor spurs him on, and he is wholly driven by
other principles than those of his reasonable nature, and the serious thoughts
and considerations of things, or observing the consequences of his own Actions.
And thus sin deceives him, in the next place,

3. By taking off his Mind from considering and examining things, or reflecting
upon his own Actions, or using his own Thoughts; it makes him live only by the
suggestions of sense, and the propensities of his animal nature and lower
inclinations, without the Exercise or Government of his thoughts or reason,
Like brute beasts that have no understanding, as the Scripture compares
sinners, Ps. 32.9. His Passions and Lusts, and irregular Appetites, grow
masterless and unruly, and get an entire Power and Dominion over him, and his
reason has no check or control over them; his Vices keep him always warm and
heated, and never suffer him to cool or grow sober, they ply him close with
what shall more intoxicate and besot him, and keep him from ever coming to
himself; so his mind is always dozed, and he lives under a perpetual kind of
drunkenness, and loss of his reason: his thoughts are always drowned in Hurry,
Business, or Company, Drink, Noise, or Diversion; or scattered and dispersed in
mad freaks and pranks of extravagance, and with a sort of practical incoherent
nonsense; or else amused with Fantastic Whimsies and Romantic Conceits, and
imaginary Representations of things, as they are drawn by Plays and Poets,
contrary to all sober thinking, and the right knowledge of the nature of
things, as God has constituted them in the World. Thus it is with our either
dull or witty unthinking Debauchees, who live a rambling, careless, thoughtless
Life, without any true principles, or any serious consideration or reflection,
and examining of things; who care as little as can be to think at all, and
therefore avoid themselves as much as may be, and never love to be alone; for
nothing is so troublesome and uneasy to them as themselves and their own
thoughts, and therefore they keep from them all they can, and would be quite
without them if they could: And upon this account we find them often declaiming
against reason and thinking, and extolling the condition of Beasts above Men,
which is only another way of commending themselves, for at the same time they
are endeavoring to be as equal and like to them as may be.

4. To show the deceitfulness of sin, we cannot but observe, that Virtue is
much the likelier way to attain most of the present goods of this World, which
sin aims at, but generally loses and destroys. Thus Sobriety, Chastity, and
Temperance pick up that bodily pleasure which is lost and dropped by Vice and
Debauchery, when they are so hastily running after it; the ambitious and
covetous miss often their aims, whilst others unexpectedly meet with what they
are in vain seeking; and generally most of the good things of this World, are
by Nature and Providence settled upon Virtue, and lost by Vice; the one is a
Tree of Life, as the Wiseman speaks, Prove. 3.18. and even literally Health to
our Navel and Marrow to the Bones; while the other is a Disease and trouble to
the Flesh, and rottenness to the bones. The one is a Crown of honor that
circles the head of the Wise and Virtuous, while the other is a foul stain and
blemish to a man's Credit and good Name; the one is Peace and Joy and Gladness
to the mind, the other is a worm to the Conscience, a tormentor to the Soul,
and an inward Hell in a Man's own breast. Wisdom has in her right hand length of
days, and in her left hand riches and honor; her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, as the Wiseman long ago observed,
Prove. 3.17. whereas most of the temptations to sin are Vain and Fantastic,
Cheating and Delusive, and have only appearances, but no real good in them;
like Zeuxis's Grapes, they are only painted artificially, but have no real
sweetness; they deceive the eye and the fancy at a distance, but there is
nothing of true pleasure and delight to be tasted in them, but often a real
bitterness instead of it, like the vines of Sodom and Gomorrah, Deuteronomy. 32.32.
their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter, their wine is the
poison of dragons and the cruel venom of Asps.

Men always find themselves deceived and disappointed in their vain
expectations of what their sins will afford 'em, and therefore always come off
with repentance, shame, and remorse; and can never answer it to themselves
afterward, nor find any good account in the reckoning when they come to cast
it up, and ask themselves seriously the Apostle's question, What fruit had ye
in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? Romans 6.21. They have walked after
things that do not profit, as the Prophet speaks in another case, Jer. 2.8.
after mere Idols and Images of good, pleasure and profit, which they have found
to be nothing in the World, and to have no reality in them. They have courted
and embraced a mere airy empty Cloud instead of Juno, and been led by a mere
meteor, an Ignis fatuus, a false light and seeming appearance, which has
bewildred and misguided them in their blind search and dark pursuit after their
own good and happiness. Where they have looked for and expected any good, they
have always missed of it, and found the contrary evil; their sins have been so
hard and cruel to them, that when they have asked Bread, they have given them a
stone, and instead of a fish a serpent; and their own experience, which is the
best and only teacher to them if they would attend to it, would learn 'em above
all things the deceitfulness of sin.

5. Sin deceives very much with being customary and fashionable; this draws in
a great many by the power of example, and the having such numbers and so great
a party on its side; for thereby the shame and reproach of it is in great
measure took of, and the sinner runs, he thinks, but the same risque and
venture with so many others, and hopes to fare as well as the rest of his
Companions and as others in the crowd. This is a strong delusion and works upon
a great many, and is not so easily took off unless a great Authority, and a
great example brings virtue into fashion, as it easily may by having God and
all good Men on its side; and so discounterances Vice, and makes it become as
infamous and contemptible in the thoughts of others, as it is in it self: and
when a mark of infamy is set upon any thing, even upon the greatest power or
the greatest sin, it can never long hold its interest, nor keep its ground.
Virtue can never lose its Credit by all the attempts in the World, but will
always be honored, and have a true value and esteem in the hearts of Men; and
even those who forsake it, will yet have an inward awe and secret reverence of
it: but Vice, though it bears a mark like Cain of shame and ignominy upon it, yet
when it becomes modish and fashionable, grows more bold and impudent; and
escapes a great deal of that reproach and disgrace that belongs to it, and
bears out with some considence and assurance, when otherwise it would sneak and
be covered with confusion; then it endeavors as much as it can to run down
solitary Virtue as a piece of singularity and affectation, and to change the
opinion of Men in those things, and alter if it could the very nature of Vice
and Virtue, and the thoughts and sentiments of mankind about them; and make
false Names, and counterfeit Terms of honor to it self. But it may as well
change the seasons of the year, and turn Summer into Winter, and Day into
Night, and pluck up the sundamental Constitution of things, as destroy the fixed
and immutable nature of good and evil; and as well pervert our senses, or our
perceptions of the motions made upon us by outward objects, as the settled
Judgment and Opinion of Mankind, concerning the moral objects of our mind.
Nature, and Reason, and Wisdom are stubborn and inflexible things, and will not
comply with the modes and humors of a foolish World, and will be always on
Virtue's side; and however, the mad men and the vicious may have the majority,
yet they will never carry it against the other, nor be able to contend with
them in a cause that Heaven, and Nature, and Reason have decided and settled by
a decree that is irreversible. Health will be still health, and is to be
preferred to Pain and Diseases, though in a general Contagion, and when never so
many are sick, and though the Diseases make them never so frantic and
lightheaded. Life was a thing very valuable and comfortable to Noah, when all
the World besides perished; and Heaven will be never the less desirable, nor
Hell never the more tolerable, though there be few, as our Savior says, that
find the one, and many that go into the other: so little is there in this
deceitful Temptation to sin, that it has numbers on its side, and is customary
and fashionable.

6. Sin deceives very often by being counted a little one, but a small trifle
and peccadillo in respect of those greater and more scandalous Vices that bear
a blacker mark and fouler Character. Thus to drop an Oath now and then, to take
a Cup a little too much sometimes, to set off Discourse with a little
Profaneness and Obscenity, and to make bold with God and Religion for a Jest
and a Witty saying, and to go as far in some Liberties as is possible without
committing the last act of sin; these and other things are called only innocent
freedoms and such as the sociable and well bred, and Persons even of Conduct
and Prudence can hardly avoid, if they would converse in the World without the
charge of too much preciseness and moroseness. But if these, however they are
looked on, are direct breaches of a Divine Law, if they are inconsistent with
the known rules of Religion, if they are contrary to the Gospel and the strict
commands of Christianity; they are never to be called little or small sins, but
such as a Man must avoid upon the peril of his Salvation, and being excluded
out of Heaven: besides, these lesser unregarded sins lead to others, and take
off the strict guard and serious watchfulness we ought always to maintain over
our selves; and lay us open very often to the greatest temptations, by carrying
us to the utmost bounds of what is lawful, and so to the nearest approaches of
what is sinful; and like smaller wounds and lesser illnesses by being over
much slighted, and not taken care of, they become in time dangerous and mortal.

Lastly, for the deceits of sin are innumerable, and cannot all be reckoned up,
though it concerns mankind above all things to know and escape them, and not be
cheated in the main things wherein their happiness or misery consists; but the
last thing I shall name is this, That many Men are deceived into sin by
thinking it may be easy to get rid of all the evil, and guilt, and punishment
of it by the help of Repentance, and the merciful provision of the Gospel; by
which they may quickly be set right again, and be in as good a state as they
were before. Now here are too many mistakes to be considered at present, I
shall only say, that this is to be deceived not only in the nature of sin, but
in the nature of Repentance, and the nature of Religion, and to make that
rather an incourager, and promoter of sin than a destroyer of it, and to find
out a trick, if it will do, even by the help of Religion it self, to be too
hard for Heaven upon its own Terms and Concessions; but God is not to be thus
mocked or overreached. No Repentance will do but what brings forth the fruits
of obedience and a good life, nor is a sin so easily repented of after it is
committed, especially upon such presumptuous terms as may justly provoke God to
give it up to an hardened and impenitent heart, and to that wretched state
which sin by being continued in will bring it to. Which is the next thing I am
to consider,

2. How Men are hardened by their sins, or how sin hardens their minds
afterward, and brings them to the most wretched and depraved state and temper.
And this I shall show.

1. In the gross or in general. 2. More particularly how, and to what degrees
it hardens them. 3. Make some remarks and observations from the whole.
1. How Sin hardens in general. When a Man has given way to it in any great and
wilful instances, and it has made a breach upon his purposes and resolutions
which were too weak to hold out against it, it will enter with all its force
and gain ground daily upon him, and quickly conquer and overcome him, if he do
not repulse it immediately, and drive it out by Repentance: though he may a
little struggle and rally against it, especially at the first beginning, when
natural Conscience will strive a while with his carnal Lusts and Inclinations;
yet if in this conflict the Sin prevails and is too hard for the Spirit, and he
continues to commit it, it will at last wholly master him and bring him into
such Bondage and Vassallage, that he shall lose the moral liberty and freedom
of his mind, and be such a slave to it as to be led Captive by it at its will;
so that in the same sense he both will not, and cannot get rid of it, for he
has then lost the power of his mind, and is brought under the perfect dominion
of his Lusts and Vices: so that though he sees the plainest mischief of them, and
wishes he could leave them, and would do so, if a faint wish and a mere
velleity were sufficient; yet he still lives in them to the plainest ruin both
of his Body and Soul, to his undoing both in this World and another; and though
he sees and seels the pernicious consequences and effects of them, yet neither
a decayed Body, nor a disordered Mind, nor a shattered Estate, nor Conscience,
nor Credit, nor his own Reason, which condemns and reproaches him for them, can
ever prevail upon him to forsake and abandon them.

They have taken such strong hold of him, and he is so much under their power,
that he cannot for all these strong arguments and considerations resist the
next temptation or opportunity that invites to them; His Lusts and sensual
Inclinations and disorderly Appetites are grown so strong, and his Reason and
Religion so weak and unable to resist them, that like a mighty Torrent, they
carry all before them; and indeed he himself has broke down all the banks that
should withstand them, and he is carried down by the violent stream of his
Lusts, till it dryes up of it self, and age, and infirmity abate and sink it,
and his sins, as we commonly say, leave him; and even then when he is dead to
sin in some sense, yet the Ghosts of his departed Vices still haunt him, and
the Phantoms or fancies, the Spirits (if I may so call them) of his Lewdness
and Debauchery, still hover over the Grave and the Carcass as it were of an old
sinner, and will not quite depart from him.

This hardening of a sinner is gradual, and comes not all at once upon him, but
by the power of Custom, and the strength of Vicious Habits, he is brought by
time and degrees to this hardened state, and by an unaccountable quality in sin
it self, whereby the mind is as it were petrified by it, and brought to that
(...) and (...) which the Platonists often speak of; such a deadness and
stupidness of its faculties, and its moral powers as we cannot well express.
Every sin hardens the mind a little, and weakens the first tender sense of good
and evil that is natural to it; and the longer it continues in it, it sensibly
hardens it the more, though by secret and insensible means, as even Stones grow
out of the Earth that was at first soft and fluid, but by time and a saline and
other qualities they grow hard and rocky. A Sinner at first had great
tenderness of mind, and could hardly be brought to commit a wilful Sin; 'till
by Custom and many repeated Acts, he grew more hardened and emboldened: So that
what he committed at first with reluctance, he commits afterward with
greediness; the first conception and formation of Sin in his mind was by a
small seed or principle, and by an unaccountable growth and increase, a wicked
thought became at first an Inclination, or rather a natural Inclination
produced a Thought, a Thought increased the Inclination, that begot a Delight,
a Delight a Consent, a Consent an Act, an Act, by degrees, a Habit, and that
becomes stronger and stronger by time; As in the growth of our bodies
Anatomists tell us a Gelly becomes a Nerve, a Fiber, a Tendon, a Muscle or a
Bone, by strange and imperceptible ways. The Body of Sin, which the Scripture
speaks of, is formed by custom, and grows still more and more, and has no fixed
stature set to it, but is harder to be put off the older it is, and gets
strength every day, and renews it by age: The Sin which at first might have
been easily withstood and overcome, and like a young Weed readily plucked up;
afterward takes such deep root in a Man's mind that it is the hardest thing in
the World to remove it, and to get rid of a long and confirmed habit, that has
been a great while growing upon us.

This hardening of the Mind by Sin I take to proceed from Custom, which has an
unaccountable force and power upon us; and does as it were bend the Will that
way, and put so strong a bias upon the Thoughts and Inclinations of the Mind,
that it can hardly with all its natural Liberty and God's ordinary Grace, get
off of it; and when the Will is thus obstinately bent to any Lust or
Wickedness, it affects and draws in the Understanding, and corrupts the
Judgment; and the mind at the same time, it is thus hardened by its Vices, is
blinded also by them: and so the two great powers and faculties of the Soul are
corrupted by it both at once; for hardening respects properly the Will, and
blinding the Understanding, and they always go together, and are promiscuously
mentioned, the one for the other in Scripture. Men's Lusts and Vices as they
harden them, and bring as it were a Callus upon the mind by long use and make
it to be past feeling, as Scripture speaks, so they darken and blind the
Understanding, which is as it were the Eye of the Soul, and bring a cloud over
it, or cast a mist before it, and hinder it from seeing and discerning things
as it ought to do. These, I confess, are all figurative expressions, whereby we
are forced to describe and illustrate the Acts and Operations of the Mind, by
material and bodily resemblances, as the Holy Ghost it self does: But there are
such real effects in the Mind as answer to them, and about which we can use no
other Words or Ideas. Men's Sins at the same time they harden their Wills, and
bring them to a senselessness and stupidity about their moral Actions, they
blind their Judgment also, and bring them to a Reprobate sense, so as not to
see the plainest Truths or greatest Evidence, nor be aware of the grossest and
most notorious Errors, nor be convinced by the strongest Arguments and
Demonstrations for the Truth or Practice of Religion.

2. I shall consider a little more particularly in the 2d. place, how, and to
what degrees the mind is thus hardened and blinded by its Sins.

1. And this is done first of all by breaking through natural shame, and the
innate modesty of our minds; this is one of the strongest senses which God and
Nature have set about Virtue, and the greatest check and restraint against
Vice; for it arises from the first quick and discerning sense of the mind,
whereby it sees the ^^^ness and reasonableness of the one, and the indecency
and natural turpitude and shame of the other; and when this is once broke
through, the mind is quickly Prostituted and Debauched to the greatest Lewdness
and Villainy, and comes to Sin Impudently and with a Where Is forehead: at first
indeed it was modest and reserved, and blus^^'d at the rude offers of Sin, and
ran from them; but by coming nearer and making some further approaches to it,
it was drawn in to consent; and so having lest its Original innocence and
native modesty, it is sooner brought to after-acts of Sin, and wears off by
degrees that shame which was its great guard and preservative at first; and
then it lies open to every Temptation, and (...) to every offer and opportunity
that invites (...) and hardly needs to be tempted, but becomes a tempter both
to it self and others, and a Pander in time to all Vice and Wickedness.

2. Sin hardens by stupifying Conscience, and deadning the inward and natural
sense of good and evil on our Minds so as to bring Men by degrees to Sin
without struggle, dispute, or reluctance. It must be a great while before it
comes to this, and a man must have gone through a long course before he can
arrive at this state and perfection of Sinning. No Man can commit a plain and
great Sin at first without great struggle and remorse of mind, and great
reluctance and opposition from his own Conscience; the spirit will strive
against the flesh, as the flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5.17. there
being a natural principle of Virtue in us as well as of Vice. And as a good Man
must have many conflicts with his lower inclinations before he can arrive at a
full state of Virtue; so must a bad Man have as great a contest with his
Conscience and the natural sense of his own Mind before he can be perfectly
wicked. Conscience will check and restrain him at first, and inwardly smite and
reprove him for doing amiss, and this is an evident proof of the natural
difference between good and evil, and an excellent Monitor set up by God in
every Man's breast to mind him of his duty, and the great security indeed of all
Religion; but when Men have, by many acts and long customs of wickedness,
wasted and sinned away Conscience, and stifled or stupisied the inward sense of
their own minds, so as to sin with greater ease, and without any trouble or
opposition from within, without any rebukes or resistances, or remorses of
their own Consciences for whatever they do; then they are become perfect
Sinners indeed, and come to an absolute and full state of Wickedness, to be
hardened into an utter insensibility, so as to be past feeling, and to have
their Conscience, as it were, seared with a hot iron, as the Scripture speaks,
1 Timothy 4.2. so as to be quite senseless. This senselessness may seem an easier
and less painful state, but it is more mortal and dangerous; and is just such
a Disease to the Soul, as an Apoplexy or a Lethargy is to the body. If this
senselessness and stupidity would always last, it were much better indeed than
sharp and actual pain, but the Conscience of a Sinner, though it may sleep and
slumber a while, yet it will awake one time or other, and like an enraged Lion
tear and devour all about it; Either Death or Sickness, or some Judgment or
Affliction will probably rowse it here, and bring the stupify'd mind to it
self; or to be sure the flames of Hell will make it open its Eyes when it is
too late, when it can see nothing but horror and despair before it, and round
about it, and where it; Conscience shall always torment it with a Worm that
never dies, and with never ceasing Anguish and Remorse.

3. A third instance and degree of being thus hardened by Sin, is doubting of
the Truth of Religion, and calling into question the principles of it, and at
last an utter rejecting and dis-believing of them. No Man ever did this till he
was corrupted in his morals, and engaged in a vicious course; so that this
Skepticism and Infidelity, was plainly the effect and consequent of his Vices;
and proceeded from his Will, blinded with his Sins and Lusts, rather than from
his Understanding, or from any want of Evidence about those matters. It was
first the Sinners wish and desire that there were no God, before he questioned
whither there was one or no; and he never doubted of the truth of another
World, till it was against his Interest, and he was lost and undone, if there
were one, and therefore he was very unwilling to believe it. Men must have very
much blinded their Minds, if they do not see the plainest Evidence for
Religion, both from Nature and Reason, and from History and Revelation; from
the make and frame of the World, and from the make of their own bodies, and the
inward sense of their own Minds: all which make it as unreasonable almost to
doubt of the Being of a God, as to doubt of their own being and existence; and
we may as well be Scepticks to the truth of any thing else, as to the truth of
Religion.

4. There is a degree yet beyond this, and that is ridiculing Religion, and
exposing it to Contempt and Laughter; which is not only the utmost and most
desperate attempt and affront against God, but the most rude and unmannerly, as
well as mischievous thing to all Mankind; for all sober and wise Men, and
civilized Nations, have always believed there is a God, and it is no very civil
thing to call them all Fools or Cheats for doing so; it is so much the interest,
nay the necessity of mankind that there should be one, that all Government, all
Security, all Society, and living happily in the World, must be lost without
it; to laugh therefore at this, as either a Politic Cheat or a Melancholy
Delusion, on which so much depends, both as to the benefit of the public, and
the happiness and comfort of all private Men, is only to show the boldest folly
and ill will, both together; and, without any reason in the World, to take upon
themselves to persuade mankind that they are deceived in the most useful and
necessary thing to 'em that can be. It Is certainly the highest impudence and
rudeness to run down those things, and expose them as ridiculous, which have
been the greatest objects of Honor and Reverence to all wise men; and to treat
Religion and things Sacred, with jest and drollery, about which all the World
has been the most serious and in earnest; and to mock and scoff at that which
others bow down to and tremble at. This is only a more mad and daring bravery
in wickedness, and one of the highest instances of a corrupted and hardened
Mind. I shall add but another, which is an effect as it were of this; and that
is,

5. An industrious design of being wicked and glorying in it; to make it their
business to spread and promote it, and to take pleasure not only in committing
Sin themselves, but likewise in those that do it. This is to love Wickedness
for Wickedness sake, and out of pure opposition to Virtue, and a direct enmity
to Religion; When Men make it their Trade and a kind of Professed Science to be
Debauched, and set down rules to themselves and others of being so; When they
can boast of their Wickedness, and glory in it; and assume perhaps more to
themselves than they have been guilty of, and charge themselves with such Sins
as they never committed, thereby to Triumph as it were in their mighty deeds
and great exploits; and, to endear themselves the more to their Lewd
Companions, when they endeavor to outdo one another, and out-vye their fellow
Sinners in Oaths, Drinking, and Debauchery; and give greater proofs of their
highest proficiency in Wickedness and Lewdness. This is perfectly giving up
themselves to the Devil's Service, and to toil and drudge in it, as his
greatest Slaves, and as his Disciples to devote themselves to him, and become
sworn votaries to Hell and Wickedness, and declare themselves Champions and
Defenders of his cause and interest, against God and Religion. It Is strange
that Human Nature should be depraved and corrupted to these degrees, but we see
too many Examples of it in the World; and we see too what is the cause of it;
namely, men's being so strangely hardened and blinded by their Sins, and having
their Reason and Understanding and all the Faculties of their Minds so horribly
corrupted and depraved by them.

3. From what has been said, I shall make the following Remarks and
Observations.

1. I observe from hence, That our proper and truest happiness lies in the
Perfection and Improvement of of our Minds; and therefore we ought to take the
greatest care of them.

2. That Vice is the greatest Corruption and Depravation of the Mind; and
therefore we should not suffer that to grow upon us.

3. I shall enquire into the Scripture-notion of God's hardening Men, and
whether that be any thing more than our Sins hardening us.

4. From hence we may conceive and understand the misery and wretched state of
the Devils and damned Souls, who are come to the highest degree of this
hardening.

1. I observe that our proper and truest happiness lies in the Perfection and
Improvement of our Minds.

The happiness of any Being must be suited and adapted to its Capacity and
Faculties; for otherwise it has no root to grow upon, and the more those
Capacities are enlarged and extended, and have agreeable objects to fill and
entertain 'em, the greater is the happiness of it. The lowest Creatures that
have sense, have very small Capacities, and their Enjoyments are very little;
the more we rise in the scale of Beings, the Capacities are greater till we
come to the All-perfect Being; We have bedily Capacities, the same with the
Brutes, which can partake of such bodily pleasures as they do; but these are
very little and narrow, and confined to few things, and a short time. We have
much higher Capacities even like God himself, whereby we take in all the truth
that can be known, and all the good that can be enjoyed; and hoard up these
immortal Treasures in our Minds, and in the fullest measure of those consists
our proper happiness as we are Men, and Rational, and Immortal Beings. It Is in
our Souls, those noblest parts of us, that our Happiness lies and will lie for
ever; Our bodies are poor dying decaying matter, that can afford very little
Enjoyments, and for a very little while; the capacities of the mind are great
and large, and comprehensive, and can reach not only to all things that are
made, but even to the God that made them, and partake of a proper happiness
from all of them; for the more it increases its knowledge, and grows up to a
more perfect Understanding, and to a more free choice and entire willing of
what is good; and the more good it enjoys, and the more its faculties are
enlarged and filled up with their proper objects, the more Happiness and
Perfection, Satisfaction and Enjoyment it must have; and this will be its
Eternal Heaven when we shall be as like God as we can be, and equal to the
Angels in the proper perfections of our rational nature advanced to the highest
degrees, and the most unspeakable Enjoyments and Satisfactions.

2. Vice is the greatest Corruption and Depravation of the Mind, and therefore
is our greatest misery; it sinks and impairs the Faculties, decays and weakens
the Mind, as a Disease does the body, and fills it generally like that with
pain and uneasiness; as being contrary to its natural frame, and to its proper
and regular Operations. Virtue is the Vigor and Health, the Soundness and right
Constitution of the Soul, the Spiritual life which Religion and God's Grace
would advance it to; but Vice and Wickedness are the Spiritual death of it,
both in the Language of the Scripture, and of the best Philosophers of Old;
their manner and custom of setting a Coffin in the place of him that had left
the Schools and Precepts of Virtue, was speaking the same thing in emblem and
figure with the Scripture expression of being dead in trespasses and sins; The
loss of the Soul is justly accounted so great an one, as the gain of the whole
World will not compensate; What shall it profit a Man, says our Savior, to
gain the whole world and lose his own Soul? Matthew. 16.26. Now the Soul can
never be so lost as to lose its Being or its Power of thinking. Happy would it
be for a great many if it could so lose it self, and vanish into air or
nothing: but it is the loss of its proper Life and Happiness of the right use of
its noble Powers and Faculties, and of those Operations and Enjoyments it was
made for; and suffering the Misery and Anguish which its own thoughts bring
upon it; This is the unvaluable loss of the Soul, and a great part of its Hell,
as I shall show immediately.

Sin indeed brings the Mind to this lost and wretched condition by degrees; it
darkens and blinds the Mind, and spoils its powers of rightly Judging and
Understanding; not in an instant, but as darkness comes upon the Earth by
gradual approaches. It Is hard perhaps to give a full Account how it does this;
but it employs the thoughts upon wrong and undue objects; it immerses and sinks
'em in carnal Fancies and sensual Ideas; it perverts and distorts the Judgment,
and gives it undue representations of things; or it takes it off from thinking
and considering at all; by such means it brings it to this pass, though it have
eyes to see, yet it sees not, though it have Understanding, that is, the natural
power of it, yet it understands not, Mat. 13.14. so though it have its power of
willing, yet it wills only evil, and has no moral ability to will good from the
strong prevalency of its own evil desires and affections. This is losing the
Soul, and the right powers of it, and making it like an absorpt Star, lose its
proper light, center, and motion, though it be still a Star but fallen, dark and
wandering.

3. And this I take in the third place to be the Scripture-notion of hardening,
when Men's sins bring 'em to this state; and when God is said to harden them,
it is not by any positive influx or poisonous infusion; nor yet perhaps by
withdrawing his ordinary Grace, and the means of conversion from them: this he
did not from Pharaoh or the Jews, or any other Sinners that we know of. It Is
only Sin that hardens them, and their own Lusts and Vices that blind them; and
when God is said to do it, it is generally by doing such things as are the
occasion, not the cause of it; which are in themselves proper means of working
quite other effects upon them, not of hardening and blinding, but rather of
converting and convincing them: Such were all the Miracles God wrought and all
the Methods he used, both with the Jews and with Pharaoh, where he tried all
ways to bring them off from their Obstinacy and Infidelity, and continued so to
do, notwithstanding their abuse of them. God strikes no Man spiritually blind,
nor takes away that light which is necessary for him to see by; or that
strength and assistance which is necessary to convert him. It Is the Clouds only
darken the Earth, and not the Sun; it is the interposal of the dark body of the
one, and not the withdrawing the beams of the other, which properly brings
night upon it. I very much question whether there be any other judicial
hardness and blindness, especially in this Life, than what Men's sins bring upon
them; their being left to the malignant Power and efficacy of those, is without
any other influence or causality, the entire reason of their hardness and
blindness; and God is said to leave them and give them up to hardness of heart,
just as a Physician leaves his Patient to the incurable malignity of his
Distemper, without either giving him any thing to increase it, or without
withdrawing the Application of any proper Remedies that might help to cure it.

4. Fourthly and Lastly, By this we may conceive and understand the misery and
wretched state of the Devils and damned Souls, who are under the utmost and
irreversible state of this hardened and depraved temper of Soul; which will
naturally and necessarily make them miserable. Those accursed Spirits were once
capable of noble pleasures and improvements of mind; but Sin and Disobedience
to God, has spoiled, and sunk, and corrupted them, and brought them to this
wretched condition, where their thoughts are filled only with rage and malice
against God, and with an extreme horror and dread of him, joined with as great
rage and vexation against themselves. It Is a terrible thing for a poor Creature
wilfully to offend and sin against its Great God; impudently to affront and
defy its Maker, and trample upon his Laws and Government; which is setting up
its own Will, Thoughts, and Reason, against his. This will bring it to
dreadful Thoughts and Resentments one day, whatever we think of it, or however
we slight it now. Sin would not have had a Hell and Eternal torments prepared
for it by a good God, had it not been an opposition to the Will and Counsels of
Heaven, to all God's designs in making Us, and making the World; and contrary
to all the measures of God's Wisdom and Government, and to the Good and Welfare
of the whole System of Beings. Vice therefore by the order of things, throws
Men into this miserable state; and a lower spirit by having its Thoughts, its
Will, and Understanding, so contrary and opposite to the highest spirit, and by
not having due regards and observances to him, must necessarily fall into this
state of Misery, as well as of his utmost Wrath and Displeasure. It Is Vices
have depraved and corrupted its mind, given it wrong Thoughts of God, and of
every thing else; and sunk it into the love of evil, and of every thing
contrary to God and Goodness; made it delight in mischief, and in doing such
things as are directly contrary to the good of its fellow Creatures, if it were
but a little gratifying to it self. And now that false pleasure is gone off,
and it is left wholly to the sting of its Vices, and it therefore reflects with
infinite remorse upon the folly, and the madness, and the mischief of them; but
it cannot now redress or amend them, or what injury it has done by them; and
therefore it must lie for ever under the insupportable weight and burden of
them. It cannot now raise up its thoughts to any love or desire of God, whom it
has always had a fixed contempt and neglect of; it cannot now take any delight
in him, or the apprehensions of him whom it seldom or ever thought of, or ever
cared to Worship or Acknowledge before; and there is nothing now to divert or
entertain it, its bodily Pleasures and worldly Enjoyments are gone off, and not
here to be met with; and it is left wholly to its own uncomfortable thoughts,
and to the extreme anguish and bitterness of them. It never rightly understood
nor loved either God or Goodness; and now there is nothing else to be loved;
and therefore it must hate it self and every thing else: It must now bear the
misery of its own ill mind, which it has been spoiling and corrupting all its
Life, and bringing to this fad state and condition; and now it is desperate and
irrecoverable, and because it has lost the only opportunities of improving and
sitting it for happiness, it must now necessarily be miserable with it as long
as its duration lasts, that is for ever.

God grant that we may avoid all those sins which will thus spoil our minds,
and bring this hardness, and this misery upon us. FINIS.
ERRATA, besides some false Pointings.
PAge 2. L. 11. r. there. p. 4. l. 18. r. Principle. p. 9. l. 9. r. (...). p.
21. l. 7. r. distractions. p. 22. l. 2. for the r. any. p. 33. l. 5. r.
perception. p. 49. l. 15. r. (...). p. 50. l. 16. r. true Judgment. p. 51. l.
7. r. Reason. Would men. p. 58. l. 6. r. only are. p. 91. l. 27. r. Sediment.
p. 100. l. 16. r. Dying, the. p. 106. l. 8. r. hid. p. 143. l. 17. r. leave
them. p. 158. l. 12. r. ever. p. 214. l. 31. r. take. p. 219. l. 1. r. better
not. p. 246. l. 8. r. as it was, of. p. 270. l. 28. r. no where. p. 289. l. 5.
r. could.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Mystery of the Christian Faith and of the Blessed Trinity, Vindicated, and
the Divinity of Christ proved. In three Sermons. Preached at Westminster-Abbey
upon Trinity-Sunday, June the 7th. and September 21. 1696. By the late Reverend
William Pain, D. D. In the Press before his Death, and by himself ordered to
be Published. And also a Letter from the Author to the Bishop of Rochester in
Vindication of them.

THE CONTENTS.
Sermon I. Romans IX. 14. WHat shall we say then? Is there Unrighteousness with
God? God forbid. P. 1. Sermon II. Matthew. XI. 29. last Part. And ye shall find
rest unto your Souls. p. 29. Sermon III. Matthew. VII. 13, 14. Enter ye in at the
strait gate, for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be which go in thereat; Because strait is the gate
and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there he that find it.
p. 71. Sermon IV. Matthew. VI. 19, 20. Lay not up for your selves Treasures upon
Earth, where Moth and Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves break through and
steal. But lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth nor
Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves do not break through and steal. p. 103.
Sermon V. Luke XV. 31. And he said unto him, Son thou art ever with me, and all
that I have is thine. p 131. Sermon VI. Acts XVI. 30 latter part. Sins, what
must I do to be saved. p. 167. Sermon VII. Job. XXVIII. 28. And unto man he
said, Behold the fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to depart from Evil is
Understanding. p. 185. Sermon VIII. Romans XII. 21. Be not overcome of Evil, but
overcome Evil with Good. p. 203. Sermon IX. Luke XVI. 31. And he said unto him,
if they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though
one rose from the dead. p. 223. Sermon X. Acts XVII. 22. latter part. I
perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious. p. 245. Sermon XI. Acts
XXVI. 8. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should
raise the dead? p. 295. Sermon XII. Heb. III. 13. latter part. Lest any of you
be hardened through the deceitfullness of sin. p. 325.
Books Printed for Ri. Wilkin at the King's-Head in St. Paul's-Church-Yard.
Immorality and Pride the great Causes of Atheism. The Atheist's Objection,
that we can have no Idea of God, refuted. The notion of a God, neither from
Fear nor Policy. Three Sermons Preached at the Cathedral Church of St. Paul,
Jan. 3. Feb. 7. and Mar. 7. 169^, being the First, Second and Third of the
Lecture for that year, founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire By John
Harris M. A. and Fellow of the Royal Society. 4vo.

Remarks on some late Papers relating to the Universal Deluge and to the
Natural History of the Earth, by the same Author 8vo.

Dr. Woodward's Natural History of the Earth. 8vo.

Dr. Abbadies Vindication of the Truth of the Christian Religion, against the
Objections of all Modern Opposers. In 2. Vol. 8vo.

A serious Proposal to the Ladies, for the Advancement of their true and
greatest interest. By a Lover of her Sex. The Third Edition. 12o.

A serious Proposal to the Ladies, Part II. wherein a Method is offered for the
Improvement of their Minds. By the Author of the First Part, 12o.

Letters concerning the Love of God between the Author of the Proposal to the
Ladies and Mr. John Norris. 8vo.

An Answer to W. P.'s Key about the Quakers Light within, and Oaths; with an
Appendix of the Sacraments. 8vo.

A Letter to the Honorable Sir Robert Howard: To gether with some
Animadversions on a Book entitled, Christianity not Mysterious, 8vo.


