SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Serpent Stones, Imported from the INDIES:
SHOWING Their Admirable Virtues in Curing Malignant Spotted Fevers.

Written by a Country Physician to Dr. Burwell, President of the College of
Physicians in London.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1694.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Serpent Stones, SHOWING Their Admirable
Virtues in Curing Malignant Spotted Fevers. In a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
I Received your Letter of Thanks for the last Specific I communicated to you,
and that has proved so successful, that I find you very importunate with me to
acquaint you with what I have found most effectual against Malignant Spotted
Feavors.

I am sorry to hear that London Physicians are so often disappointed in the use
of vulgar Medicines. The great Dr. Sidenham in his Discourse of Feavors, tells
the World his Art is defective in that Distemper; and that if any Man can be
found who can propose a better Method, or Communicate a good Specific, for the
more effectual Cure of that Distemper which carries so many thousand to their
Graves, he will prove himself a good Citizen.

For my own part I declare, I knew no better Remedy than the Indian Serpent
Stones, for it powerfully expels Poisons of all sorts, both externally and
internally applied, it resists Putrefaction, promotes insensible transpiration,
raises the Vital Spirits, comforts the Heart, and gives a new Fermentation to
the Blood, and helps Nature to cast off all Malignity. I have found it more
serviceable than any sort of Alexipharmics.

Mr. Boil in his Discourse of Specific Remedies, gives very strange Accounts
of the Extraordinary Virtues of these Stoney Concretions, said to be found in
the Heads of Indian Serpents, and particularly of an Experiment he made himself
upon a Cat bitten by an enraged Viper, which caused its Tongue and Head to
swell, and made the Cat raving mad, yet upon giving it a little of the Powder
of this Stone inwardly, it had recovered, had not the rude People killed it by
Violence. He confesses that there are many of them Counterfeits, and such were
those that Mounsieur Redi made Experiments upon. He also tells us, that an
Eminent Physician of the College performed a very great Cure by the External
Application of one of the Stones.

I was sent for unto a young Man who had a very dangerous Feavor, and all the
Symptoms of Malignity very well known to Physicians; I gave the usual Remedies
prescribed in that Case; his Distemper threatened every Day more and more, and
all Friends despaired of Recovery; at length I gave him a Tincture drawn out of
these Stones, with the Powder in substance, and it powerfully expels all the
Malignity by gentle breathing Sweats, and the Patient speedily recovered, and
gained his Strength beyond Humane Expectation.

An Ancient Gentlewoman who had a high Malignant Feavor, being first surprised
with a Rigor, and shivering Coldness in her Back, and afterward a hot burning
Fit, which lasted many Hours without any intermission, a low weak Pulse, cold,
clammy, faint Sweats, Purple Spots in the Skin, little or no Thirst, a pale
thin Urine, and very delirous, but no Complaint of any Pains in the Head, or
other parts; a Hitch-cough, frequent Sighing and Dozeing; I finding all
Remedies fruitless, gave this Specific, and found a speedy Recovery attend it.

I could tell you of several Familes in our Country that have been seized with
these Malignant Feavors, that have been secured from the Dangers, by the Use of
this Specific Remedy: But I find People generally displeased when Physicians
mention their Names in print, if it be in English; they are prone to suspect
the World never thinks them sound afterward, and therefore I omit Names.

I knew one Man about Fifty, who was seized as if he had been infected with the
Plague, had Swellings under his Arms, and all other Pestilential symptoms upon
him; and only giving him a few Drops of a Mixture made with the Powder of this
Stone, he was restoared to Health in a miraculous manner.

I could Name one Patient who was saved from Death, when two in the same Family
dyed of the Spotted Fever, after they had taken large Quantities of Bezoar and
Goa Stones.

I can truly say with Dr. Sidenham, in his Discourse of Pestilential Feavors,
that I have delivered faithfully all things relating to Practice, and never
proposed any thing but what I had often and sufficiently tried; and when I come
to Dye, I hope I shall have a cheerful Witness within my own Breast I have done
my Duty.

FINIS.

