SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Mexico Seeds, Imported from the INDIES:
SHOWING Their Wonderful VIRTUE against WORMS in the Bodies of Men, Women, and
Children.

Written by a Country Physician to Dr. Burwell, President of the College of
Physicians in London.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1695.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Mexico Seeds: SHOWING Their Wonderful Virtue
against WORMS in the Bodies of Men, Women, and Children. In a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
I Received your Letter, with your Desire to know what particular Specific I
had ^bserved the Indians make most use of against Worms; and I must freely tell
you, that I have often seen them give the Mexico Seeds, which powerfully expels
them in Men, Women, and Children. The Seeds look like an Insect, o^ sort of
flat Worm it self, and is spotted like a Leopard; it is a sort of a Palma
Christi, it resists the Putrefaction of Humors, and Purges the Stomach and
Bowels, and drives ou^ all sorts of Verminous Matter by Siege, which cause
gnawing Pains in the Body.

The Deaths of more People is owing to Worms than is generally supposed, for
they cause Vomiting, Looseness, Feavors, and wha^ not.

I saw an Indian Doctor give a Medicin^ made with these Seeds, which expelled
forty Worms at one time.

Many famous Physicians have of late Year in their Observations taken Notice,
that i^ most Distempers, especially Putrid and Malignant Feavors, there has
very much (...) Worms been a Cause, which has made them prove more difficult
to Cure, and generall^ more Mortal; and a Curious Physician tells the World,
that with the help of Microscopes he had discerned in his Patients Blood, and
sometimes in their Urine, many Animated Vermicles, and until he has applied
himself to the use of Worm-matick Medicines, could perform no Cures; but upon
the use of Medicines against Worms, he quickly perceived an Abatement of all
Feavourish Symptons.

I knew a young Gentlewoman who had a great Pain in her Head, much Sickness at
her Stomach, a very pale Countenance, want of Appetite, and a continual
Feavourish Heat, and sometimes a Chillness in her Back, and a great Faintness.
Many Means I applied to mend her Blood, to cleanse her Stomach and to alter the
Habit of her Body, but al^ in vain; at length I gave her this Medicine in a
Decoction of Bitter Herbs, about twenty Drops at a time every New and Ful^
Moon; she sometimes took it in good Mum and now and then in Milk, with Lavender
Cotton boiled in it, she voided many Worms and wonderfully recovered.

A Maid Servant who had a gnawing Pain in her Stomach and Bowels, especially
being Hungry, a dry Cough, a Loathing, and sometimes Vomiting and Looseness, a
Symptomatical Feavor, and Sleep often disturbed with horrible Dreams, starting
and gnashing of Teeth: But notwithstanding all these formidable Symptoms, I
gave her the Tincture of these Seeds, and ordered her to take them in
Wormwood-Wine, and she was restored to a perfect State of Health.

Many young Children have been destroyed by Worms, because they would not take
bitter unpleasant Medicines; but this being given only in Drops, and insensibly
conveyed into their ordinary Drink, has proved very successful toward the
Preservation of their Lives, especially when Clysters have been administered
made with Alloes and Worm(...)eeds boiled in Ale, and the Belly anointed with
Oil of Worms.

I knew a young Gentlewoman, who complaining very much of a great Pain in her
Stomach, especially when she had at any time fasted, she dying very suddenly,
her Brother (who was a Physician) caused her Body to be opened, and to the
great Wonder of the Spectators the Worms crawled about in a strange manner,
which gave abundant satisfaction as to the Cause of her Death.

If this Medicine had been known sooner, the Lives of thousands might have been
saved who made up the Numbers in your Yearly Bills of Mortality at London.

FINIS.

