A WARNING-PEECE FOR ENGLAND.

Being a Discovery of a JESUITICALL Design, to Dismember WALES from ENGLAND, to
the ruin of both.

Together with undeniable Reasons and Arguments, proving the indispensable
necessity of Appeals from Wales to the Courts at Westminster.

By Certiorar. Writs of Error, Habeas Corpus, Quo minus, and Subpaena's out of
the Exchequer, and Subpaena's out of the High-Court of CHANCERY.

Established by several Acts of Parliament.

Humbly tendered to the Consideration of his Highness the LORD PROTECTOR and his
Council.

By a Well-wisher to the Peace and Tranquillity of this NATION. P.P.

LONDON, Printed for N. Ekins, and are to be sold at his Shop in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1655.

IT has been, and of late, a much used Maxim, Divide and impera; In order
thereunto persons ill-affected to the public peace, by reflecting too much upon
their own advantages, do employ their endeavor to sever Appeals from the
Cognizance or Jurisdictions of the Courts of Westminster, thereby to be within
themselves absolute Masters of their own desires, with little heed looking back
upon the common Enemy, that by these Wiles insensibly ensnare them, under
pretense of advancing themselves, to ruin the whole Government: For the Wisdom
of our Predecessors purchased our Union with much expense of Blood, Money, and
Time, to prevent those great Inconveniences that the inconsiderateness of
some, probably of themselves excusable, will inevitably draw upon us by an
intention they have to petition the Supreme Power, to bar the Inhabitants of
Wales of the benefit of those Writs of Appeal, Certiorar. Writs of Error,
Habeas Corpus, Quo minus, and Subpaenas out of the Exchequer, and Subpaenas out
of the High Court of Chancery established by so many Acts of Parliament; And
for the continuance of an usurped Chancery in Wales, the inconveniency whereof
briefly appears by the ensuing. Treatise.

A WARNING-PEECE FOR ENGLAND,
AS it is said of Tenures, That all Estates are held mediatly, or immediately
from the King, or Supreme Magistrate: So it may in as apposite a Sense be
affirmed of Judicatory power, that all Jurisdiction is subordinate to the
Supreme Authority: There is and ought to be in one and the same Commonwealth,
or Empire; a certain Scale of Judicatory continued in an orderly concatenation
of Superiority and Inferiority, until there be at last a concentration of all
in that ultimate Right of Sovereignty; He that shall contradict this
Subordination of Powers, seems in my judgment equally obnoxious unto censure,
as those that shall maintain that there ought to be no order or degree amongst
particular men, all power is either Ordinary and Original or delegated, and
without peradventure the power delegate ought to be dependent upon that from
which it is deduced: to pretend authority in the lower Spheres of delegated
Jurisdiction, that shall be unresponsall to the higher is little better then a
criminal and contemptuous arrogance, which truly I can call no less then a
degree of Denial to the Supremacy it self: that the Summa potestas should be
secured with this Life-gard Maxim of Policy, Immunity of punishment and
unquestionablness for Error: I would readily allow as conceiving it rational
and agreeable to the rules of the Government, for there must be a sons
Justitiae a Dennier resort upon whose determination all litigant and dissenting
parties must quietly sit down and acquiesce. But to set up particular inferior
Magistrates, of what condition soever in such Paramount Stations as to be
exempt from the benefit of appeals, as it is a solaecisme in Government without
President, so would it tend to nothing but to gratify the supercillious minds
of corrupt and ambitious men: and consequently set up so many Exorbitant
Dictators in the place of Judges who may exercise their Arbitrary wills and
tyrannies, and grind the faces of the people, cum privilegio.

'Twere to be wished that all such as are real friends and relate to that
Jurisdiction of Wales would address themselves to those that sit in Judicature
in the Welsh Counties and thereby to represent seriously to their consideration
how fatal and perilous a thing it is to any Court or Jurisdiction to seek to
advance their own authority by incroaching upon another power (especially where
that power is the Superior) Many fresh instances might be produced in these
latter times of several Courts that have had their downfall from this Pinnacle
of Usurpation. Let the Council of the Marches for all the rest be mentioned
for one single Memorial and monument of the unhappiness of this Error: other
Examples I omit, the truth hereof being notorious enough to the most careless
observer. I am really persuaded that it is not the unanimous opinion of all
those judges that ride the Welsh Circuits that those Writs of Certiorar. Habeas
Corpor. and Writs of Error etc. should not be allowed, But am assured that the
most of them More Majoru^ do acknowledge their Subordination and dependence,
which is an argument to me more cogent, then a Demonstration that they that
promote this project for abolishing these Writs (for I can call it little
better) are agitated and by assed by some private intention to a grandize
themselves rather then upon pure and honorable principles of conveniencie and
zeal to the public welfare, before such attempts as these, it is known those
Courts of Wales continued in great splendour and reputation, under the power and
management of wise moderate and Learned Judges and Officers, But if now they
shall not contain themselves within their ancient Land-Markes, those Earthen
potts may, it is to be feared, be broken in pieces, by dashing against those
that are of more solid Materials, what the pretenders of this innovated
privilege (for exempting the inhabitants of Wales from appeal upon Writs of
Error Habeas Corpor. Cerciorar. etc. (being the ancient rights of the people)
can say for themselves, is beyond my apprehension to conceive.

To affirm that it is against Law would smell of gross or wilful Ignorance,
or else which is worse, affected Arrogance; For,

1. It is a sufficient reason in Law that the practice ever since the erecting
the Jurisdiction in Wales has warranted Certiorar. and in these times when
those parts were supplied with as learned Judges as any the Nation afforded,
and for writs of Error the Statute of Wales directs where they shall be brought
Viz. in personalls in the Marches; in mixed and real at Westminster as for
Criminal causes.

It is the opinion of the most learned Lawers of this Nation that Certiorar.
upon the Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 6. do lie in Wales for removal of all
Inditements for Felony, Murder Manslaughter, and other Offenses there
committed to be tried in the next adjacent English County. And that by the same
Statute any of the Inhabitant of Wales may be indicted and tried in the next
adjadent English County for a Fact committed in Wales.

The practice whereof being frequent in cases arising as well in North Wales as
South Wales, and many presidents might be instanced and produced in that
behalf: And the words of that Stature are very plain and pregnant to warrant
the same; But in case the Statute had been dark or dubious, yet by implication
of Law an Appeal lies without express provision as out of Ireland, Galice,
County Palatine. etc.

2. By the Statute of the 27th. of H. 8. Wales and England were incorporated,
and by the words of that Law, the Inbabitants of Wales shall have and enjoy all
Rights, Fran bises, Liberties, Privileges, and Laws within England, as any of
the Inhabitants there being born Subjects should have, or enjoy.

3. The Inhabitants of England enjoy the benefit of Certiorar. Habeas Corpora,
Writs of Error, Quo minus, and Subpaenas out of the Exchequer, and Subpaenas
out of Chancery (which Court ought to be always open for the releife of all
Suitors.) and consequently the Inhabitants of Wales by authority of the said
Statute ought to enjoy the like Benefits, Franchises, Liberties, Laws, and
Privileges; Since which time they have lived peaceably under the same Law and
Government, which the most ingenious and knowing amongst them desire still to
enjoy; Who cannot but look on the promoters of this innovated Jurisdiction
amongst them as persons that go to separate Wales from Eng. to the indangering
the peace thereof, and to debar all Wales of those Privileges Laws and
immunities which were graciously made and established for that benefit, and
such as do herein as they have done in other things else do deem themselves to
be enemies to their Native Country and the Peace and Tranquillity thereof.

4. The Statute of the 34 of H. 8. which establishes the Welsh Jurisdiction is
an affirmative Stat. and was merely granted in Favor of Wales by way of
additionall Privilege and Liberty; But does not take away those Laws,
Liberties, and Privileges which were established for their benefit by the said
precedent Statute of 7 H. 8. nor does abridge them from the benefit of any
Privilege or Liberty which they might claim before those Statutes.

5. It Is repugnant to Reason and common Justice, that an Inferior Court should
be set up that is subject to err, and yet should not be subject to an Appeal.

6. The Jurisdiction of Wales is derived from the Crown of England, and the
Judges there fit by Patent made under the great Seal of England. It Is agreeable
to reason that the Chancery that gives them their Power should be capable to
send a Writ of Error to them and force obedience.

7. The Certiorar. and Habeas Corpus comes out of the Upper Bench, the Court
of the Lord Protector, where he himself is supposed to sit, and has absolute
and supreme Authority in Criminal Matters, and must be obeyed therein upon pain
of contempt.

8. It is observed that ever since the Union of Wales and England, by the
Statute of 27 H. 8. Writs of Error, and Habeas Corpora, have never been denied
nor opposed by any until within this two years, by one Mr. John Corbet Justice
in Brecon, etc. Gwyn agninst Corber, Hill. 1654.
A Writ of Errror was opposed in the case of Kees Gwin Gent. But on full debate
thereof by learned Council on both sides before the present Lords Commissioners
of the great Seal of England: Their Lordships declared their Opinion that the
Writ of Error did unquestionably lie and issue into Wales, and the Judges
there ought to yield obedience thereto; And the said Court imposed several
Penalties on the said Mr. Gorbet for his wilful contemning the said Writ and
the Authority of the High Court of Chancery, from whence he received his
Commission.

9. As for the Writ of Quo ininus it is warrantable likewise by Law. Keleway,
138 Quo minus out of the Exchequer and Capias us lagatum out of the common
Pleas issue into Wales


1. Because in transitory Actions a man may sue where he pleases.

2. A Quo minus is a Prerogative Writ found out for releif of the Kings
Debtors.

3. The Principality of Wales is, and always was held of the Crown of
England, and therefore the Inhabitants thereof properly suable before the Barons
of the Exchequer to which place they are Accountants.

4. The liberty of suing in the Chequer by Quo minus, or Subpaenas has been,
time out of mind used and practiced without contradiction and without question
if the Inhabitants of Wales did not find more benefit thereby, and more
indifferent just proceedings there, then in their own Country; it is not
probable they would travel so far for Justice whilst it is in the choice of
the Plaintiff where he will bring his Action, and surely no Plaintiff will
probably sue in the Chequer without very good cause of Action because that
Court provideth costs for the Defendant suitable to the nature of his Expense,
and where the Inhabitants of Wales should be abridged or debarred of this
ancient Freedom, Liberty, and Privileges, no indifferent unbyassed person can
afford a satisfactory reason. And the rather because the matter comes to be
tried in the next adjacent English County, not far from their own Habitation,
nor yet so remote as the late Council at Marches was to most parts of Wales.
And trials of this nature give great satisfaction both to Plaintiffs and
Defendants, when they have choice of learned men to plead their Causes before
learned Judges, and able indifferent Jurors of no relation to Plaintiffs or
Defendants to try their Causes.

But it is possible that the legallity according to the present Constitutions
may not be much contradicted, and therefore it must not suffice to rest there.
It shall be my next task to make known and discover to those that will not
wilfully hood-wink themselves, the absolute and undispensable necessity of
continuing this ancient, laudable, and approved Constitution concerning the
removal of Actions or Suits from or beginning them elsewhere, then in Wales,
where the cause of Suit is first emergent.

And in the first place give me leave to say, I hold this liberty of Appeal as
great a privilege as any is comprised within the great Charter of our Freedom:
There are many living whose experience will testify to this Truth, had not
their sufferings made them incapable to be produced as Witnesses, and others of
foreseeing judgments and perspicacity that will readily maintain that this
assertion is no Hyperbole. For my part I make no difference in relation to
every English man's general Birthright by the Law, between a Habeas Corpus, and
these other Writs of Error Certiorar, Quo minus, and Subpaena out of the
Chequer and Subpaena out of the High Court of Chancery; And how grievous the
complaints of the people have been in all times, when Writs of Habeas Corpora
be obtained; Presidents of former times speak loudly of, and the noise thereof
has wrung in all men's ears: But to make the necessity of the present Position
the more delucidly appear, it will be convenient to descend to some particular
numericall reasons for the maintenance of it, which may be thus Marshalled.

1. All County Jurisdictions must of necessity be more obnoxious to
partialities in their proceedings, then those that are of more universal
latitude, they are so circumscribed within so small a Circumference, that the
Judge although never so upright and vigilant will be more easily abused, the
Jurors more liable to be packed or misled, and the Witnesses in all Causes more
readily wrought upon and corrupted.

This reason (as may be supposed) was not the least motive to the late
Parliament that gave the break-neck to the Design set on foot for Provincialls.

So that it is more then apparent the present Design to make the Welsh
Jurisdiction absolute and independent, tends not only to the deprivement of
Wales, of their ancient Rights, Liberties, and Freedoms established by Law, but
if granted, would prove a President of dangerous consequence to all the people
of England, as herein afterward is more fully declared.

2. It is very well known to those that are acquainted with the nature and
condition of the people of Wales, that before the late Wars, and at this time
there were, and are such Family Emulations and Differences for the most part in
the several Counties, that the whole body of them is apt to be cast upon every
slight controversy into Factions Confederacies and parties, insomuch that the
infection thereof does not only remain amongst the Vulgar and private men, but
often times does attach the very Bench of Justice, and by that means it is not
impossible but it may sometime catch hold of the Judge himself.

3. It is observed that since the late Wars, these Differences have been so
increased, and the spirits of men so highly provoked, that of late years (as I
am informed) the civil, Military, and Ecclesiastic Powers there have been
used and converted by some, more for private vindication and revenge on their
Neighbors and Countrymen, then for the real discharge of public trust;
Insomuch that the cries of the oppressed have been very loud though helpless,
and should the Jurisdiction of VVlales be made absolute and independent without
Appeals, then without question all (except such as are entrusted with the
Authority) and their Friends and Relations must needs be unsafe in their lives,
liberties, and Estates.

4. Those that are conversant with the Welsh Proceedings, do observe, that if
the matter concern any person of awe or eminence, there is most commonly such
relation between the Parties, Jury, and VVitnesses either in respect of Blood
and Kindred, tenure or other dependa ce, that some out of wretched simplicity,
others our of wilful perverseness will make but a Cipher of the man upon the
Bench, and think they discharge not their duty unless they find for their
Kinsman, their Friend or Lord.

5. But suppose that the case of controversy fall out between a Native and an
Englishman, certainly experience has taught some that mediet as linguae is in
no case more necessary then here; For the first Inquiry or whether he be E^gle
Cheria or no, and I may then say without traducing of that Country, that the
same Injury or Fact committed upon a Native, will many times not be found so
when committed upon an Englishman.

Ob. If it be objected, that Appeals to the Courts of Westminster by Habeas
Corpora, Certiorar. Writs of Error, etc. occasion delay, and expense.

An. It cannot be denied by any, but that delatory Justice is more desirable
then perverted, and the Appellant bears the greatest burden, who probably will
not appeal without good cause to warrant his proceedings therein, for besides
his own charges he must pay considerable costs (if in civil Causes) to the
other party if he make not good his Appeal, if in criminal Cases, the charge
of bringing it to the test, besides the re-inforcing of the Judgment given
below, if he fail to make good his Appeal, is a sufficient check to all
Causeless Appellants.

Ob. If it be objected, that Trials upon Quo minus, and Subpaenas out of the
Exchecquer are chargeable and delatory, because they are transmitted for trial
into foreign Counties, and that the remoteness of the place is a
discouragement to parties and their Witnesses.

An. 1. That Objection will prove of little force if the convenience of having
the same tried before indifferent and impartial Judges and Jurors in the next
adjacent County be duly considered, where Causes are determined with equal and
quicker dispatches, then the ordinary course of Justice in the great Sessions
of Wales does bear it, where many by reason of experimental delays of late
used there, are much discouraged to prosecute their Causes.

2. If the extraordinary charges of Appeals from corrupt and erroneous
Verdicts, and Judgments, be taken into consideration, occasioned by the
partiality and corruption of Sheriffs and Jurors, and others that have the
transacting of the peoples causes, as has been before demonstrated; with this
also, that in case a Welsh Sheriff be of the contrary faction, or a friend to
the Plaintiff or Defendant; such Jurors shall be returned, against whom no
exceptions can be made by Law, yet shall bring in a verdict rather according to
the pleasure of the Sheriff and the parttie he adheres unto, then according to
the truth and merits of the cause.

3. If it be considered where the trial by Law is appointed, although not in
vicineta, yet in vicino Commitatu in the neighbor County, although not in the
neighborhood, and it is often seen on trialls in the Welsh Counties, the
parties are forced sometimes to bring witnesses out of England 100. or 200.
miles, or more, and sometimes out of the remotest parts of Wales even to this
County of Mountgomery.

4. The contrivers and promoters of Cantonizing Wales to serve their own
ambitious ends, do not only go about to deprive the Inhabitants of Wales of the
benefit of Certiorar. Habeas Corpora, Writs of Error, Quo minus, Subpaenas, out
of the Exchequer; But would also make themselves Lord Chancellors, as well as
Lords chief Justices of Wales, and that no Appeal might be hereafter made by
any of the Inhabitants of Wales to the High Court of Chancery for the reveiw or
reversal of any decree, or other proceeding in the pretended court of Chancery
there held, nor any address to the said High Court of Chancery by any of the
Inhabitants of Wales, for releif upon Original bills there filed, touching any
matters real, personal, or mixed, relating to Wales; all which sufficiently
testifies the pride, ambition, and exorbitant thoughts and purposes of these
Innovators, to make themselves sole and arbitrary Judges, both of Law and
equity in all causes criminal and civil, to the indangering of the lives,
liberties, and estates of all such as are not, or shall not be entrusted with
this Paramount authority, or are not or shall not be of relation to them.

Whereas in truth if their Chancery Jurisdiction be but inquired into, they have
not the least color, much less Commission or authority to hold such a
Jurisdiction as they now do, and for some late years have usurped as I humbly
conceive for these reasons.

1. The Judges of Wales have not any power either by the Stat. of Wales or
their Commissions to hold a court of chancery, nor yet by any ancient custom or
Prescription; but its beginning was from the Council of the Marches now
abolished on mere references transferred unto them, whereby color thereof first
retained petitions and afterward bills in equity, neither can they produce
especially in South Wales one bil in equity preferred in this pretended Court
of Chancery in Wales of 50. years standing, there being many living that well
remember the time when no such bills were retained but only equitable rules
made at common law, either by the mutual consent or upon submission of the
parties

2. There are no Officers settled nor sworn, nor any set Fees established in
this welsh Chancery by any Law or legal authority, other then what the Judges
there for some late years arbitrarily have erected, whereas the Fees and
Officers in reference to their Gommon-Law Jurisdiction are certain and
prefixed by the Statutes of Wales.

3. The Welsh Chancery is a paper Court where there are no records or
inrolments kept of their proceedings, but their paper Records as they call them,
are commonly carried by Client, Solicitor, and Attorney, from place to place
in their pockets, and often left and some times made use of to light Tobacco.

4. It is questionable whether any person can be questioned or Indicted for
perjury committed in this Court, whereby the same may become a Nursery for
Perjury, which is a reason given by some that know the Country, why Perjury is so
frequent in some of those parts

5. To a Court of equity a distinct Seal ought to appertain, to seal all
their writs and enforce obedience to their proceedings: But to this pretended
Court of equity no such Seal appertains, yet assume they power to seal their
Chancery writs with the Judicial Seal, and thereto affix green wax, which is
solely ordained by the Statute of 34. H. 8. to Seal Judicial writs and not
Chancery writs, and therefore as well may the Judges of the Upper Bench or
Common Pleas or the Officers entrusted with the Seals thereof affix green wax
to the Writs Issuable out of the Highest Court of Chancery, and seal the same
with their proper seal, and take the Fees due for the same, as the said
Justices or their Clarks may seal the Writs or mandats which they Issue out of
their pretended Chancery, with their Common Law Seal by which they cannot
enforce obedience to their pretended Chancery Jurisdiction, and so consequently
their Orders and Decrees are of no force, but the people exposed to fruitless
trouble and expenses, and that which can attain to no reasonable end, the Law
rejects as a thing inutile and useless, Sapiens incipit a fine.

6. The High Court of Chancery time out of mind and memory of man, nay ever
since the establishment of the Jurisdiction of Wales, on Bills exhibited there,
have and do retain the same and give relief therein, notwithstanding any
Decree, Order or Proceedings in the pretended Chancery of Wales, against whose
proceedings the said Court have, and do grant Injunctions until the hearing of
the cause which were never disobeyed nor contradicted; nor such proceedings
found inconvenient until within this 12. months, a Judge then and now in Wales
drew a Plea of a decree made before himself, in Bar of a bill exhibited in the
High Court of Chancery, for releif of the same matter, Owen against Thomas
Hillar, 1654.
but got an other Counsel to sign it, which being argued before the Lords
Commis. and endeavored to be maintained by two Welsh Counselors, that take
upon them to be the principal upholders of this usurped jurisdiction yet their
Lordps. overruled and ordered the Defendants to answer in chief, and granted an
Injunction for stay of the proceedings in the Chancery of Wales, for the
matters here complained of, until hearing of the cause.

7. There are Presidents that may be likewise produced of Prohibitions Issued
out of the Courts of Upper Bench and Common Pleas, against the pretended
Chancery of Wales.

8. A Court of Equity cannot be erected by grant or prescription, but only by
Act of Parliament; Hobart 5.87 Martin and Marshall, Dyer 175 1 pr. Sproggs Case.
and yet the Chancery in Wales has neither grant nor prescription nor Act of
Parliament for its support, whereof the Judges of Wales being deeply sensible,
and of the danger of incurring the penalties imposed by the several Statutes
for Praemunire in cases of like nature, have not until now of late take upon
them the authority to make any final or decretall Orders, without the orders
themselves were first signed by the Counsel and Attorneys on both sides whereby
the same were indeed made rather orders by consent of both parties their
Counsel and Attorneys, then any final or decretal orders by a Chancery
Jurisdiction which indeed gives them no more authority then if the matter were
referred by consent of all parties by way of Arbitration to ordinary
Arbitrators, and how far any have acted beyond their Commission or contrary to
the Statutes for Praemunire; is humbly submitted to consideration, there being
no Register there until of late.

8. To give the Judges of Wales the power of Law and equity in all cases
criminal and civil, without Appeals to Westminster; is such a Jurisdiction
that the wisdom of former ages never yet thought safe to entrust to any
persons of never so much integrities and abilities, nor any could be found so
immodest as to accept much less to desire it, until few of late, and it is
well hoped that the supreme Authority will take special notice of the contrivers
and promoters of this design being a few out of Brecknock Shire, where John
Corbet Esquire does ride as sole Justice; is upon occasion of a murder there lately
committed by some that are of near relation to those that carry on this design,
with an intention to smother this murder, and save the life's of few from the
power of Justice, with the utter ruin of the whole Country, as is herein after
more fully discovered.

The granting such a power of Law and equity in one or more persons, is to set
up Arbitrarines, and to destroy the fundamental Laws of England; as Magna
Charta, the Petition of right, and trials by 12. men etc. For after a verdict
at Law the same person that sits as Judge thereof, may if he please, as
Chancellor stop Indgment, or after Judgment stay Execution, or if he please
stop the trial it self, and in one man's case Administer the strictnes of Law,
but in another man's case of the same nature, Administer his own will for rules
of equity: And so carry fire in one hand, and water in another hand, being
indeed a power that many learned honest conscientious men would not accept off,
if offered unto them, as Inconsistent wh the rules of good government in the
due administration of justice; and if once this power was erected in Wales;
then by the same rule of Law and reason may some ambitious persons petition for
establishing the like Jurisdiction in all other parts of this Nation that are
but 30. or 40. miles distant from London, and thereby reduced the whole Nation
into several Provinces under an Arbitrary mixed power of Law and equity in one
and the self same persons, to the subversion and overthrow of the Fundamental
rights, laws, liberties, and freedoms of England. Far be it from any sober man
as much as to imagine that the Wisdom and Justice of his Highness the Lord
Protector and his Counsel will ever condescend to such unsafe destructive
Attempts, the effecting whereof would not only draw a ruin insensibly upon the
whole Nation; But endanger the very Root of Government.

Whereas, now the Supreme Magistrate has the mediate overseeing of all the
Judges proceedings in Westminster Hall and they have an inspection into the
proceedings of all delegated and subordinate Judges and Officers, and a power
to relieve the innocent and oppressed and punish the guilty; whereby the Supreme
Magistrate may oversee the proceedings of all the Judges of England and Wales,
in and through the Crystal Fountain of Justice which always ought to flow from
the Courts at Westminster for the releiving and refreshing of all the oppressed
injured people of the Nation; and thereby the Supreme Magistrate is the better
enabled as Judge over all Judges to discern and determine such differences as
shall or may arise either between the people or the several Courts and
Jurisdiction of the Nation and Administer equal right and Justice to all the
people under his Highness Government and Protection.

But least this discourse might fall into the hands of some incredulous persons
that are no ways concerned to take notice of the manner of the proceedings in
Wales; give me leave to present to your consideration, three Affidavit, the
Original whereof remain of record in the Chancery, and upper Bench; which will
in great measure fortify the verity of the foregoing conclusions, and I dare
affirm, if all other passages of like nature that have happened in the great
Sessions held in those parts, this little treatise would swel into too great a
Volume.

Thomas Watkins of Bulith in the County of Brecon. Gent. makes Oath that
Elizabeth Williams mother of Roger Price late deceased finding one Jeffery
Williams at the last Epiphany Quarter Sessions held in Brecon did in Court lay
hands on him and charged him with the murder of the said Roger Price her son,
and acquainted the Justices, of the peace then and there sitting, that the said
Roger Price was dead of the stab, and wounds received of the said Jeffery
Williams, Hugh Williams his brother, David Williams, and Samuel Thomas, and
prayed the Justices to commit the said Jeffery williams then and there present
to the Goal, whereby he might be proceeded against according to law; Nevertheles
the said Jeff. Williams was left at liberty upon ordinary Bayl to appear at the
last great Sessions for the County of Brecon. and the said Ieffery Williams
has since been permitted to ride armed with his sword, and the said David
Williams with a fouling piece to the great terror of the mother, wife and
friends of the said Roger Price, and the said David Williams having threatened
Thomas Phillips brother to the said Roger for appearing for the Lord Protector
against him, and the rest of the offenders in order to the bringing them to a
fair trial; And the said David Williams did shoulder and jostle Elizabeth
Williams the mother whilst she was going peaceably in the street, that the
said Elizabeth Williams taking notice of the premises and of the great
Countenance given the malefactors, finding their power and interest to be too
potent for the Prosecutor in the said County of Brecon. where she could not
hope for a fair and indifferent trial and proceedings against them, did
employ this Deponent being uncle to the said Roger price to sue out a
Certiorar. out of this Court for removing the Coroners Inquisition to this
Court in order to a fair trial, in an indifferent English County, who on
security given to prosecute with effect, obtained the same, and delivered the
said writ to the Coroner, since the Inquisition made, by which the said parties
were found guilty of Manslaughter on the Statute of stabbing, of the first of
King James: since which time at the last great Sessions held at Brecon. before
John Corbet Esquire Justice there, the said Mr. Corbet was moved in open Court that
the said Ieffery Williams then and there present in Court might stand committed
according to Law, and acquainted Mr. Corbet that the Inquisition was found,
whereupon Mr. Corbet seeming highly displeased with the removal thereof, did
check and discountenance the prosecutors Counsel and permitted other Counsel to
speak against the said writ and removal of the Inquisition, and Edmond Jones
Esquire Attorney General there for the Lord Protector not speaking one word in
behalf of the Lord Protector, and the Prosecutors in that behalf; but on the
contrary moved that the said Ieff. Williams might stand on his bayl; And
further deposes that the said Mr. Corbet committed the said Elizabeth Williams
mother of the said Roger Price, and one of the Prosecutors and suffered the
said Jeff. Williams to go at liberty on his bayl, and did not as much as Issue a
Warrant to apprehend any of the said Offenders; but did also so far appear
against the Prosecutors and the Interest of the Lord Protector that he checked
the Coroner and called him a knave and examined him against himself on oath in
court merely for his careful discharge of his duty on the Lord Protectors
behalf: as this Deponent verily believes; and the said M. Corbet did examine
the foreman of the Jury in open Court against the Coroner and the Lord
Protectors Interest, and against himself as this Deponent takes it, and
afterward privately examined him in his Chamber, and refused to Administer an
oath to the said Elizabeth Williams on her Affidavit produced in writing
touching the Premises, a true Copy whereof is hereunto annexed although the
said Elizabeth did render her self to be sworn to the truth thereof, first in
his Chamber, and afterward in open Court who then kept the same: Wherefore, and
by reason of the potency of the Malefactors in the said County this deponent
being Uncle to the said Roger Price deceased, and one of the Prosecutors for
the Lord Protector cannot hope, or expect to obtain Justice, or any fair or
indifferent proceedings in the said County of Brecon. against the said
Malefactors, for the said horrid murder whereof they stand as before said
indicted; And the rather in regard John Williams Esquire late high Sheriff of the
said County being brother to 2. of the said Malefactors; and Edm. (...) Attorney
Genesis there, being a special friend to the said Jo Williams and his brothers,
who contrary to his duty the last great Sessions neglected the Prosecution of
the said Malefactors; And further deposes that he was credibly informed that
the said Malefactors and their Accomplices did way lay this deponent to take away
his life, in his Journey to London this term.

Thomas Watkins.
Sworn the 15th. day of May, 1655. before me Hen: Roll.
REes Gwyn of Llanlloelvell in the county of Brecon. Gent. makes oath that
this deponent being indicted for Barretry in the County of Brecon. upon the
malicious Prosecution of some of his adversaries, and finding his Prosecutors
too potent in that County, where he could not expect to receive an indifferent
and fair trial, this Deponent did sue forth a Certiorar. out of this Court of
Vpper-Bench returnable Michalemas Term 1653. in order to a fair trial in an
indifferent County, and delivered the same with the Fee to John Corbet Esquire
then, and yet Justice there; who allowed the same; and this deponent paid the
Prothonotaries Fees for certifiing the Record, that this deponent being before
taken on process to appear that Sessions; and having given bond to the Sheriff
for that purpose, and appeared, and had his writ of Certiorar. as aforesaid,
allowed; The said John Corbet did afterward threaten to extreat the said Bond,
unless this Deponent would wave his Certiorar. which he was forced to do to
save the suing of his said Bond, which nevertheless was sued: And this Deponent
coming to trial on his Traverse, and twenty four able men returned by the
Sheriff, the said John Corbet did lay aside the said Jury, and caused another
Jury to be immediately Impanelled, who were many of them, this Deponents
professed Enemies, and one of them; Viz. William Vaughan, one of the grand
Jurymen who had first-found the Bill, by which means this Deponent was found
guilty, and fined by the said John Corbet 200 l. and ordered to be Imprisoned
until he should pay it. And after some time of restraint this Deponent was
discharged out of Prison, with a purpose, as this Deponent believes, to levy
the Fine on his Estate, which in part was effected, and about the value of 40
l. of his Goods seized, and sold for about 16 l. whereby he endured a double
punishment for one supposed Crime, and this Deponent having since by advice of
Counsel taken out a Writ of Error in this cause, returnable in Hillary Term
last, did deliver the same to the said John Corbet at his own then dwelling
place, and tendered him his Fee which he refused to allow; And in Hillary Term
last, this Deponent renewed the said Writ returnable in Easter Term last, and
again tendered him the Writ and his Fee at his then dwelling place, which he
refused then to allow: But wished this Deponent to tender it in Court at
Brecon. Sessions then next following, and there he would allow it. In pursuance
whereof this Deponent did in Brecon. Sessions held in April last, as well in his
Chamber as in open Court, tender him the said Writ and his fee, which he
refused to allow.

And this Deponent further deposes, that on his said enlargment he was forced
to be bound with two able Sureties in a Recognizance of 400 l. for his
appearance the first day of the last great Sessions in Brecon. and in the mean
time to be of the good behavior; Notwithstanding this Deponent, has, as he
doubts not but to make appear, performed the Condition of the said
Recognizance, and duly appeared and attended in Court every day of that
Sessions, and until it was adjourned, yet since there is a Scirifacias sued
out on the said Recognizance. By all which ways and means, this Deponent is in
danger to be ruined in his Person, Credit, and Estate; The said John Corbet
having declared, he would address himself to all the Judges of Westminster, and
would use his utmost endeavor to have this Cause determined and concluded, by,
and before himself and none other. And this Deponent is credibly informed, and
doubts not to make it appear, that the said John Corbet so far appeared herein
against this Deponent, that he solicited the extending of this Deponents Lands
and Goods for the payment of the said Fine, and applied himself to several
persons for that purpose.

Rees Gwyn.
Sworn 7th: day of June, 1654. before me Hen: Roll.
Between Rees Gwyn Gent. Plaintiff, John Corbet Esquire Defendant.
THe Plaintiff Rees Gwyn makes oath that since he this Deponent delivered the
first writ of Error unto the Defendant, Corbet (which was in Michaelmas Term
1653.) he this deponent has expended in Journyes to London, and otherwise, to
force the Defendant to return the Writ of Error and Record into this Court of
Vpper-Bench, above one hundred pounds, and upon the delivery of the last Writ
of Error to the Defendant he demanded his Fee for allowing the writ in a
jeering manner, using these words in open Court No penny no Pater Noster; And
although his Marshal in his presence and by his approbation received six
shillings eight pence as a Fee therein, he the said John Corbet has not yet
returned the same, though he then promised to return it. All which rends to
this deponents great damage and prejudice.

Rees Gwyn.
Sworn the 22. day of Feb. 1654 Edwin Rich.
THese things being premised what man of reason can esteem it convenient to
debarr that Nation of so high a Birthright as the benefit of Appeals to the
Courts at Westminster, by Certiorar. Habeas Gorpus; Writs of Error, Quo minus
and Subpaenas out of the Exchequer, and Subpaenas out of the High Court of
Chancery.

To conclude all, if this ancient Right and Freedom be taken away, the
Inhabitants of Wales will be deprived of the most considerable branch of
liberty that belongs unto them, and I am persuaded, and partly know, that
many of the most ingenious amongst them, and of considerable estates there, will
be enforced to sell their Inheritances, and forsake their own native Country:
rather then live under such an Arbitrary power as is herein before
demonstrated, which to a noble or ingenious mind will be a greater bondage then
to serve in the Callies as a conquered Slave.

FINIS.

