Mr. Pead's SERMON, On the Parable of Dives and Lazarus.

Courteous Reader,

If that these serious and weighty Considerations upon the Parable of Dives and
Lazarus, should not be accounted worth laying out One Penny, be pleased to Read
them over Gratis, keep the Book clean, and Return it in three Hours.

The Wicked Man's Misery. AND THE Poor Man's Hope and Comfort. BEING A SERMON
Upon the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, Wherein Is briefly discovered the
Miserable Estate and Condition of those who are guilty of Incharitableness,
Pride and Covetousness.

AS ALSO, The happy Rewards and Enjoyments which are prepared for the
Righteous, who patiently endure Afflictions in this World.

Luke XVI. Ver. 19, 20, 21. There was a certain Rich Man, which was clothed in
purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day. And there was a
certain Beggar named Lazarus, which laid at his Gate full of Sores: And
desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the Rich Man's Table:
moreover the Dogs came and licked his Sores, etc.

Prove. 28.6. Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, then he that
is perverse in his ways, though he be Rich.

By the Reverend Dr. Pead, Minister of St. James's Clerkenwell, London.

Licensed according to Order.

London Printed, and Sold by J. B. on London Bridge, 1699.

Luke XVI. Ver. 19, 20, 21.
Ver. 19. There was a certain Rich Man, which was clothed in purple and fine
linen, and fared sumptuously every day. And there was a certain Beggar named
Lazarus which was laid at his Gate full of Sores. And desiring to be fed with
the crumbs which fell from the rich man's table: moreover the dogs came and
licked his sores, etc.


THE Pharisees, who were present at our Savior's Conference with the
Disciples, in the former part of this Chapter, were so netled at his pithy and
home Discourse, that they mocked at, and derided him, viz. Because he exclaimed
against those sins they were strongly prone to, and wilfully allowed themselves
in; namely, Covetousness and Vncharitabless: He therefore, to convince them of
their Folly, and, if possible, to reduce them to a more generous and humane
frame of Spirit, ushers in a very not able and affecting Parable, adorned with
illustrious Instances, and furnished with memorable Characters: There was, says
he, a certain Noble Man who lived softly, had many Attendants, full Tables, a
stately Palace, every thing that was great, good, and desirable in this Life.
And there was a poor indigent Man, called by the Name of Lazarus, destitute of
a comfortable Habitation, his Belly pinched with hunger, his Spirits
languishing for want of reviving draughts, his Countenance dejected and fading,
and his Flesh being exposed to stress of weather, not having wherewith to
defend it from boisterous Winds and other common Contingencies, broke out into
Ulcers and putrefying Sores. This miser able Creature makes to the rich Man's
Seat, and fills his Courts with the doleful cries of a languishing Soul; he
begs, not for Dainties and sumptuous Diet, but only for waste Bread, the refuse
of the Servants; or rather for the Crumbs which usually fall under the Table at
Meals. This was the poor Man's request; that which is swept up with the rest of
the litter, and thrown out of Doors to the Dunghill, was all that this
distressed Lazarus most importunately desired, to allay the gripes and gnawings
which sharp Hunger had created within him: But though his Necessities were so
pressing, his request so modest and reasonable, and his Sores so angry and
painful, (enough to have melted down an obdurate Heart into pity, and to have
obliged the meanest Person to have spared from himself, and nourished such an
afflicted Soul, (yet this avaricious and impregnable Wretch turns a deafned
Ear, casts a dismal eye upon, and brow-beats this trembling Beggar, and basely
denies him that which his menial Servants scornfully rejected. The Dogs which
generally are currish and snarling, ready to snap at, and fly upon strangers,
here change their Nature, and, as it were, express their Pity by doleful
howlings; and as if this was too little, medendi gratia linguas suas
accommodant, run hastily to him, and endeavor the Cure of his Wounds by
licking them with their soft and easy Tongues: Thus these Creatures supplied
the Necessities of afflicted Lazarus, by the instinct of Nature, more than
their Masters by all the Ties and Obligations of Reason.

He was blessed with a flourishing Estate, nothing that the World esteemed good
great, and desirable, was withheld from him; so that since Providence had thus
undeservedly crowned him with a plentiful Revenue, he could not, unless wrapped
up in the Womb of Ingratitude, have denied a small part of so vast an Income to
this importunate Beggar; much less have refused him that inconsiderable Request
of his, namely, The crumbs which fell from his Table; such Offel which his Dogs
blowed upon; But brutishly forgetting from whence his Riches sprang, and
greedily fixing his Heart upon them, concludes, it Prodigality and ill
Husbandry to part with any thing, though it were but a Rag to cover the Flesh, or
a morsel to sustain the Hunger, or a draught to revive the languishing Spirits
of a Fainting Soul. Such dangerous Temptations are Riches, if Men are not
Guarded with Grace, and well consider the Design of God in bestowing them.
Hence our Savior pronounces, That it is easier for a Camel to go through the
eye of a Needle, than for a rich Man to enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Not
that Riches are evils in themselves, but they become such by an imprudent
Management, when Men suffer their Hearts to be drawn away by them. They are
commonly Blessings; they were so to Abraham, Lot, Isaac, and Jacob; to Job,
David, and Joseph of Arimathea: But such was the stupid brutishness of this
Miser, he contracted such an inordinate love to his Estate, that he had quite
lost all Humanity and Compassion: His only care was to keep what he had,
drowning his Senses in Gluttony, Drunkenness, and all kinds of Sensuality,
never once thinking of a Life to come; but O sad Catastrophe, and dismal change
of things! Riches, though they defend from Hunger, Thirst, and other exterior
Contingencies, yet they cannot bribe and stave off Death, neither insinuate
with the Judge Christ Jesus for a favorable Trial, nor purchase a Mansion
amongst the Saints; he dies and awakes in the midst of scorching flames, and
bituminous smoaks, scared at the ghastly Spectrums and heideous Noises he meets
with among Devils and damned Fiends Lazarus also dies, and is carefully
conveyed into Abraham 's bosom, a safe repository, and never to Hunger, Thirst,
and want more.

The words of the Text are properly divided into two special parts. The First
is, A brief Narrative of a Rich Man's general Course of Living; he clothes
himself with rich, gay, and costly Raiment, and fares sumptuously every Day.
The Second Part is, A description of the Calamities that attend Poverty;
Lazarus was full of sores, almost naked and famished, he begs for a little
Sustenance, and that of the meanest kind, but was most uncharitably denied it.
Now these two Generals demonstrate to us;

First of all, That Riches are strong incentives to Luxury and Riotousness;
this Rich Man fared Sumptuously every Day, he Entertained himself every Day
with Luxurious Delights* Secondly, That Riches tempts to pride, Haughtiness,
and Incharitableness. This Elated Miser thought it beneath his Grandeur, either
to look upon, or commiserate afflicted and languishing Lazarus; and therefore
chides him by his Menial Servants, and sends him away empty as he came.
Thirdly, That Poverty is a despicable State, and renders a Man most vile and
mean in the Eye of others, how much soever good he has heretofore done with
what God has blessed him with.
These are the three Topics which will be the subjects of my ensuing
Discourse; only by the way it may not be improperly inserted, That by the Rich
Man, and poor Lazarus, is figured out to us the different state of good and bad
Men in this Life: Good Men, for the most part, are in mean and low
Circumstances, and of small account, but are rich toward God, precious in his
sight, and have their portion treasured up with him, according to that of
James, chap. 2.5. God has chosen the poor of this World heirs of the Kingdom of
Heaven. The Wicked generally flourish, the World's affluences tumble upon them,
but they have their Portion in this life; hereafter Fire and Brimstone, and an
horrible Tempest, shall be the Portion of their Cup, Psalm* 11.6.

But to proceed in order. First, Riches are strong incentives to Luxury and
Riotousness. This noble man fared Sumptuously every Day; he observed no
intervals for Mortification, no time for holy Retirement, for a strict
Examination of himself, for Prayer, Repentance, and other necessary Duties: Nor
was he so Morally useful to others as was St. Agustine, who divided the Day
into special Portions for needful businesses; to reconcile disturbed Families,
and link together enraged Neighbors in the Bonds of Amity, to observe and
minister to the Necessities of the Indigent, to instruct the Ignorant, counsel
the less wary; and such like. No no, this wealthy Wretch lived every Day to
himself, delighting his Palate with luscious Viands, and Falernia Liquors,
loading his Stomach with Morsels, without any regard to Moderation; had no
thoughts of, nor any earning bowels, after those who wanted, and would be glad
of the meanest bit at his Table. After this Luxurious manner did he spend every
Day; such strong and irresistible temptations are Riches, when Men are without
Grace, and consider not the wise and holy purpose of God in bestowing them; for
though they are the proper and peculiar Gifts of Heaven, and were promised to,
and bestowed upon our Forefathers, as illustrious instances of the Divine
favor, yet they are not to be prostituted solely to our selves, that is, to
nourish and maintain our Lusts, for then they change their nature, and prove
the manifest ruin of Soul and Body. Upon which account, it may not be improper
to insert this Memorandum, That they who are blessed with Plenty and Store,
ought to be very importunate with God, that he would moderate, and rectify
their Appetites, keep and restrain their Hearts, curb and limit their Desires,
that they may not be taken up, and charmed with their Wealth, as to forget the
Concernments of their Souls, and suffer them to live out a long Eternity with
the Damned Crew, in the unhappy Residences of Misery. Therefore our Savior,
ever and anon, is giving a special charge to Rich Men, that they be very
cautious and wary, lest they should be Enchanted, and betrayed by
Superfluities, which like the Sirens, whom the Poets speak of, as it were, lie
in wait for Men, and seduce them by their pleasing, and almost irresistible
Charms. It was an excellent Prayer of Agurs, Prove. 30.8, 9. O Lord, says he,
Give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with jood convenient for me: Lest I
be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor and steal,
and take the name of my God in vain.

Having weighed in an even Balance both a prosperous and an adverse state, and
considering what inconveniences the extreme of their condition would bring men
into; the one tempting them to Luxury, Drunkenness, and Gluttony, the other to
Theft, Lying and Perjury; Prostrates himself before God, with rectified
desires, a moderate appetite, and an humble heart, and beseeches him to bless
him with a condition neither too wealthy, nor too despicable: to the end he
might not be prompted to such enormous sins. When Riches are enjoyed without a
just sense and fear of God, they lead men into manifold extravagances; the
appetite which once perhaps was corrective, and as scanty as a mean competency,
now enlarges it self, and grows as comprehensive in its wishes, as the Estate
abounds; Now the Heart is fixed upon its desired Treasure; and no less taken
with all the pleasures and seemingly delights it can procure and purchase, to
violate a divine Commandment; when obedience thereto stands in competition with
Money, is thought no sin, but rather a special instance of policy and prudence.
In a word, and to borrow the expression, The love of Money spends all its
desires upon it self, to purchase nothing but unsatisfying instruments of
Exchange, or Supernumerary Provisions; and ends in emptiness of Spirit.

This Rich Man in the Text spent all his thoughts, how he might advance to the
height of an Epicures Life; what shall I eat? or what shall I drink? or what
shall I put on? the World seemed too little to answer his greedy desires; too
empty to furnish his Table with such varieties his extended Appetite most
passionately craved after. His Estate was large, and his Mind answerable; nay,
rather more diffusive: So that though he was plentifully accommodated with the
sublimest rarities, yet still he seemed unsatisfied; but sure this is not the
end of our Creation, God has not designed us merely for these lower
entertainments. Our Spirits are capacious Beings, of eternal duration, and must
live in another World for ever, after this is consumed. Where then is thy
policy? O Dives? Where is the sense of thy Voluptuous faring? Thou must not
always abide here; thy Riches, Honors, and Luscious Delicates, all must
perish, and thou Stripped into a naked Spirit, and answer for all thy
Transactions at the Tremendous Bar of Justice, where neither thy Wealth nor
Grandeur can procure thy favor with Judge or Jury, the meanest Peasants shall
then be as great as thou, and find as much receptance at that Grand Assizes.
But to proceed to the second general Head, namely,

Secondly, That as Riches are strong Incentives to Luxury and Riotousness, so
to Pride; Haughtiness and Incharitableness. This wealthy Miser thought it too
great a Reflection upon his Dignity and Person, to look upon, or commiserate
afflicted Lazarus; and therefore he imperiously charged his Servants to forbid
him begging, and to send him away empty as he came.

He considered that such an Estate as he was possessed of, called for Lofty
looks, a starched carriage, big words, and full commands, a visible separation
of himself from his inferiors; and that which enhansed his Estate, speaking to
others by the mouth of his Servants, being difficult of access, and carrying it
in all things with Majesty, Pomp, and an imperious Deportment. It had therefore
been a visible slur upon his Person, to have seemed afflicted with the
complaints of poor Lazarus, to have stepped from his seat and viewed this
Beggar's Condition, and commanded supplies for him. Should he, who was advanced
to the very top of honor and magnificence; he, who had attendance always at
hand, whose grandeur was noised abroad, and became the wonder and admiration of
the Neighboring Villages; he whose clothing was Royal Purple, whose Linen
the Richest that Acajah could furnish him with; he whose Presence was the
Terror of his Household, and the astonishment of the Vulgar; Should such a one,
thus incircled to the rarest accommodation's of Fortune, so far demean himself
to stoop to a Person fallen into the depth of Disgrace, attended with all the
Instances of Contempt and Derision, as was dejected Lazarus? No, no, let him
away from my Gate, and get his Belly full at some Cottage or other. Thus Riches
are apt to make us forget our selves, they intoxicate our understanding, and
Prompt us to overrate our selves; they lift us up above our Sphere, and lead us
to contemn and slight those who are not in such fortunate circumstances as our
selves. Common Experience gives us too many, and palpable Instances of this
kind; some who through meanest of Parentage, or other unhappy Contingencies,
have lived in an Ordinary Capacity, and while thus bereaved of Fortunes Gifts,
possibly were Humble, Meek, and Condescending, forward to assist when useful,
and apt to be affected with the Calamities, and pressing necessities of others;
but when the tide has changed either their Industry blessed to a plentiful Etate,
or they started into a wealthy Condition, by the last Will and Testament of a
deceased Friend, or familiar Acquaintance, their disposition has changed too
Now their late Translation speaks greater things; their Conversation must be
with those who are of the same Rank and Quality with themselves. Now their
wonted Apparel, which was plain and suitable to their Condition, must be of
another Mode and Figure, set off with curious Trimmings, and fashionable
Appurtinances; their Carriage more Airy and affected, their Countenances more
Elevated and Stately; their Speech more Majestic and Uncooth, former
Acquaintance must be buried in Oblivion, the poor not worthy of their notice,
or at least have nothing to spare for them; their Pride and Grandeur must be
maintained; but what an unfortunate case is this, that men should forget from
whence they are, and value themselves so much upon such unconstant and
perishing things as Riches are? what art thou the better for thy wealth?
wherein do thou exceed thy meanest Brother? Reckon not upon Wealth, for God
is no respecter of Persons. A Beggar, it may be, is more in God's favor than
thou, and shall be admitted within the vail to Joy and feast himself for ever
with those rare, unseen repasts which Divine Wisdom has contrived for those who
express their Love and Loyalty to him, whilst thou shall be dragged away by the
common Accuser, and his Angels, into the Repositories of shame and sorrow,
there to suffer the utmost heats of Sin-revenging God.

But besides the stupid folly of being puffed up in conceit, because thy Lot is
fallen into a fair Heritage; Daily experiences almost evinces us, that riches
are Transient Pleasures, like unto the flower of the field, which to day is
blown, gay, and beautiful, and to morrow faded, and fit for naught but to be
helped together with the grass: Thou call thy self to day a substantial,
wealthy person; Houses in abundance, Land large and fruitful, Bags full, and
running over, but by the morrow perhaps thou may be weeping to see thy
Tenements laid in Ashes, thy Money snatched away by the silent crafty Thief, or
perhaps, thou weeping, sighing, and roaring in Hell; thou know not but the
Sentence is gone forth from God; Thou fool, this night shall thy Soul be
required of thee, and then whose shall those things be which thou have
provided? But if it so falls out, that thou should outlive thy Happiness,
see thy self stripped of all thy Pomp and Riches, thou may justly expect to
meet with hard usage; for, (besides the many Reflections which would certainly
be cast upon thee, that this sad Catastrophe, and dismal change of things, is a
just Judgment upon thee for thy Pride, Arrogance, Self-conceitedness, and
Incharitableness, during thy Prosperity,) Men would be so far from pitying thy
downfall, and considering thy necessities, that rather they would reproach thee
for thy Poverty, and laugh at thy Calamities. The World is apt to remember
faults, and never at a better time, than when Men are fallen into decay, and
stand in special need of common help, then the generality lay their heads
together, and recount as many failings, which may harden them against a
charitable disposition; but enough for the second general thing, namely, That
Riches are strong Temptations to Pride, Haughtiness, and Incharitableness. The
other remaining Topic, namely, That Poverty is a most despicable state, and
renders a Man most vile and mean in the Eye of the World; drawn from the
miserable Condition of Lazarus, and the base usage shown him in his Low
Circumstances by the Rich Man, shall be my business the next opportunity. I now
proceed to make same special Use of what has been said at this time, and so
conclude.

And the first Use is; That if Riches are such Lures and strong Temptations, it
should serve for an Admonition to those who are blessed with them, that do not
set too great a value upon them, nor hug them with too much eagerness and
desire; that they labor to make their love of Wealth subservient to their Love
of Heaven, and heavenly things, that they learn to admire and adore their
Creator, who has cast their Lot in a fair Heritage, and rightly understand his
wise and holy purpose, in crowning them with Prosperity, that Riches are not
given to spend them upon our Lusts, to live sumptuously every Day, to trifle
our time in ease, Idleness, and security; this is the abusing of Riches, No,
no, they are given to more excellent ends; To encourage us in our Duty, to give
our Children good Education; to help the Fatherless and Widow, the Oppressed
and Stranger; it is sad to consider, how Lavish and Prodigal many are, whom
fate has blessed with plenty and store, laying out vast sums in beautifying
buildings, dainty fair and well furnished Wardrobes, and the like, while the
poor perish at their Gates: Dives was so taken up with his various and
extravagant Diversions, that he could spare no time, or rather would not, to
hear the doleful Complaints of distressed Lazarus, or to see, consider, and
relieve his necessities. He was clothed in Purple and fine Linen; his belly
filled with the best of Provisions, and therefore considered not what it was to
be Hungry, Thirsty, Naked, and Friendless, he was not tormented with that sharp
Thorn which so miserably afflicted Lazarus, that he cried, Oh! fill my craving
Stomach with the crumbs that fall under thy Table, with those superfluous
morsels which are thy Dogs Food; I desire not that which thou feedest upon;
nothing else but the worst bit thy Servants leave; this is my request, this I
should be glad of, and without some speedy relief, I shall faint and drop, and
perish at thy Gates. This dismal Story no way affected this Inexorable Wretch,
but he rather chid him for his importunity, than Pitied him for his poverty.
One would have thought that such expressions as these were enough to have
pierced the most obdurate heart, and to have melted it down into Compassion;
but such is the unhappy proof of an heart enamoured with, and inseparably fixed
upon Riches. Let it therefore be a Caveat to those who are favored with the
smiles of fortune, that they do not reckon too much upon their prosperous
condition, nor be too much in love with it.

Secondly, The second Use is, That since Riches are apt to seduce and betray
men, tempt them to forget God and themselves; let those whose fortunes are mean
in the World, learn to be content in their State. They have the more leisure to
look after the concernments of their Souls, and to provide for their long
Journey into Eternity; they are free from abundance of Cares, Fears, and
Troubles; they are not perplexed with contriving how to purchase such an
Estate, not overwhelmed with the fear of losing it, but have many fair
opportunities of preparing themselves for the embraces of the Father of
Spirits. Therefore Christian, grudge not that thy Portion in this Life is so
narrow, if thou art brought to a morsel of bread, to a draught of water; yet
even this is enough to bear thy charges to Heaven: But if thou art not so
fortunate to be Master of this meaner Diet, thy Life will be only the shorter;
and possibly God keeps thee short here, that he may plentifully reward thee
hereafter; Heaven is sufficient to make thee satisfaction for all thy
sufferings; in God's presence there is fullness of Joy, and at his right hand
are pleasures for evermore. To be received into that capacious world where are
all instances of Joy, all the ingredients of felicity, to have all thy
faculties enlarged; to the end they may relish those hidden Comforts to know
and understand the methods of Providence, and to be made acquainted with the
Arcana imperii, the secrets of Heaven.

Death is the Lot of us all, he invaded the Rich Man's Palace, as well as the
poor Man's Cottage; he storms the Princes Court, as well as the Peasants meaner
Habitation. High and Low, all must submit, when this grim Sergeant makes a
demand. Neither Wealth nor Honor, neither beauty, nor Wisdom, nor any
secular regard, can plead against Death, to privilege a Man from the Grave.
Which consideration should insinuate with Men, to be less in love with this
world, and more thoughtful of that time when they must go into a fixed state,
either of eternal happiness, or misery. But such was the stupid folly of Dives,
that to dye was the least of his care, and the least in his mind. His chiefest
study was, what he should eat, drink, and put on; what sort of pleasures would
best suit with, and accommodate his Senses. In fine, his happiness was fixed in
these perishing enjoyments, and so fondly imagined his condition immutable; But
behold a woeful change of things! In the midst of carnal security, Death steps
in, an unwelcome Guest, a frightful Spectrum, and irresistably hauls him from
all his darling repasts, and crowds him into the Region of damned Spirits. Now
he that was clothed with Purple and fine Linen, is inveloped in devouring and
unquenchable flames; he that fared sumptuously and deliciously every day, is
confined to a loathsome dungeon, and doomed to suffer those intolerable
preparations, and to enhance his Misery, Lazarus, whom he uncharitably denied
the crumbs which fell from his Table, and without any reluctance permitted to
faint, languish, and dye at his Gate, is at a distance presented to his view
lying in Abraham's Bosom, crowned with Glory, and encircled with the rades of
eternal bliss. To Abraham he addresses himself, Pity my hard fate, consider my
woeful condition, see how the flames scorch and torment me, see how my tongue is
parched with heat; I am so miserably afflicted, that I cannot express my self;
I pray thee therefore to send Lazarus with a drop of water to abate the
Anguish, and allay the throbbings of my enflamed Tongue. So great and vehement
are the plagues of Hell, that the damned Spirits there cry continually for help
and succor, but are not pitiable Objects, having withstood the frequent
tenders of Grace and Mercy.

To conclude, let us all endeavor to answer the end of God in whatsoever
condition we are; if we be Rich, let us be Humble, Meek, and Modest, affable,
Courteous, and Charitable; if Poor, Content, Thankful, and Holy. Now to the
mighty Governor of the World, who loves Mankind, and gives to all Men
according to Infinite Wisdom, be given the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

