SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Blatta Bizantina, SHOWING Its Admirable
Virtues in Curing Astmahs, and Shortness of Breath.

Written by a Doctor of Physic in the Country to Dr. Meverell at London.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1694.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Blatta Bizantina; SHOWING Its Admirable
Virtues in Curing Astmahs, and Shortness of Breath. In a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
I Recieved the Letter you sent me concerning the Case of your Astmahtical
Patient, who tells you that he is troubled with a Stoppage in his Stomach, or
the Rising of the Lights, as he calls it; both you and I know very well what he
means; and the best Advice I can give you in that Case is to bleed him
plentifully, and give him inwardly the Blatta Bizantina, which I know to be an
incomparable Specific to give him Breath, to remove the spasmodical Affections
of the Lungs and Stomach, to promote the Circulation of the Blood, and to
prevent a Pollipus from growing in the Heart, which oftener causes sudden Death
than the World imagins; for when the whole Mass of Blood in a Man's Body, which
should run through the Heart and Lungs ten or twelve time in an hour, is stopped
in its Circulation, and creeps through as it were by Drops, and for want of
Motion stagnates and putrifies, it may well cause Pains and Stoppages in the
Breast, and Shortness of Breath.

This Shellfish is the same which in Exodus is called by Moses Onicha, one of
the Ingredients of the Holy Perfume prescribed by Almighty God himself. I am
sure it has done great Service, in relieving many who have had great stoppages
in their Stomachs, and difficult Breathing, which has made them very
apprehensive of some sudden Change.

I confess I have known many dye of this Distemper with short warning, and
especially Ministers, and some Lawyers, after they have spent their Spirits
with much speaking; and particularly I know a very Grave and Learned Divine,
who after his Preaching used himself to drink two Glasses of Sack, which
pernicious Custom heated his Lungs after they had been too much warmed before
by Earnest and loud speaking, this Person had gotten an ill Habit of Body, and
a violent Astmah, but was very much relieved by Drinking only warm Ale, with a
few Drops drawn out of this Medicine, with a little Nutmeg and Sugar, which he
made his constant Practice, and found much. Advantage by it, less Pain in his
Breast, a more free Respiration, and a clear Voice in Preaching. I only once in
a Month advised him to take a little Manna in Water Gruel, to carry down the
Phlegm, and keep his Body laxative.

Mr. Grant in his Observations upon the Bills of Mortality takes Notice that
this Disease is much increased of late Years; in 1629. there was but forty
four, but in 1660. there was two hundred and forty nine. And he tells us, that
the Cause proceeds from the Lungs, which are the Bellows of the Body, not
blowing, that is, neither recieving in nor venting out Breath.

But a Greater Man than Mr. Grant says, it proceeds from an abundance of
Morbifick Matter in the Blood, and Nervous Liquor, which causes a Convulsion
in the Lungs; and sometimes it may proceed from a Decay of the volatile Salts
of the Blood, which makes it apt to fix and stagnate in the Breast.

But I shall not meddle with the Speculative Part of Physic, but only the
Practical, which is Grounded upon Experience; for as Dr. Castle well observes,
that Experienced Medicines are like Dials and Almanacks, which agree as well
with the Hypothesis of Copernicus as of Ptolemy. The Husbandman may till his
Land, and sow his Seed, and yet not fully understand whether the Earth or Sun
moves.

Hypocrates, the Father of Physicians, advises his Sons not to be backward in
making Observations upon the Cures wrought by Farriers or ignorant Women,
though they were not able to give an Account how or in what manner they Cured.

I lately had an Astmahtical Patient, whose Breath seemed to be gone every
moment, and all his Blood would appear in his Face, as if he were strangled,
and yet upon taking this Medicine he was wonderfully relieved, and walked
abroad. I also advised him to Bleed, and play at Bowls often.

A Gentlewoman about fifty Years of Age complained to me of a great Oppression
and stoppage at her Stomach, had taken many Purges and Vomits, but all in vain;
I gave her the Tincture drawn out of these Shells, mixed with the Extract and
Spirit of the same; she took it every morning in a glass of Spring Water, mixed
with Virgins Honey. I permitted her to eat no Suppers but stewed Prunes or
Roasted Pippins, and she wonderfully recovered.

A middle aged Man of a sedentary Life told me, he could not lie down in his
Bed for fear of being choked, his Stoppage and Wheasing in his Throat were so
troublesome. I used only this Remedy, it gave him Help and Ease. I could
mention many others, but I Will Desist.

FINIS.

