SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the ROOT CASSUMMUNIAR, Called otherwise RYSAGONE,
Imported from the East Indies. SHOWING Its Nature and Virtues, and its
Usefulness above others as yet written of, in Apoplexies, Convulsions, Fits of
the Mother, the Griping of the Gutts, with probable conjectures of its Fitness
to Cure many other Distempers; and its being the most proper Corrector of the
Jesuits Powder, rendering that Me^^^^^ (...) and Harmless.

By JOHN PEACHIE, Doctor of Physic.

(...). Epictetus.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the
Lower end of Cheapside. 1679.

TO THE Right Worshipful Sir Jonathan Keate, BARONET: A True Patron of Piety,
Virtue and Learning. J. P.

Humbly dedicateth the Ensuing Observations, in testimony of his grateful
resentment of his Favors, with apprecation of all Grace and Happiness.

OF THE VIRTUES OF Cassummuniar.
TO give a Description of the Herb, its place, its growth, whether it bears
any flower, or Seed, is not in my power, having received no account along with
it from my Brother, Factor to the Honorable the East-Indy Company: Only thus
much is most certain, it is a Plant esteemed even by Princes themselves, some
part of what I have, being taken out of the King of Golcondaes Garden, one of
the greatest, and wealthiest Princes in India, and the Priests, who are the
Brackmannes, of the Pythagorean Sect of Philosophers, do many and great Cures
with it, for which they are so much esteemed not only by the Natives, but also
foreign Merchants that reside there, the English themselves preferring them
before their own Country men, when they labor under those diseases that reign
in the East-Indys. They are very excellent Botanists, admirably skilled in the
nature, and use of Plants, and having an extra-ordinary variety of them have
improved Galenical Physic to a very great height. I do not understand that
they are acquainted with any of the Chemical ways of separating the pure, from
the impure parts: or understand the use of Minerals: but as they are nourished
by the produce of the Earth, so they are cured by the offspring thereof, not
feeding upon any animal killed for their use, fearing they should eat some of
their Ancestors; because they hold a transmigration of souls. This root though
it might serve to aromatize their diet, and is certainly a good stomachical,
yet they use it only medicinally, and that in so homely a way as is becoming
such plain, and simple men, unacquainted with the Confectioners or Apothecarys
Art; they cut the Root transverse, or cross-waies, and having so done, they dry
it in the Sun with great care, and when they have ocasion to use it, grind it
betwixt two stones, adding water to it, after the manner of Painters grinding
their Colors: being reduced hereby into the consistency of an Electuary they
administer two or three drams of it at a time to their patients.

As to its qualities it is moderately hot, and very astringent, it consists
of very fine parts, wrapped up in, and tied to an earthy matter; and may be
reckoned amongst your Aromata or Spices. It exceedingly recruiteth the animal
and vital Spirits, and may well be imagined by its taste, color, and smell, to
be an aperitive medicine. But by the experience I have had of it, I find it
admirably to agree with the animal spirits, and a proper remedy against theit
irregularities With Spirit of wine I have drawn a good Spirit from it, and with
the remaining faeces made a very good extract, and conceive its extract made
with fountain water, might be better than the powder in the bloody flux, for
which it is an excellent remedy. The Spirit is good to mix with cordials, and
is a very good medicine outwardly used: and will lay scents better than any
thing yet sound out.

It is matter of no small grief and trouble to any person endowed with pity or
compassion, to see how many persons labor under Apoplexies, Falling-siknesses,
Convulsions, and convulsive-motions, Fits of the Mother, which diseases have
such stupendous symptoms, that they do astonish the beholders, Nature seeming
to be in an earthquake, and in its last agony: and by the frequent aggress of
so dreadful a Distemper, those endowments which distinguish us from irrational
creatures are in a great measure lost; our understanding, that great Light very
much darkened our memory, that excellent Repository, broken, and like a Sieve
lets through most, if not all the species presented to it, so that our fitness
to serve either God or Man is very much impaired. And yet notwithstanding all
the Boasts of Chemists, and the singular and prudent management of Galenists,
with the help of what medicines Nature or Art has yet presented, scarce one of
a hundred has proved a trophy of their Victory over so obstinate a distemper;
I mean not those whose disease does arise from any fault in the first ways, as
children which have, worms, or the nerves disseminated in the stomach, being
affected with ill matter therein contained, of which an easy way of cure does
effect the desired end viz. By evacuating and discharging nature by Vomit or
Purges: but when the distemper has its rise from the head, and is of long
continuance and duration; The way of cure Iuse is first generals as Bleeding,
Vomits, or Purges ordinarily used in this case. Afterward where the distemper
is in the head originally; I use to cut off the hair, and use a fomentation of
the spirit night and morning. As for internal remedies: Cassummuniar. pulv. ii
conserv flor. Betonic. i cum syrupo Pae^^: q. s. fiat electuar. s. a. Capiat q.
N. M. ter in die horis medicis supbibend. iiii sequentis. Julapii aq. florum
^iliae, cerasor. nigr: an lb. Spirit. Lavendul. Composit. Math. iii. syrup.
Paeon. q. s. Misce. I shall not give Instances of those many who have had their
Fits hereby lessened and abated, and very many cured. I could instance in a
Gentlewoman, who had a concussion of her head, which she labored under for
half a year in the Country, after a fall down stairs with her head foremost,
coming up to London was cured by a decoction, and electuary made of this root,
to mine, as well as her admiration, and lives now free from any ill effects of
that ill accident. I was called to a Gentlewoman that had hysteric. Fits with
unusual symptoms, accompanied with as great oppressions, and debility in her
Spirits when her Fits went off, as when upon her, as she apprehended. The
Medicines used I find upon the file to have been only these: Cassummuniar.
pulv. s Conserv. flor. boragin. i cum syrup Paeon, q. S. M. fiat electuarium,
capiat. q. N. M. superbibend cockl. viii sequent. Julapii. aq. atriplic. vi
puleg. spirit Lavend. composit. Mat. an i M. The common plaster to the navil,
and a nodul of Galbanum; in two hours her Fits ceased, and with the use of the
same Remedies some few days, she was so far cured, that they have not returned
these twelve months, the occasion of the distemper not proceeding from any
passions of the mind.

The Spirit of it drunk with black-cherry water every new, and full of the
Moon, I conceive may be a sovereign preservative for them, who have had the
common symptoms that are forerunners of that mortal disease the Apoplexy, or
been once attacqued by it, and escaped it, for prevention of the second Fit,
commonly mortal. To conclude this head; the greatefulness, as well as the
usefulness of it, to prevent convulsions, looseness, and gripings in children,
makes me commend this medicine to Country Gentelwomen, to Midwives, and
Nurses, and the rather because of its safety, and but one incovenience can
attend the use of it, which is its binding quality, which is rarely a
prejudice, where the Medicine discusseth wind, as this does. They may boil it
in their water-pap, their milk, or what else they think fit to give the child.
I prefer it before any other Galenical or Chemical Medicine, for that I have
observed, that by the nauseousness of spirit of Amber, and ill contexture, and
consistency of Diascordium, Methridate, and Venice-treacle, they have
oftentimes brought Fits instead of hindering them. The decoction of it in a
little Ale, or Wine, and Water, is very useful for the Mother when laid, or
boiled in her caudle to prevent Fevers, and after-pains, because it will
promote sweat, and discuss wind.

The Griping of the guts, a disease no less torturing, than mortal, has
reigned excedingly in London for these many years last past: and
notwithstanding the endeavors of our learned Doctors, and ingenious Chemists,
our bills of mortality inform us, that a great number of persons die of it
every week, though more in July and August than at other seasons of the year.
This desease is many times Epidemical in the East indies, and this Root was
sent me with high commendations of the succesful use of it by the Brammenees in
this malady, and indeed this remedy has convinced me of the truth of Doctor
Willis's assertion, that the nervous part is principally affected in this
distemper. By the excrements it is distinguished into the bloody and unbloody
Flux, in the latter, the matter is sometimes waterish, and sometimes mucous, to
which may be added that which is called the dry Gripes. The method I proceed in
all is alike: only where there is a Fever conjoined with, or consequent to the
disease, I use Fountain Water for the vehicle. When called to a patient,
bleeding being premised, if the age, temper of the patient, and season of the
year require it, I use Doctor Sydenhams purge. Tamarind s sol. sennae. mundat.
ii Rhei iss coquantur in aq fontanae q.s. Colatur. add Mannae, syrup. rosar.
solutivi an. i M. fiat potio. At night when the purge has done working. rad.
Rhysagon. pulver. ss cum syrup. corallior. q. s. fiat bolus hora sommi
sumendus. Repetatur sexta quaque hora. After it I give a large draught of the
decoction of the same Root sweetened with syrup of Couslips, and sometimes
fifteen drops of the Laudanum Liquidum described by Doctor Sydenham in his
excellent book of Observations upon acute Distempers. Syden. Page 255.
This Method I use till its declination to the better, and then the case is so
easy, I need not inculcate any thing further about it.

I use this Root as a corrector of the inconveniences that attend the peruvian
bark, and commonly prescribe three parts of the bark, and one of the Root
Cassummuniar. And though I have always after generals, as the bitter potions,
vomits, or bleeding as the case requires, proceeded to the use of that bark,
and that as frequently, as most have, having had the honor of many persons of
greatest eminency in the University of Oxford one year under my care, together
with many others ill of quartans, yet never can charge, that bark in any one of
my patients with any damage, which was the result of its administration, being
thus corrected.

A very Eminent East India Chyrurgion assured me, he had used this Root in
Melancholy Hypocondriack, and the Scurvy, with great success, of which I can
speak nothing from my own experience. I conceive that a decoction of this Root
in Fountain Water, (seeing it strengthens the animal spirits, helps
separation of what is inconvenient from them, promoteth Sweat, and a good
circulation of the blood) may be of great use in Fevers, to prevent Deliriums,
which has frequently a fatal ill event attending it. I look upon it as a thing
very probable, that this Root may be serviceable in many other diseases, and do
not doubt, but its own harmless, as well as useful nature will excite ingenious
and learned Physicians (of which this Nation and City abounds in as many as
any in the world,) to make a higher and greater improvement of it, than I have,
or can. If what I have written may tend to the public advantage, I have my
end: and could wish, that all Physicians would so far consult the good of
mankind, as to communicate what they have singular to the world, that so noble
a Science might be completed, and health be the better preserved and restored:
for that of Seneca is most true in Physic: Multa egerunt, qui ante nos fuerunt
sed non peregerunt, multum adhuc restat, multumque restabit, neque ulli nato
post mill secula praecidetur occasio aliquid adhuc adjiciendi.

This root may be had at Mr. Bartletts Druggist in Bishopgate-Street, or at my
Apothecaries on Rhederiff wall. Mr. Bartlett has as I suppose a sufficient
quantity for present use. And if it has the desired success (of which do not
doubt) I presume more will be imported in a year or two.

FINIS.

