SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Bengala Bean, Imported from the INDIES:
SHOWING Its Admirable VIRTUES In CURING All sorts of Hemorrages, and
particularly Spitting of Blood.

Written by a Doctor of Physic in the Country to one of his Patients in
London.

Printed in the Year 1694.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Bengala Bean, IMPORTED FROM The INDIES: In a
LETTER, etc.
SIR,
IEceived yours, wherein you give me an Account of your dangerous Disaster,
which greatly threatens your Life, viz. your frequent Spitting of Blood,
proceeding from the Acrimony of that Vital Liquor. Long and frequent
Evacuations of that Kind must of necessity spend the Spirits, weaken Nature,
and shorten Life: I therefore recommend to you a most Excellent Specific in
your Distemper, viz. the Bengala Bean; which is of a healing Balsamic Nature,
moderately Stiptick, of a very temperate Quality, and affords an excellent
Soder to the Veins and Arteries, where any breach is made on them by the
Defluxions of a sharp corroding Humor: It mitigates the Acidity of all salt
Rhumes which invade the Lungs, and threaten a Consumption. It checks the
Violence of Coughing, and eases pains in the Breast, it rarely Thickens and
incrassates the Blood, and gives it a good Consistence, whereby it prevents all
sorts of Hemorrages of Blood.

Dr. Smith, the Author of the Book called Solomon's Pourtraicture of Old Age,
tells of a young Virgin, a Patient of his, who Dyed in twenty four hours Space,
of a Violent Flux of Blood, from all parts of her Body; as Nose, Ears, Eyes,
Mouth, etc. Had he been so happy as to have known this Remedy, I don't know but
he might have saved her, with God Almighty's blessing.

We cannot now Apply our selves in our Issues of blood, to so Happy a remedy as
the Hem of our Saviors Garment, and therefore must make use of the Best means
we can, and be thankful if we find Relief by any.

I could tell you a strange Story of a young Gentleman who was troubled with a
Hemoptosie, or spitting of Blood for many Weeks, so that he Despaired of Life.
He had opened a Vein Twice, had used all the Common Forms of Medicines, as
Frictions, Ligatures, Fomentations, Gentle Purgatives, and what else could be
thought on by the ablest Physicians; but nothing could cure the Rupture of the
Vessels about the Lungs, until he applied himself unto the Drops drawn out of
this Balsamic Bean, and drinking them sometimes in Cows Milk, and sometimes in
Asses and Goats Milk, was wonderderfully Cured.

I knew a Learned Divine, who straining his Voice in Preaching, had broke a
Vein in his Lungs; and after the use of many Prescriptions, which proved
insignificant, he at length used these vulnerary Drops in Wine and Water, and
he experienced a mighty advantage thereby, to the Immortal Praise of the Great
Physician above.

A Laboring Man about Forty years of Age, who fell from the Top of a House,
and bruised his Breast, which occasioned Spitting of Blood: I gave him these
Drops in Mead seven days, and all his pains abated, and he Spit no more Blood,
nor felt any more pain.

A Child about Twelve Years of Age, being troubled with a violent Cough, which
caused him to Spit and Vomit Blood, a great Quantity, after he had taken many
Fantastical Medicines, as Fried Mice, John and Jones Bread, sat with his Naked
Buttocks upon a Bears Back, and been Tossed seven or nine times over a
Bramble-Bush, etc. at last he took these Drops in Claret Wine and Water, and
was cured of his Chin-cough, his Whooping ceased, and his Spitting went off.

An elderly Person, who was continually bleeding at the Nose, and other parts,
was wonderfully rescued from the Jaws of Death, by the use of these Drops in
Milk and Water.

FINIS.

