AN ANSWER To A Printed Letter TO Dr. W. P. Concerning NON-RESISTANCE, And
other REASONS for not taking the OATHS.

With some Queries to the Non-swearers in a POSTSCRIPT.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil,
over against the Royal Exchange, 1690.

Licensed,

September. 16. 1690.
AN ANSWER To A Printed Letter TO Dr. W. P.
SIR,
IT was too great a Favor that you should present me particularly with those
Reasons which our dissatisfied Clergy may have to offer for themselves for
their not taking the Oaths; when you were pleased to lay the chiefest stress of
their not doing so upon the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, that you should single
me out among all my Brethren, who were as much Preachers of it as my self, and
put me upon the hard Task, as you thought no doubt, of reconciling that with
the present Government and the present Oaths, or of renouncing the one or the
other.

The Pains which some of you have taken in the History of Passive Obedience,
shows that this is not the singular Doctrine of some few men but of Most if not
All Divines, so that if it were a mistake, and a man had bin in the wrong, he
has a great deal of good Company with him, and need not be much ashamed of
being called out to do Penance alone, or be taken to task for such a General
Error. But however some of late are pleased to be very Angry or very Pleasant
with the Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance, Rediculing and
Exposing it as the flattering Heresy of the late Clergy, and talking against
it at such a rate as if they would have St. Paul's words quite blotted out of
the Bible, They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation; and when
they are Friends to the present Government, yet do so far discredit it, as to
be of their mind to think it inconsistent with that Principle, yet I am
perfectly of another Opinion, and think that as true a Doctrine now as it was
in St. Paul's time; and that we are no way bound to recant it in order to our
taking the Oaths, and joining with the present Government, or that it is
necessary to give up either the one or the other. That this is a Christian
Doctrine in the general, as much as not Revenging or not Killing, St. Paul's
words set it beyond all dispute, though there may be Limitations and Exceptions
to them all in extraordinary Cases, and it requires great Prudence and Caution
when we come to the particular stating of this, and run into nice Discourses
about Government, which many a good Divine may no more understand than Matters
of Trade; and therefore may be apt to mistake in some Cases of both, and commit
great oversights in going out of his Province, and applying general Rules to
some particular Cases that will not bear them. The way of rightly stating this
Doctrine, I have always thought was according to the Form and Constitution of
our Laws and Government; whatever they are we are to be passive to them, and
ought not to resist that Legal Power and Constitution which is the Ordinance of
God which he has set over us.

But to make it an Instrument to destroy our Laws and our Constitution by
advancing Prerogative above Law, and setting up I know not what Imperial Power
above the Political, and requiring such a Loyalty to the Prince in Conscience,
as is no way due by the Law of the Land, which is the true Rule and Measure of
our Duty, this is to state it wrong, and to squeeze and wring a great Error and
Mischief out of a Real Truth; and whether this has not bin done by a great
many who have thereby brought an Odium and Discredit upon the Doctrine it self,
I leave you to judge; but there is not the least color of charging this upon
any of my Sermons, where I lay the matter very much upon our own Constitution,
and allow expressly the other Provision in the German Empire, and in the
Capitulation of Spain and the Low Countries, page 25. Sermon. 2. But if the
Unlawfulness of Resisting upon any pretense whatsoever, was a slavish Doctrine
in England, as some inconsidering Men throw out against the Clergy, 'twas more
owing to the two Houses of Parliament who made that a Legal Declaration, then
to any of the Clergy who Preached it up.

I doubt not but that, as general and absolute as it was, carried in it the
Supposition of the Legal Constitution, and was not designed to alter or
overthrow that, but there may some extraordinary Cases happen which no positive
Laws can provide against, or ought indeed to suppose, but when they do happen
the plain Reason and Necessity of things will provide against them, and there
cannot be certain and standing Rules made for them, but they fall under the
Equity and Reason though not the Letter of the Constitution. I am fully of the
mind that it is more for Public Good and the Peace of the World, to teach
People the Doctrines of Obedience to Governors, and Non-Resistance Generally
and Absolutely, then to open a door to unquiet Spirits to disturb the
Government they live under upon all occasions, but yet the greatest Divines who
have Conscientiously done this, and particularly Dr. Falkner among our own,
when they have bin unwilling to allow any particular and practical Cases of
doing otherwise, because they do but seldom and extraordinarily fall out, yet
when they do, must and cannot but allow an exception to a general Duty, as he
particularly mentions the case of Antiochus, and of a Princes design to destroy
and ruin a considerable part of his People contrary to the established Laws; to
which some think ours comes up under King James, and yet he still vindicates
that General Declaration of not Resisting upon any pretense whatsoever, because
that is ordinarily and generally true, and the exception to it is so rare and
extraordinary as ought not to be taken in and supposed; and as no way hinders
the Truth of such a general saying, as when holy Scripture declare that Wives
and Children must obey their Husbands and Parents in all things; and whom God
has joined together no man must put asunder. These Declarations how general
soever, and how Exclusive they may seem of doing otherwise upon any pretense
whatsoever, yet still are not without some Exceptions in extraordinary Cases,
which all Divines do allow.

Some Cases may fall out in Government, though they ought not to be supposed,
nor can well be provided against: As if a King shall endeavor to destroy his
People, to change the Constitution, to turn a Legal Government into an Absolute
Empire; if he shall put a stop to Justice, and shut up Westminster Hall, and
give out no Commissions to Judges and Sheriffs, and appoint either none or
other Officers then the Law knows; if he shall fall into Lunacy and Madness, or
the like incapacity, if he shall voluntarily Desert and Leave the Kingdom
without any Government; if the whole Royal Family shall be extinct, and there
be no Lineal Heirs to the Crown; if the right Heir be dubious, or there be a
reasonable ground to believe a suppositious Child put in the place of the right
Heir: In these, and such like Cases there is no ordinary Provision made by our
Law, nor indeed can there well or possibly be in all of them; but when they do
happen, the plain Necessity and Reason of the thing must direct to some
provision or other; and it is very unreasonable to quarrel with that because it
is not in every thing agreeable with ordinary and standing Rules, and the exact
Measures that the Laws do at other times require, but cannot then be observed.

This Sir answers all that is objected in the latter part of your Letter, which
is the most considerable thing in it, concerning the Convention and House of
Commons, whither they had as you say, any Authority to Act as an House of
Parliament in imposing these Oaths? page 4. Let. Because, First, Our Law owns
no Parliaments but what are called by the Kings Writs. Secondly, Nor does it
know any Member of the lower House, but who are chosen for a Parliament.
Thirdly, Nor does it give right to any to Act in the House till they have taken
the Test. Fourthly, And if any one enter and take their place there, before
they have taken the Oath of Supremacy, their Place is void, and they are not at
Liberty to take it afterward, new Election is to be made; 5 Eliz. cap. 1.
Fifthly and Lastly, The former Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy have bin so
imposed by diverse Statutes, and are so expressly required of all Members of
Parliament that none could possibly have a power of Substituting others in
their stead till they had taken those and had swore, if not that they believed
King James, yet at least that they believed King William to be rightful King of
this Land.
i. e. The Members of Parliament were before their Sitting to take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy to the King.

Now because this is true in all ordinary Cases must it be so in all
extraordinary ones too? Were all these things observed by the Convention in
1660 which brought in King Charles the Second? And are we therefore to be
dissatisfied about the Laws they made, and the proceedings done by them,
because some of you may think that by our Constitution, a Convention has no
power at all in Law? And because they observed not all the ordinary Rules
required at other times by our Laws? If we do, we shall call in question the
Legality at least of that Revolution, and that Convention as well as of this.

The Truth is, Positive Laws cannot always be observed, but must give way to
the greater Law of Necessity, and of notorious greater good; and even the Laws
of God himself have often done so, as we find in Scripture. When therefore you
urge on your side some particular Laws of the Kingdom which you cannot wholly
reconcile with the present Government, and this I believe is the great
Difficulty that sticks with you; we on the other side think it such an
extraordinary Case as dispenses with those, and that the plainness and
notoriety of the thing may satisfy any man's Conscience about it, and did so
when the Prince of Orange came, even these who now dissent, not only wished well
to the Prince, and went over to him in their Hearts and Affections, but denied
their Assistance to King James; and did several other things which the Law
would not warrant them in had it not bin an extraordinary Case; and most if not
all of you have to my knowledge owned you did go in with the Prince so far as
his Declaration, which was not altogether strictly Legal I suppose, by any of
our Laws in bringing a King by such a manner to good Terms, so that we must
leave God to judge whither it was not in the whole, such an extraordinary and
extralegal Case as justifies whatever was done though not altogether according
to express Laws and whither we have not acted sincerely in thinking so all
along, and you unreasonably and perversely in thinking otherwise at one time,
though not at another.

As to what you urge out of the Statute of 1. James 1. which declares the Right
to the Monarchy to have lineally descended to the Prince, and by Proximity of
Blood, and that hereupon he was recognized and submitted to by the whole
Nation, and not upon any Choice or Election of the People. Who will not own
this to be a common and rightful way of coming to the Crown in such an
Hereditary Monarchy as ours is? But does that Statute say, that no other King
of England who-ever came to the Crown, or ever should without such a Lineal
Descent and Proximity of Blood, was rightful King? Or does it say that King and
Parliament have not a power to limit and settle the descent of the Crown
according to the Thirteenth of Elizabeth? Does it take away that Act by express
Words, without which I think our Lawyers say no former Act is nulled or
abrogated? What is it then to the purpose? Have not King William and Queen Mary
a right of Blood and Lineal Descent, if King James his Right be ceased? Do they
or the Kingdom ever own or declare that they hold the Crown by the Choice or
Election of the People? Have not half of the Kings of England, before the
Conquest and after, bin as much or more chosen by the people according to all
our Historians? Is there not a great difference between the Peoples Choosing
and Electing of a King, and the States and Representatives of a Kingdom
Recognizing and Declaring them to be King and Queen by whatever unnamed Right?
When you have satisfied me in these Questions you will fully satisfy your self
about that Matter.

You tell me there is another Statute of the same King, that enjoins the Oath
of Allegiance to him, as the true and Rightful King, and (which deserves well
to be considered) makes it Treason to go about to persuade one to take the Oath
to any else. Now is it any wonder or does it deserve any mighty Consideration,
that the Law should make it Treason to go about to persuade one to take the
Oath of Allegiance to him that is not King, this sure if any thing tends to the
Kings Disherison and Destruction; and Parsons I suppose, and some of the Popish
Party in the beginning of King James I. Reign had such a design against which
that Statute is levelled; but that which you bring it for, is upon the account
of the Rightful King, so that you would have it meant against those who are for
a King de facto only that is not Rightful: Now though this does not in the
least concern me, but those who are of that Opinion, to answer, yet I believe
this Statute had no Eye to any such thing nor is any way concerned about it,
nor does it however take away the Act of Henry the Seventh about those who
adhere to the King in Possession, but what you add to it is very Considerable,
and the greatest though shortest thing in your whole Letter (for as to the
business of Non-Resistance, I take that to be very impertinent to the Clergy's
taking the Oaths, and to concern only a very few others) which is this; So long
as Allegiance is thus due to the Rightful King, you would be very kind if you
would show those that are dissatisfied, that they may transfer it to any other
without Sin. Now, Sir, in answer to this, I must own that I know not how
Allegiance can be due to two Kings at once; to a King de jure and a King de
facto, no one can actually serve two such Masters, but if our Law allow such a
distinction, which I am not at present to dispute, then it must by requiring
Allegiance to the King de facto, discharge us at that time from the Allegiance
due to the King de jure, and transfer it to the other; if there be such a Law
and Constitution of the Kingdom for the sake of Public Peace and the security
of private Persons, I would know what Law of God there is against it? And then
whether a Man may not without sin submit to it, and take the benefit of it? But
I think Allegiance to a Rightful King ceases, by his ceasing to be King; and
then it may be easily known know it comes to be transferred to another.

As to the 12 Carol. 2. c. 30. That neither the Peers of this Land, nor the
Commons, nor both together in Parliament or out of Parliament, nor the People
Collectively or Representatively, nor any other persons whatsoever, have any
Coercive power over the Persons of the Kings of this Realm. This will be
readily owned, you know, by me who do not think that our Government is such as
that of the Lacedaemonians under their Kings and Ephori, and by all but those
who are of the mind of the Judges of Charles the First; had those who were
chiefly concerned in the late revolution bin of another Opinion, K. James had
bin stopped from going either to France or to Ireland. Our Peers and Commons in
Parliament did not use any Coercive power over King James, nor give any proper
judicial Sentence against him to exclude him the Government, as having any
Superiority or Sovereignty over him, but only declared the throne Vacant of him
for many Reasons, and that William and Mary were King and Queen of this Realm,
and this they did, not as formal Judges but as Arbitrators made so by the
necessity of the Circumstances we were then in, and however you may dislike
their award and Arbitrament, for which they alone are answerable, yet if as
private Persons you may not submit to it, you must break up the World, and
disband the Society of Mankind, and necessarily run into a state of War and
Confusion, and we shall be hardly able to live under any Government whatsoever.
However you do not think I suppose that a Foreign Prince is tied up and obliged
by that Statute against making War upon a King of England when he supposes him
to have done him an otherwise irreparable injury, nor are the Nation hindered
hereby from going over to the just side or bound to assist their Prince in an
unjust Cause, especially when they know it would have bin to their own certain
Destruction.

Thus I think the Matter might be stated without touching upon any of those
Statutes you mention or the Doctrine of Non-Resistance and Passive Obedience
which lie far enough out of the way from hindering our taking the Oaths or
coming into the Government, though you think fit to throw them in as Rubs to
keep you from both; but you desire me not to shift of the matter to a Conquest,
which is neither owned by King nor People, and yet may be true enough in point
of Conscience, though not insisted on in point of Prudence; Nor to a Vacancy by
a voluntary Desertion, which is a falsity in matter of Fact; and yet if it be
well considered it will amount to as much as if he had bin brought to a
Resignation under his hand, and may as well satisfy any Man's Conscience, for
that might with as much reason be supposed to be as little Voluntary, and not
without a design of returning to his Government again, if he could; but this I
dare assure you is true in matter of Fact that King James rather chose to go
away, than to tarry and call a Parliament, and give thereby a reasonable
Security to the Nation against Popery and Destruction; and this was not only
Voluntary but Deliberate too, and upon the Advice of his Popish Counselors,
and so far it was a Voluntary Desertion.

As to the Case of Non-Resistance, what I have ever taught from the Press or
the Pulpit, in neither of which Chair I pretend to be Infallible, or have in a
solemn manner professed that it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to
take up arms against the King or any Commissioned by him, I did it as you hope,
and God is my Witness, in the sincerity of my heart, for the good of the World
and Peace of Mankind, as I thought it agreeable to the Law of God, and the Law
of the Land, and I do not think that either this or any other Wise Government,
will think it a dangerous Opinion, or oblige any Divine to Renounce or Recant
it, and if any unseen and extraordinary Case should ever happen to be an
exception against it, I am clearly of the mind it is much better to let it alone
to provide for it self when it comes, then to mention it in a Sermon or
Practical Discourse, and fill Peoples Heads with a Nicety they may be too apt
to abuse. As to give you a plain Case, if you were to Preach against Stealing,
and taking away another man's Goods without his consent, and were showing the
great Mischief and Unlawfulness of it in all Cases, and how contrary it was
both to the good of the World, and to the Laws of God and of Man, you would
not, I suppose, think it Necessary or Prudent to acquaint your Auditory with
that extraordinary Case of a Man's Stealing for the support of his Life, when he
must otherwise starve, though you with Thomas Aquinas, and other Divines,
thought it lawful to do so in such a Case of Necessity.

The Case of Non-Resistance, however high it was carried in all the likely and
practical Cases, to stop most of the Holes at which Treason and Rebellion might
be then apt to break out, or at least through which Factious Spirits might as
they pleased creep out of that ordinary Duty and Obedience they owed to the
Government and have too many others to follow them, and so embroil and disturb
the World, by disobeying and resisting as they thought fit, so that if we would
speak to any purpose it was necessary to speak to those Cases and to show the
unlawfulness of private Persons Resisting or Rebelling either in the Case of
mere Religion, or the Case of Legal Rights, when we might justly complain with
the Primitive Christians in Tertullians Apology that some of those were taken
from us and yet still suffer patiently; or in the Case of Natural Defense which
is not so allowable to private Persons against the Government as against one
another, and the Otherwise Remediless Case by the encroachment of Princes, who
are not to be Resisted for every encroachment. But in all these Cases there may
be several degrees which you do not consider, and which it was not so proper
for me to do at that time. However in all of them there is not that great, but
one would think unlikely, and therefore unthought of Case, of a Princes
Destroying the Community, and overturning the Government, and Ruining the
greatest part of his People; concerning which I desire you to consult Dr.
Falkner, and see what he says about it, who has yet spoken as fully for
Non-Resistance in all Cases as I or you your self can do; and I think now you
find that true which you quote out of my Sermon, and which might have deserved
another sort of remark from you, though it was spoke without the Spirit of
Prophecy, namely, That Gods Providence and Government of the World is the best
Security in this and all other Evils we are subject to; that the great Patron
of Justice will set bounds to the Power and Injustice of Princes; and as far as
is necessary for the good of the World, and for his wise designs, so far they
shall go and no farther; that he will take the matter into his own hands, and
satis est quod Deum expectent ultorem, who will not therefore strike them
immediately and miraculously with Thunder from Heaven, but raise up
Instruments, and find out means in his Wise Providence to Deliver a people by
those who were under no manner of Obligation from the Doctrine of
Non-Resistance.

The Clergy who have taken the Oaths, were no more concerned in Resisting K.
James while he was their King, nor in adhereing to any that did so in this
particular, than any of you who refuse the Oaths, and for that sin of Omission
in not Assisting him, which is a duty we are ordinarily bound to by our Laws
and by our former Oaths, that if it be one, is a common Crime we are both
equally responsible for, and the same reason by which you unloose your selves
from part of the Oath of Allegiance, which was to defend and assist the King,
and which made you not think your selves bound to keep that when the Prince
came because it tended to your manifest destruction, might have unloosed you
from the whole, even, if you please as Sampson did his withs; and we think our
selves now fully unloosed by his not being King.

I wonder therefore, and can hardly think you in earnest, when you bring such
frivolous and unconcluding Reasons for your not taking the Oaths, or
noncompliance with the present Government, which can satisfy no body; and if
they expose any, it is those who bring them, as for example, because ye would
not be like a kind of Weather-glasses, by having your obedience to Governors
higher or lower according to the temperature or variation of outward Affairs.
This fancy of Weatherglasses has had great Honor and Credit done to it by
several of your party, and particularly by the Wise Publisher of the History of
Passive Obedience, who was pleased to put it into his Preface as the only piece
of Wit there, and if any of you stand in the same need of it, and it be further
serviceable to you, the Owner of it will still allow you the free use of it,
but then pray take this with it, and all that belongs to it, That none may be
so malicious as to think we Calculate our Sermons merely for the present
Circumstances, as if the Pulpit were a kind of Weather-glass wherein the
Doctrine of Obedience to Governors is higher or lower according to the
Temperature or Variation of outward Affairs, I challenge Malice it self to name
the Pulpit where this Doctrine has fallen so much as half a tenth since the late
Revolution, or where the contrary Doctrine, to wit, the Lawfulness of Resisting
has ever bin Preached by any unless perhaps by a Nonswearer; so that I see no
danger hereby of our rendering our Ministerial endeavors useless and
ineffectual, or becoming a great Scandal and Disturbance to such as have known
our former Doctrine and manner of Life and bringing a reproach upon the
excellent Religion we profess. If any thing of this be, it is owing more to
those who stand out, who thereby furnish some weak Persons with Scruples, and
some discontented ones with Pretenses against the present Government, but which
of us do hereby render their Ministerial endeavors more useless and
ineffectual, let the Body of the Nation judge, and let any of your selves judge
by the small number of those whom you can bring to be of your Minds in your own
Parishes; if you come to consider Consequences, as ye thus object to us upon
our coming in to the Government, what are those upon your standing out, but the
Ruin not only of your Country, but of the Protestant Religion here, and all
over Europe; and the serving a Cause, and joining in an Interest that no Honest
Englishman or Hearty Protestant, though he may suffer for it in Conscience, yet
can in Conscience wish well to; you need therefore be as Cautious against
those, as you are you say, against Treason, because you have bin told, and I
hope you would have bin so, if you had not bin told, that Treason has stood so
long in this Nation, in the late times, that it has run to seed, and scattered
its principles, etc. and that it is a Disease, which though it be not like the
Sweating Sickness of old, a Malady peculiar to Englishmen, yet the plenty and
luxury of our Country may perhaps make us more subject to it than others; I
would therefore have your Party have a care of it, for I do not believe this
Government will be more a friend to it than any other, but I think no man is
exposed by a thousand such like Quotations either against Treason or for
Non-Resistance, which will hold as long as there is any Government in the World;
and I am of Opinion that Treason is as great a Crime under K. William's Reign,
and Non-Resistance as much a Duty as it was under K. Charles's.

I can easily grant you all that either I or others have said much better upon
that Subject, while they have kept to the Laws and to the Constitution, and not
run into such Notions and Schemes of Government as destroy both, and nothing
will follow or be concluded from it that shall in the least injure K. William,
if he be our true and proper Sovereign, or be any way serviceable to K. James,
if he be not. This is the great Point which you have not hit, but may if you
please make it the Subject of the next loving Letter between us: All that is in
this I have answered with that kindness and openness that becomes a Friend, and
with that seriousness that becomes a point of Conscience and such as I fear not
to be ashamed of at the last day.

And I am still, Sir, Yours and Non-Resistances Faithful Friend and Humble
Servant, W. P.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the Writing, but before I had the opportunity of sending this to you, a
few Scrupulous Quaeries came into my Thoughts, which seem to me to have more
weight in them to incline a Conscientious Man to take the Oaths, and come in to
the Government, then the Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance can
have to keep him out and make him forbear; and therefore with the same Freedom
and Civility you have used to me in desiring an Answer to those Scruples on the
one side, I beg the favor of you to give a fair and plain Resolution of the
other.

First then, I would ask whether it be, or were, a full judgment and persuasion
of the downright Sinfulness and Unlawfulness of taking the Oaths, or only some
doubts and scruples and dissatisfaction in your Minds about it that does or did
hinder you? I have reason to think it is or was only the latter, because
several of you have expressly owned this, and have therefore judged more
charitably of your Brethren than to believe so many ventured upon an action
that carried a downright Sinfulness and Unlawfulness in it; but if others could
satisfy themselves about it, and could do it, you thought they might, and did
no way blame or condemn them for it. This I am sure was the judgment and the
words too of many of you, nay the best and greatest of your Dissenting Brethren
did not say any thing to their Friends or so much as admonish their young
Chaplains, and others who were under their immediate care, against taking the
Oaths, when they knew they were inclined and disposed so to do. Now if they
instead of some lesser doubts and private scruples had made a full judgment
about the Sinfulness and Unlawfulness of this, how could they be excused for
thus suffering sin upon others who were under their Charge, and not giving
warning as Watchmen to those who belonged to their inspection? who dwelt in
your houses, and were within your gates? whose Souls they were to take care of,
lest their blood should be required at their hands, and their Sin should be
charged upon their neglect. Nay, how could any of the Bishops satisfy
themselves in not doing this to their whole Diocesses, and immediate Cures,
whatever Worldly Perils and Inconveniences they had hereby ran, that so at
least they might have delivered their own Souls? I take it therefore for
granted that it was not a full judgment and persuasion of the downright
Sinfulness and Unlawfulness of taking the Oaths, but only some lesser doubts
and private scruples which hindered them, and many of you from so doing; if any
of you have since come to a greater Plerophory, and your Convictions have risen
with your Resentments, God and your own Consciencies must judge of that; but
whilst ye were only under those Doubts, and so thought it safer not to do the
thing than do it, whilst ye thus doubted about it, and had some Scruples
concerning it remaining in your Minds, I ask whether these doubts and scruples
of yours should not have bin overruled by the many Reasons on the other side,
by the great and evident Mischiefs of your standing out both to the Church and
Kingdom, and the no less great good to the Protestant Religion both at home and
abroad by this Revolution? And whether it were not or had not bin Lawful in
this Case, to have Acted even with a Doubting Conscience? I am sure we have
often told the other Dissenters so in the Case of Church-Conformity, and I
question not but it is a true Principle that a man may and often ought to act
with a doubting Conscience where there are only some scruples, and
dissatisfactions that he cannot perfectly get rid off on one side, and such
great Reasons as the Peace and Unity of the Church or Kingdom on the other,
though never against an Erroneous one where he has formed a full and complete
though wrong judgment of the sinfulness and unlawfulness of an Action; and here
by the way I would recommend to you, to consider over again and apply to your
selves what ye have formerly said and written against those Dissenters in the
matter of Schism, and in the Matter of a Doubting Conscience.

Secondly, I Query, Whether most if not all of the Dissenting Clergy were not
once well satisfied in their Consciences about the Prince of Orange 's coming
over, and rejoiced in it as their only Deliverance under God from their Ruin
they saw coming upon the Church and Nation; when they wished well to him and
prayed for him, and went over to him with their Hearts and Affections, if not
more overtly by Addresses and other Applications. Why should they then think
themselves now so indispensably obliged to King James, and so inseparably bound
to him by their Oaths of Allegiance, which they then thought they were in
great measure discharged and released from? For who then thought himself bound
in Conscience to defend King James in all his Rights, Privileges and
Preheminencies whatsoever, according to the Oath of Allegiance, and to assist
him to the utmost of their power against one who seemed and was declared by him
to be an open Enemy and Invader? What Minister of the Church of England
encouraged the Soldiers to Fight against him, and did not rather declare it
unlawful so to do when it was so plainly fighting against their Religion, and
their Country, which were then thought sufficient Considerations to supersede
an otherwise necessary Duty? I ask therefore whither the same reasons which
then satisfied us all, and which ye then thought released you from part of your
Oath of Allegiance, and from giving King James that Assistance which had bin
otherwise due to him, had it not manifestly tended to the utter Ruin of your
selves and your Religion, and the whole Kingdom, may not as well and much
better discharge you now from that Allegiance which ye pretend is still owing
to him, and why they who were for taking away his Authority and Dispossessing
him of his Government by a Regency during his Life, and without his Consent as
the only expedient to secure the Church and Nation from Ruin under him, should
think they were under such a strict and unalterable Obligation to him by their
former Oaths, and the Laws of the Land? Whither those were not more
irreconcilable with such a method than with a New King? Farther, Whether those
who sat in the Convention, and in the Parliament too when it was made such by
the Authority of King William, till they went off upon the Act for taking the
Oaths, did not own the present Government, and shake off that of King James? I
would there-therefore beg leave to ask those, and all of you why you did so
many ways leave King James then, and adhere so closely to him now? Whether ye
have changed your Minds, and altered your Opinions, and repent of the Zeal
which most of you showed for the Prince? Whether ye would not do the same
things again ye did then if ye were in the same Circumstances? If so, if ye can
alter your judgments in so little a time, why should ye so much wonder at
others, and object it to them as an instance of their mutability and sudden
change of their Opinions in the Case of Non-Resistance, and Passive Obedience,
though ye have no reason for it, when so far as I see ye have as much Power over
your own Minds, and have as suddenly changed your own Opinions, and acted, some
of you, as inconsistently and contradictorily to your selves, as ye suppose
others have done.

Thirdly, I would ask you, Whether ye can produce any Examples of Christian
Bishops or Priests or any other Christians since the times of our Savior who
ever suffered on such an Account or for such a Cause as ye now do? viz. for not
submitting to the Civil Government that was Established amongst them, and owned
and acknowledged by the States and Representatives of a Kingdom, and for such a
Cause as those who are honest and sincere cannot heartily wish Success to, or
pray to God that it should thrive and prosper; for we have a better Opinion of
most of you than to believe ye would have King James Conquer King William with
the French Fleet and Irish Army, and that it was as far from you as from us to
desire this a few Months ago, and that ye cannot in your Hearts wish that K.
James should come back again in his present circumstances, unless so
miraculously changed, and in such a wonderful manner that we may almost as
reasonably hope that God should raise his Father and send him to live again and
reign over us. Bating then such a Miracle as that, what would ye have? no
Government, to which we should pay Allegiance, and from which we should expect
Protection, but rather that all things should run into Anarchy and Confusion,
as King James left them, till he shall please to return again? Alas a Kingdom
cannot like a Woman deserted by her former Husband or Divorced from him, live
single and not Marry again, but must have some Government immediately, and some
other Ruler besides the Mob. When therefore in such a Case a Government is
settled in a way ye may not like, but cannot help, in the best and only way it
could then be; for either the longest Sword or most Votes must carry it, (which
were then both of a side) nay when it is established in a way most agreeable to
our old Constitution, must private Persons lose all they have rather then come
into it? They must leave the World, and live in very few Governments long if
they do this: Did any of the Primitive Christians do so who had as much reason
to be dissatisfied with several Governments they lived under, and especially to
question the Rightful Title of many of their Supreme Governors as you can have?
and yet never that I know of did they suffer on such an account, much less for
such an untoward Cause as ye now do.

Fourthly, I would ask you, If you believed the matter of Fact true that King
James had put a suppositious Child upon the Kingdom to exclude the Right Heirs,
and had made a League with France to overturn the Legal Government and
Constitution, and had resolved to use the utmost Force and violence to bring in
Popery by French Dragooning, and Irish Massacring, and were endeavoring and
likely to accomplish all this; whether in such a case ye could think your
selves discharged of your Allegiance to him and that ye were no longer bound to
him as your Rightful King? If ye could, then ye must grant this Principle that
a King may cease to be King, and lose his Right to your Allegiance without a
Natural Death or voluntary Resignation, and then you will have as much to
answer for Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance, as you think others now have;
when you shall send me word that you will give me this Principle, and put the
Issue upon the matter of Fact, I Will give you a further account of that. If you
will not own this, but still hold to indissoluble Allegiance, and Passive
Obedience, let the King destroy all his People and all the Laws and Rights of
the Kingdom, and the Inheritance of the Crown too, and that in such a Notorious
Case, his Right and your Allegiance still continue in full force, then ye stand
to such Principles as will make Government a great Curse very often instead of
a Blessing to Mankind, and such a Yoke as neither we nor our Fathers were able
to bear, who did in vain settle any Legal Rights and establish any Legal
Constitution if their Posterity are bound in Conscience to let go their claim
to all this, and give it all up, when a rash and resolute Prince will be
contented with nothing less, than destroying the Government by which he is
King; I cannot believe that any of you can soberly and in good earnest believe
such a Principle or carry it so high but only as it is necessary for you to
defend your selves and your Case at present, and though you are then driven as
far as we can follow you, yet like the Irish, your Refuge is in a Bog, and in
the grossest absurdity; however I am of Opinion if ye search your own Hearts,
ye do not believe this, nor believe your selves bound to such an Allegiance
still to King James as ye pretend, for if ye were, ye were bound to do all ye
can to bring him in again, to defend him in all his Rights, Titles,
Preheminencies, and Authorities, according to your Oath of Allegiance to him if
that still oblige you, and to oppose all the Enemies to his just and rightful
Claim and Authority, and to use some other Weapons for him than those of
Prayers and Tears, and to live no longer peaceably under this Government than
ye have a power and opportunity to destroy it; and yet I dare say the best and
most conscientious among you are not of this Mind, so that if you will give me
leave to request the same favor of you, which you have done of me to return
such a serious and sincere answer to these Queries as you will not be ashamed
of at the last day, you will find you are more apt to contradict your selves
and your own Principles in several things then any of us are in the business of
Non-Resistance and Passive Obedience.

Fifthly, I would seriously ask you one Question more: Whether if it be lawful
to take the Oaths, and come in to the Government, it be not a Sin to refuse
them, and stand out? This I ask because I am apt to believe that most of you
consider only the loss of your Preferments, and Worldly Interests as the only
danger and hazard on one side, whereas there is a sin and all the Consequencies
of that on the other; and therefore ye look upon it as much safer and better to
venture the penalty than the crime. Now if this were all, I confess it is so to
a very good man who has lively Thoughts of Religion upon his Mind, and near
Thoughts of Death, and mean Thoughts of this World, as a Wise Man cannot but
have, who has lived long in it and enjoyed it, and even a Man of no great
Goodness may be easily brought to do this when the Worldly loss and danger is
not so certain but he has hopes by many ways to Escape it, and especially at a
time when it is very uncertain which side is like to be the looser or the Gainer
as to this World. But This is by no means putting the case right, nor using a
just Balance to weigh the difficulties on both sides, but it is leaving out the
heaviest weight on one side which should turn the scale against all the rest,
Worldly Interest alone is easily weighed down with Peace of Mind, and a man's
Eternal Interest, and sometimes with the mere Glory and Opinion of Suffering
Persecution for Conscience sake, and the enjoying and gratifying a stiff and
obstinate Humor that is not humble enough to yield or to retract a mistake;
but the Consideration of that Mischief which a man does to Religion, to the
Church whose Service he deserts, to the Kingdom whose Peace he disturbs, to his
Parish and Flock whom he forsakes, to his Family, whom he ruins and undoes, and
how much he becomes an Instrument, though against his Will, to serve Popery and
the worst Interest in the World, this should open his eyes and make him see a
greater danger and evil on the other side then the mere loss of his Worldly
Interest, and that it must be one of the greatest sins that can be and the most
big with evil Consequences to stand out, if it be not utterly sinful and
unlawful in it self to come in, and therefore if any man does the former out of
any humor, perverseness or revenge because he is not pleased or things are not
carried to his Mind, or because he will not be thought to Change his Opinion,
or sneakingly come in to save his Preferment, and be laughed at for so doing,
if it be from a point of Honor or any other reason but a Point of Conscience,
such an one commits a greater Sin than can be committed on the other side, and
runs the Hazard of losing something greater than the best Dignity and Promotion
in this World. This I would therefore have ye all seriously consider and answer
it, if not to me, yet to God and your own Consciences. Farewell, and remember
you were the Aggressor.

FINIS.

