Houblon Mayor, Cur' Special' tent' apud Domum Mansion' Owen Buckingham, Mil'
un' Vic' die Mercur' xv. die Aprilis in Hebdomada Paschae, 1696. Annoque Regis
Willielmi tertii, Angliae, etc. octavo.
THis Court does desire the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of
Ely, to print his Sermon, Preached on Monday last at the Parish Church of St.
Brides, before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Governors of
the several Hospitals of this City.

GOODFELLOW.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR, AND Court of
Aldermen, AT St. BRIDGET's CHURCH, On EASTER-MONDAY, 1696.

By the Right Reverend Father in God SIMON Lord Bishop of ELY.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church
Yard. 1696.

THE BISHOP of ELY's SERMON ON EASTER-MONDAY. 1696.

A SERMON Preached before the LORD MAYOR, etc.
2 TIMOTHY II. 8. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from
the dead, according to my Gospel.
THese words are a solemn Charge of St. Paul's to his Son Timothy: whom he had
earnestly exhorted, in the foregoing part of this Chapter, to take care of
three things.

First, To continue constant in the Grace, which he had received from our Lord,
i. e. in the Doctrine of Christianity, v. 1. Thou therefore, my Son, be strong
in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, To deliver this Doctrine to other faithful persons, who might spread
and publish it there, where he could not preach it himself, v. 2. And the
things which thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou
to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. And

Lastly, Not to be moved by any troubles or difficulties that might come in his
way, to neglect his Duty, or be less zealous in it: but in his Christian
Warfare to endure hardship, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, v. 3.

This he illustrates and urges, by three most apt Resemblances, in the three
following verses 4, 5, 6. Which show that it was highly reasonable, he should
be no less diligent in his business, than Soldiers, and Wrestlers, and
Husbandmen are in theirs. Who do not expect to carry away the Spoil, to win the
Crown (or other Prize) to reap the fruits of the Earth; unless they fight, and
strive (and that according to the Laws of the Combat) and undergo those
Labors, that belong to their Employment.

These things he bids him consider and lay to heart (v. 7.) beseeching God, to
give him a right understanding in all things.

Now that he might never fail to do according to these directions, he gives him
the Charge, which I have now read, to remember that Jesus Christ of the Seed of
David (i. e. the true Messiah) was raised from the dead, according to the
Gospel which he had heard him preach. This if Timothy preached constantly to
himself, as well as others, the Apostle knew that he would find it more
powerful to animate and encourage him in the Christian Service, and to make him
unwearied and undaunted therein than any other consideration in the world could
be.

So the Words you see do not lead me to prove the Resurrection of Christ from
the dead (for which I must refer you to the Gospel which he preached, where you
will find the belief of it grounded upon the most undoubted Testimonies) but to
show you what necessity there is to remember this, and inculcate it upon your
selves and others; That Jesus Christ was raised from the dead, according to
what we read in the Gospel.

Why should the Apostle, may some say, command this to be remembered above all
other things? Was there not as much cause to remember the Cross of Christ? to
reflect continually upon his Death and Passion, his bitter Agonies and bloody
Sweat, his cruel Torments, and all the vile Circumstances of his Sufferings?

Yes, no doubt; there was and is great reason to remember both. But yet you may
note, that when the Apostles were to choose a Person to succeed in the place of
the Traitor Judas, it was not that he might be a witness of Christ's Passion,
but of his Resurrection, Act. 1. 2^ This was the great Business of the
Apostleship; and the great Work also of the Holy Ghost, which presently came
down to join his Testimony with theirs, as you read Act. 5. 32. We are
witnesses of these things (speaking of Christ's Resurrection) and so is the Holy
Ghost; which God has given to them that obey him. That therefore which they
were peculiarly sent to testify, with the conjunct Testimony of the Holy Ghost;
was above all things to be heartily believed, and faithfully remembered, and
solemnly commemorated; as it is at this Festival, upon more days than one:
which our Ancestors, with great reason, have appointed for this purpose.

For this (to give a general reason of it) was the only thing, whereof there
was any doubt; there being no question at all, that our Savior suffered, and
was exposed to public shame. All his Enemies saw him hang upon his Cross; and
were as ready as any other persons in the World, to proclaim and publish every
where, that he was accused, condemned, and punished as a notorious Malefactor.
Nay, they rejoiced in hope, that they were rid of one, who if he had still
lived, was like to draw all men after him. They not only confessed, but
gloried, that he was buried, and shut up in his Grave: where they thought to
keep him so fast, that he should never stir, to trouble them any more. But that
he suffered unjustly, and was wrongfully sentenced and put to death; this they
denied, and resolutely gainsaid: And therefore would by no means grant that he
was risen out of his Tomb: which they saw plainly would be to reverse the
Judgment they had passed upon him; and to judge and condemn themselves as
Murderers and Crucifiers of the Lord of Life.

This therefore being the great Controversy, it was absolutely necessary that
the Apostles should constantly assert and evidently prove the Resurrection of
Christ above all other things; if they meant to gain any Disciples to the
crucified Christ. And when they had gained them, this was to be kept in mind,
and carefully preserved, if they intended to have them abide in him, (as St.
John speaks) that is, persist in the belief and practice of his Religion. As I
shall now proceed to show, by laying before you, how much depends upon the
Resurrection: even, all the Faith, and Hope, and Comfort of a Christian. For,

I. First, the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, was the strongest Proof of
the most fundamental Point in our Religion.

II Secondly, It removed the greatest Scandal, that lay ^n the way, to the
belief of that fundamental Po^^t.

III. Thirdly, It gave all Christians full Satisfaction, th^^ God was
abundantly satisfied, with what our Savior Christ had done and suffered.

IV. Fourthly, It verified the whole Gospel, which relies upon this, as the
undeniable Evidence of it.

V. Fifthly, More particularly it proved the Certainty of future Rewards, in
the other World. And therefore,

VI. Sixthly, Was the most powerful Encouragement to patient Continuance in
well-doing: Without which we cannot hope for those Rewards.

This is the Sum of what follows.

I.
First, The Resurrection of Christ, was the strongest Proof of the most
fundamental Doctrine in our Religion; viz. That Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

Which he demonstrated indeed in his lifetime, by many miraculous Works; which
were the Divine Testimony to him, that he was, what he said, the Son of God.
And this, in the highest Sense of those Words; not only sent to act in God's
Name, and by his Authority, but begotten of him before all Worlds, being of one
Substance with the Father: as the whole current of the Gospel teaches us; and
as the Jews themselves seemed to understand him, when they accused him for
saying, God was his Father, making himself equal with God, V. John 18. And this
was said, upon occasion of such a miraculous Work, as none but God could effect.

But some were so malicious as to say, Such things were done by the Power of
the Devil. And others, who were better minded, were still incredulous, and
asked for a further Evidence, saying, What sign show thou, seeing thou do
these things? That is, took upon him to drive out those that bought and sold in
the Temple, which he calls his Father's House. To which he answered in the
Second of St. John's Gospel, v. 19. Destroy this Temple (speaking of his own
Body, in which the Divinity really dwelt) and in three days I will raise it up
again. Here he plainly fore-assigns his Resurrection from the dead, by his own
Power; as the greatest Evidence that he was, what he pretended, the Son of God;
in whose humane Nature the Divine really inhabited. For these Words were, as if
he had said, I have given you Signs, and wrought Wonders already, which if they
will not convince you, then you must stay till my Resurrection, which will
undeniably prove that which you question: It being impossible I should raise my
Body from the dead, if I were not really the Son of God.

And thus we read also in St. Matthew, that another Company, upon another
Occasion, asked him the same Question more than once, XII. 38. XVI. 1. and his
Answer was, A wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, (i. e.
after so many Signs had been already given, it was a Token of a depraved
disposition to call for more) there shall none be given to them, but the sign
of the prophet Jonas. This was all that remained for the Conviction of
obstinate People: Such a wonderful thing as the Deliverance of Jonas out of the
Whale's Belly, after he had been there buried three days: Or rather a far
greater Wonder; the Resurrection of Christ, after he had been so long actually
dead, and buried in the Earth.

This was more than all the Miracles he had wrought while he was alive. Which
was the Reason (as Theophylact observes) why he wrought none after his
Resurrection; because that was the greatest, the most astonishing Miracle:
Able, by it self alone, to prove that he was the Son of God. There needed no
more, but only the Coming of the Holy Ghost, to prove that he was indeed risen.

If he had come from the Cross, as his Crucifiers desired; it had not been such
a Wonder, as his Coming up out of his Grave, after they had seen him give up
the Ghost upon the Cross. His rising to Life again, struck all his Enemies
dead. They knew not what to say, but only that he was not risen. For if he
were; then God (whose Power alone could raise a dead Man) had verified his
Word, who said he was the Son of God: And condemned theirs, who not only denied
it, but pretended that in saying so, he committed Blasphemy against God. If
that had been true, God would never have countenanced such an impious Person,
by raising him to Life again: But have been more concerned, than they, to
confute his Word, which had been very easily done; by letting him lie and rot
in his Grave. For he having given this Sign, of his being the Son of God, if it
had not come to pass; all the Fame he had acquired by his Miracles, would have
died with him. And it was impossible it should come to pass if he had been a
Deceiver and Blasphemer; because God, who alone could raise him, would never
have lent any Support to a Lie, and to a Lie whereby his Majesty was most
highly affronted: much less would he have dug so deep into the Earth, (if I
may so speak) as to fetch him to Life out of his Grave; that he might lay such
a strong Foundation as this, for Faith in his Name. No, he himself had declared
by the Mouth of David, the Royal Ancestor of this Person, that he would destroy
all those that speak leasing (or Lies), V. Psalm. 6. And therefore would not
have restored one to Life, whom they had destroyed upon that Account; if he had
been indeed guilty of speaking Lies: But rather have taken care that their
Sentence might have been confirmed, by keeping him for ever in his Tomb.

But since our Savior thus preached, that he was the Son of God; and since he
asserted this, with as great Plainness at his Death, as he had done in his
Life; and since he foretold his own Resurrection, and that by his own Power,
and alleged it as the last and greatest Sign of his Truth in this Assertion;
he has proved it beyond Contradiction, by rising again punctually at the time
he appointed. Which is the Testimony of God to our Savior; whereby he has
confirmed and established our Savior's Word: And, in effect, said what he had
said himself, That he is the Son of God. Which Truth is the great Support and
Comfort of our Souls: God having laid help (as it appears by this) upon one
that is mighty to save: Because he is really God, as well as Man. And therefore
present to us at all times and in all places; privy to our most secret Thoughts
and Desires, when we cannot speak a Word; able to Succor every one, throughout
the whole World, who comes to God by him, and depends upon his Almighty Grace.

II.
Secondly, This the Apostles had the greater reason to press, and imprint upon
Men's Minds and Memories; because the Resurrection of Christ removed the
greatest Scandal that lay in the way, to the Belief of this fundamental
Doctrine, of his being the Son of God: which was the Offense of the Cross. This
was a very great Stumbling Block to the Jews (even to those, who had some good
Persuasions of our Savior) that he, who appeared as their King, should be
crucified; that is, exposed to the most shameful and ignominious Death in the
World. This they thought would expose them also, to the Laughter and Scorn of
their Neighbors, if they should profess themselves the Followers of oue who
died amongst Thieves: And whose Life was not valued, by the wise Men of their
Nation, so much as the Life of a seditious Murderer. The Gentiles also thought
this Foolishness, a mere sottish Humor of some dull People; to addict
themselves to the Service of a Man, that hung upon a Gibbet, and there made a
most shameful End.

And so they might have thought still, if it had not been for his Resurrection;
which took away this Scandal: and made it appear, that it was no Folly nor
Disgrace, to honor one, whom God had most highly honored above all other Men.
His Glory now shone the brighter; because the most base, ignoble and infamous
Death of all others, could not obscure it. He appeared now like this Sun; which
after it has been a while wrapped up in a very thick Cloud, breaks forth with
the greater Splendour.

This therefore was to be asserted, and firmly settled, because it advanced him
above all other Lawgivers, whatsoever: who still lie in their Tombs; if their
Ashes have not been long ago scattered into the Air, and blown no body knows
whether. They have a Memory indeed in Story; but it is that they are dead: and
have no Authority now to demand Obedience to their Laws.

This exalts our Blessed Lord and Savior above the greatest Kings and
Conquerors, that ever have been in the World: who after all their Achievements
over others, were at last utterly defeated by Death; and so vanquished as never
to recover their Thrones any more. Search after the Sepulchers of all the
Caesar's; read their Inscriptions, if there be any remaining; and that which
seems to raise their Names, and to make them great, in truth depresses them and
lays them low: since after the loftiest Titles upon their Monuments, they
confess them to to lie buried underneath.

Hic jacet terrarum Dominus, Here lies the Lord of all the Earth, was the
highest Style wherein the goodliest Monuments of Earthly Monarchs could speak.
But our Savior's Tomb spoke another Language; or rather the Angels of God told
his Disciples when they came to visit it.

Surrexit, non est hic. He is risen, he is not here. Why seek ye the living
among the Dead? XVI. Mark 6. XXIV. Luke 5. He is Caelorum Dominus, the Lord of
the Heavens, as well as of the Earth; whether you shall see him ascend, and
there he shall live for evermore. This great Lord never ceases to reign. He
has no Successor in his Kingdom: But, as God himself, sits King for ever
and ever.

Which when the Nations of the World heard, and it was substantially proved,
how could they choose but say (notwithstanding the Scandal of the Cross) as they
do in the Book of the Revelation?

Who would not fear thee, O LORD thou King of Saints? who would not glorify
thy Nome? for thou only art Holy; or Sacred. Thy Throne O God (as it is else
where) is for ever and ever; the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter:
Thou love Righteousness and hate Iniquity; therefore God, even thy God has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy Fellows: that is, raised him
above all the Kings that ever were.

Thus with respect to Christ himself, we ought to commemorate his Resurrection
with the greatest Joy (as I might show, if it were not time to proceed to the
other Particulars) because it was in Order to his own Advancement, to the
Throne of Glory, as the Reward of his ignominious Sufferings.

III.
Thirdly, As his Resurrection did him more Honor, than his Death had done him
Disgrace: so it proved likewise that by his Death he had given to God, all the
Satisfaction that he desired. And therefore is most necessary to be firmly
believed, and steadfastly preserved in our Memories, that we who do confess him,
may all rest assured, that by his Blood, which he shed upon the Cross for us,
he has made a complete Propitiation for the Sins of all the World.

He himself said before he died, VI. Joh. 51. that he would give his Flesh for
the Life of the World: that is, offer up his own Body unto God, a voluntary
Sacrifice, to preserve us from eternal Death. For he laid down his Life of
himself, as he professed. X. Joh. 18. and without his Consent, no Man had power
to take it away: And he truly laid it down: as the Blood of the New Testament,
for the Remission of Sins, as he likewise himself speaks, just before his
Death. XXVI. Mat. 28.

Now if his Blood had not been an acceptable Sacrifice unto God, upon this
Account for which it was offered; or if there had remained any thing more to be
done, which God required or expected from him, for the Expiation of our Sins
(which was the End, he tells us, of his Sacrifice) God would not have raised
him, out of his Grave. For that was not only to acquit him of all the pretended
Crimes, for which the Jews unjustly condemned him: But to free him also from
the Iniquity of us ^^l, which the Lord (as the Prophet speaks LIII. Isa. ^.)
laid upon him; and to declare Publicly to al^ ^^e World, that he had received
full Satisfacti^n for them, and demanded no more.

Nay, by his Resurrection God not only testified that his Blood was most
Precious in his Sight, and had obtained what he intended: but also enabled him
to go with it himself into the Heavens; there to perpetuate this Sacrifice to
the End of the World; and by Virtue of it make Intercession for us.

For we are to look upon his rising again after he was slain, to be in order to
his doing just as the High Priest under the Law did: who taking the Blood which
had been shed at the Altar, on the great Day of Atonement, carried it into the
most Holy Place, where the Glory of the LORD resided; and there presented it
unto him: From whence, if he came forth alive, it was a final Declaration, that
God was well pleased with the Sacrifice, and was at Peace with his People. In
like manner did our Blessed Lord and Savior, who is both our great
High Priest; and also our expiatory Sacrifice: after his Blood had been shed
upon the Cross, gather it up again at his Resurrection, and go with it into the
highest Heavens; there to appear with it, in the Presence of God for us. And
from thence has already begun to bless us, by sending the Holy Ghost to us: as
an undoubted Testimony, that his Blood has made the Atonement, which he
designed. Whereof we shall be more assured, at the consummation of all things;
when we shall see him come in Person out of the most Holy Place, at the last
Day; and appear alive the second time, without Sin unto Salvation. IX. Heb. ult.

But for the present it is Evident by his Resurrection, and his sending the
Holy Ghost (which Tertullian well calls his Vis vicaria, or his Power which
supplies his Place, till he come again) that he has fully expiated our Sins;
so as to obtain an Eternal Redemption for us: and will also appear in Person to
our Salvation; because he has by the same Resurrection overcome Death, which
was the Punishment of Sin.

The Conquest of that was a sufficient Declaration, that Sin has lost its
Power over those, who by obedient belief on his Name are made one Body with
him. They may be satisfied, that it can no more hold them for ever in its
Chains, than it could him, whose Members they are. And consequently that their
Sins (of which Death, as I said, was the Punishment) are certainly cancelled
and blotted out: so that they may comfortably wait upon God, for his Son from
Heaven, whom he has raised from the Dead; even Jesus which delivers us from
the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.

Whereas, if he had not risen from the Dead, we could have had no assurance,
no, not by his Death and Passion, of Remission of Sin: Because there would have
been no Proof, that the Punishment of it ( viz. Death) was taken away, without
which we cannot be said to be forgiven. No, St. Paul openly professes, 1 Corinthians. XV. 17. If Christ be not raised, your faith is vain: ye are yet in
your Sins. They are not remitted, that is, but we are still liable to undergo
the Punishment of them: It is not apparent that we shall be acquitted, and
freed from that Obligation to suffer the Punishment of Sin; unless we believe
Christ's Resurrection.

He made indeed a new Covenant in his Blood; which promises Remission of Sin:
But what Assurance can we have, that his Blood is accepted with God for this
End; and that Christ has Power to make good his Promise, to pardon our Sins,
to release us from the Punishment of them; by delivering us from Death and from
the Wrath to come: if he be not risen from the Dead? None at all, but as St.
Paul there asserts just before v. 15. If Christ be not risen, then is our
preaching vain; and your faith is also vain. We have no ground to publish, nor
you to receive, such great things as we promise: unless we are as sure of this,
as we are that Christ died.

Therefore this was absolutely necessary to be established and settled in the
Minds of Believers, by all the Labor and Pains the Apostles could take; that
as Christ was delivered for our Offenses (they are the Words of the same St.
Paul, IV Romans ult.) so he was raised again for our justification. But further I
must add that,

IV.
Fourthly, The Resurrection of Christ was necessary to be established in Men's
Belief and in their Remembrance, because it was the verification of the whole
Gospel: the great Proof of all that Christ had taught his Diciples: the
Christian Religion in an Epitome: The Doctrine of Christ in one word. Which is
the ground of that Speech of the Apostle, X. Romans 9. If thou shall confess with
thy Mouth, the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine heart, that God raised him from
the dead; thou shall be saved. This he makes to be the Sum of Christian
Belief; because he that was persuaded of this, and openly acknowledged it, must
unavoidably believe and own the whole Gospel. The truth of which, Christ sealed
by his Blood; and God the Father sealed by raising him from the Dead. Which
assured all that believed it, there was no other way to Life and Happiness, but
that alone, which the Lord Jesus, who is the way, the truth and the life, had
delivered.

And a far greater Testimony this was, which God gave to the Gospel; than had
been given to the Law of Moses: for after he was buried, we hear no more of
him, till our Savior saw him in the holy Mount, together with Elias: where
they discoursed with him of his glorious decease which he should accomplish at
Jerusalem. Moses indeed wrought Miracles; he heard Voices from Heaven; there
were Appearances of Angels to him upon some Occasions; his Face shone, as our
Savior's did when he was transfigured: But as most of these were more
frequent, and all of them more glorious in the giving of the Gospel; so,
besides them all, the Author of it rose from the Dead, as he said he would, to
prove that God, who had sent Prophets before, had now sent his Son to publish
his Will unto the World.

If we believe this, then we are obliged, and there is no way to avoid it, to
entertain all his Doctrine; to lay to Heart his Commands; to take upon us his
Yoke, and submit our selves to the Government of his Laws: and that, as we hope
to obtain remission of Sins, and eternal Bliss; which are promised to none but
the Obedient. On the contrary, Tribulation and Anguish, Indignation and Wrath,
are threatened to all those that do Evil: which the Resurrection of Christ
assures us, he will not fail to inflict upon them.

And here it will be fit to observe these two things, which are very manifest.

First, That the Resurrection of Christ most evidently proved, that no Man was
bound any longer to observe any Laws formerly in force, which are not contained
in the Law of the Gospel. But,

Secondly, That we are all thereby necessarily and indispensably tied, strictly
to observe this Law, which Christ has laid upon us.

I. First, I say, it proved the Dissolution of all former Laws, though of God's
own making; and solemnly delivered by Moses unto the Jewish Nation. Who were
very hard to be persuaded, that they needed no longer to trouble themselves
with those carnal Ordinances; which required them to make a difference of
Meats; to wash their Bodies after several Defilements; to wear only a certain
kind of Garment, and offer such Sacrifices as Moses prescribed, (which were a
very heavy burden to them) but only give up themselves to Christ, to be ruled
by his easy and gentle Laws, of Temperance and Chastity, Meekness and
Humility; Justice and Charity; being ready to do good, and to forgive; as well
as to worship God in Spirit and in Truth. For unto this the Jews objected, that
God had made a Covenant with their Fathers, by the Ministry of Moses, requiring
such Observances: And that they could not absolve themselves from that Bond,
which they had received by being circumcised: but stood in dread of being cut
off (as the Law threatened) if they did not receive that Obligation, by
Circumcision, to observe the whole Law of Moses.

Unto which the Apostle St. Paul gives satisfaction after this manner, (VII.
Romans beginning) a Law (as you all know who are bred up under the Discipline
of the Law) can have dominion over a Man, no longer than he lives under that
Law. As for example, a married Woman, cannot be bound by the Law to her Husband
any longer than he lives. If he die, she is so loose from her Husband, that
though while he lived, she could not honestly marry another man, yet he being
dead, she may give her self in marriage to another person, and be no
Adulteress. This is the sense of the three first Verses of that Chapter. To
which the Jews might reply; True, if we were no more bound to Moses his Law,
than a Wife is bound to her Husband when he is dead, your Argument would be
good: But how does it appear that the Law of Moses is dead, as it supposes? For
if it be not dead, we are still tied to it by your own Confession. Unto this
the Apostle goes on to give satisfaction in the following Words, v. 4.
Wherefore, my Brethren, (i. e. if you allow my Principle, then thus I
demonstrate your Obligation to the Law ceases) ye also are become dead to the
law by the body of Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him,
who is raised from the dead, that ye should bring fo^th fruit unto God. In
which Words he asserts, that by the Death of Christ (for that he means by his
Body) there was an end put to their Law: From all Obligation to which they were
as much released; as a Wife is from her Husband, when he is gone out of this
World (that is the meaning of ye are become dead to the Law by the body of
Christ) for the whole Law of Moses depended upon their Sacrifices; which all
having respect to the Sacrifice of Christ, his Body being offered up, put a
Conclusion to them (which could have no effect, if they continued them) and
demonstrated they had no Obligation to observe that Law: But were left free
now, to subject themselves to a new Law (which he calls being married to
another) and they might easily know whose Law that was, even his who is raised
from the dead. They were really absolved from the Mosaical Religion, by the
Death of Christ's Body; as much as a Wife is from her Husband, when he is
extinct: But that which fully convinced them of it, and moved them to embrace a
New Religion, was the Resurrection of that Body of Christ from the dead. They
could not have believed their Freedom, and so none would have forsaken their
old Discipline, and betaken themselves to Christ: if his Resurrection had not
followed his Death; which solidly proved the Efficacy of it to abolish the Law
of Moses. For this being established, none could see any good Reason to adhere
still to their former Rites and Ceremonies: there being such a powerful Proof
of the Authority of Christ, to take them all away, and settle a better way of
living in their room; which the Apostle calls bringing forth fruit unto God.

And as this was an Argument to persuade the Jews to forsake their Rites,
though appointed by God; so it effectually prevailed with the Gentiles to
renounce their idolatrous Worship, as we read 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9, 10. Ye know what
manner of entrance we had unto you, and how ye turned from Idols to serve the
living and true God; and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from
the dead, etc. We have all great reason so to do, and to be exact and faithful
in his Service: looking upon our selves as most strictly tied to the Observance
of those Laws, which are confirmed to be the Will of God, by such a
Demonstration, as the Resurrection of him that gave them from the dead. This
evidently shows, which is the other thing I mentioned.

II. That they are utterly inexcusable, who break loose from the Laws of
Christianity; which has excused us from all other Obligations. For that very
reason, we are the more strictly bound to obey the Gospel; because we are
thereby absolved from the Law of Moses. The Resurrection of Christ does not
more effectually prove, for instance, that the Sacrifices which he ordained
(and such like Rites) are all abolished; than it proves the indispensable
Obligation that is upon us, to offer unto God continually, the Sacrifices which
Christianity prescribes. Which are principally these.

First, The Sacrifice of a broken and contrite Heart: truly grieved for our
Sins past, and sincerely resolved to do better for the time to come. That is,
unfeigned Repentance, which was ever necessary before that Law was given.

Secondly, The Sacrifice of our own Body, (XII. Romans 1.) That is, of our selves
to God: which we must devote to him, in Purity and Holiness, Temperance and
Soberness, Meekness and Humility, and such like Virtues; which are infinitely
more acceptable, than all the Beasts in the World.

Thirdly, The Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving to God (XIII. Heb. 15.) who
has made us Partakers of his Grace in Christ: which shows us the way to be
more happy, than we could possibly invent, had we the whole World at will.

Fourthly, The Sacrifice of all our Animosities and angry Resentments; which
must be entirely given up to God, for this Reason: Because Christ our Passover,
or Paschal Lamb, is offered for us: Therefore let us keep the feast, not with
the old leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth, 1 Corinthians. V. 7, 8. which was part of the Anthem
yesterday. For it is vain to pretend to love God, if we hate one another. The
Praises we bestow upon him will signify nothing; if we jarr and quarrel among
our selves. This will spoil all the Melody of our Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual Songs; wherein at this Festival we laud his Holy Name.

Lastly, The Sacrifice of Alms seems to be the chief of all: which the Apostle
would no more have us to forget, than the Resurrection of Christ from the dead,
XIII. Heb. 16. But to do good, and to communicate forget not; for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased. He had been proving in the foregoing part of
the Epistle, that Christ being risen from the dead, was not only gone into the
Heavens: but there made an high Priest at the right hand of the throne of the
Majesty in the Heavens, VIII. 1. whereby he can by virtue of his Sacrifice,
once offered, do that for us, which the Priests of old could not, by all the
Sacrifices which they offered daily: Bring us, i. e. into that high and holy
place, by a new and living way which he has consecrated for us through the
veil; that is to say, his flesh, which he offered for us. From whence he
infers, that as all Christians should hold fast their Profession, with a true
Heart and pure Conscience: constantly enduring with such a steadfast Faith as
was in the ancient Worthies whatsoever God pleases: Having Christ especially in
their eye, the author and finisher of our faith, etc. So he at last, in the
Conclusion of all, presses the great Duty of Charity; v. 1. of this XIIIth.
Chapter, Let brotherly love continue. Which he illustrates by some instances,
in the two following verses: and then, after some other instructions, renews
his Exhortation, in these famous Words I have now mentioned: But to do good and
to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. And
let me press the same Duty upon you (before I proceed any further) as both the
Feast which we keep, and the Place where we are assembled, and the Occasion of
our meeting together require.

WE are here assembled in the House of God, to commemorate the wonderful Love
and Power of God in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. For which,
I doubt not, you are all ready devoutly to offer unto him, the sacrifice of
praise, giving thanks unto his name: as the foregoing words ( v. 15.) exhort
you. But the Apostle tells you further, that you must not content your selves,
nor think to please God, with empty Praises and Acknowledgments: but remember
to do good and communicate to the Necessities of others; for these are the
Sacrifices which are most grateful to his Majesty.

There was an express Command in the Law of Moses which we find often repeated,
that when the Children of Israel came to worship the LORD, None should appear
before him empty. Which was first ordained, I observe, when he enjoined them to
keep the Feast of the Passover, XXIII. Exodus 15. But it is afterward explained
to be meant also of the other two great Feasts (mentioned in the following
Verses) XVI. Deuteron. 16. Three times in the year shall all thy males appear
before the Lord, in the place which he shall choose, etc. and they shall not
appear before the Lord empty. That is, without some Present unto him, as a
Tribute of Thankfulness for the Benefits they had received; and as an
Acknowledgment, that he was the supreme Lord of all, and they but Tenants under
him.

Which Precept is not less reasonable to be observed now, than it was under the
Law; but far more reasonable: He being our Lord by an higher Title, of our
Redemption by Christ Jesus; and the Blessings of the Gospel, for which we make
our thankful Acknowledgments, infinitely transcending their Deliverance out of
the Bondage of Egypt, and the fruitful Seasons which they afterward enjoyed in
the Land of Canaan.

Therefore if not at all our holy Assemblies, yet at our principal Festivals
(which are Three also) we are bound sure to bring along with us, some Alms and
Oblations to our Almighty Benefactor. Particularly now at this Feast, which is
answerable to their Passover; no Man ought to appear before the Lord empty: But
full, at least, of most hearty Resolutions, that he will do some charitable Act
or other; as a Token of his Gratitude to God, who has done so much for him;
and as a Recognition of his supreme Dominion over all.

It is always a Christian Duty to contribute to the Relief of those that are in
need: But now, at such a time as this, it is a piece of Worship: A part of the
Divine Service; without which our solemn Feasts and Praises of God, will be but
empty Sounds, and avail us Nothing.

Let us therefore be careful not to forget to do good; but together with the
Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving offer this most acceptable Sacrifice;
which God expects should attend upon the other.

Never fail to communicate to others; when you commemorate how bountiful God
has been to you. Especially now, when you remember the Lord Jesus was raised
from the dead, to be your Advocate with the Father, and to exercise the Office
of a merciful and compassionate High Priest for you in the Heavens; Let it
raise and stir up in your hearts bowels of Mercy and Pity, for the Help and
Relief of your distressed Brethren.

When you feel your Hearts moved to give thanks to God, saying with St. Peter
I. 13. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according
to his abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead; let this grateful Sense of his
Goodness, move you also to be merciful, as your heavenly father is merciful;
that thereby you may excite others to bless him as well as your selves.

Do Good to the Poor and Needy, because he is so very Good to you, as to make
you able to do Good to them. And the more Good God has done any of you; look
upon your selves as bound to do the more to others. For that was the Rule,
which God gave for their Charity, at the Three great Festivals amongst the
Jews, as you read XVI. Deuteronomy. 17. Every Man shall give as he is able, according
to the blessing of the LORD thy God, which he has given thee.

Consider now how God has blessed every one of you here present, and then look
upon your selves as engaged to offer to him something proportionable, for the
Comfort of others, at this time: When you appear before him to thank him, for
the great Blessings, of all sorts, which you enjoy by the Favor of his
Goodness toward you. And that for these two Reasons.

First, Because the Commemoration of Gods Benefits to us, of whatsoever kind
they be, necessarily obliges us (nay, if we have any sense, naturally inclines
us) to make some suitable return to him. Who needing nothing himself, bids us
give it to those that do: and he will take it, as bestowed upon him. And

Secondly, Because it is the very intention of this particular Benefit, which
we now commemorate, viz. Christ's Resurrection from the Dead; to raise up our
hearts above this World, and to quicken us to all good Works: of which these
Sacrifices are the chief. So that he has but a Name to live, who still remains
covetous; and for whom no body is the better. He is dead and buried in earthly
affections, and is not risen with Christ: for if he were, he would seek the
things that are above (as the Apostle speaks III. Colos. 1.) Lay up treasure in
heaven, and not set his heart on things here beneath.

And accordingly we find this blessed fruit of the Resurrection of Christ, as
soon as ever it was published, in the first Converts to Christianity. For all
that believed (II. Acts. 44.) had all things common, and sold their possessions
and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need. Immediately, that
is, their minds were quite taken off from this World; and they apprehended
nothing more necessary, than to make provision for another World, where Christ
is: by employing all that they possessed here, in the best manner they could,
for his service. As you are further informed IV. Acts. 33. if it be rightly
understood; with great power the Apostle gave witness of the Resurrection; and
great grace was upon them all. This (...) or GRACE was Charity: as appears by
the proof he gives of it, in the next words; Neither was there any among them
that lacked; for as many as were possessed of lands or houses sold them, and
brought the price of the things that were sold, and laid them down at the
Apostles feet: and distribution was made unto every man as he had need.

You are not bound indeed to sell all you have, and give it away to pious uses,
as they did (which was practiced only at Jerusalem, and in no other Church; for
some special reasons, not now to be mentioned) but yet you must not keep all
you possess to your selves; for the Apostles expected some of this Good Fruit
in all other Churches, where they sowed the Seed of the Gospel. Which was
wonderfully fruitful in some Churches; particularly those of Macedonia: who
brought forth, as I may Say, an hundred Fold. For such was the Grace of God
bestowed on them, that in a great trial of affliction, the abundance of their
joy and their deep poverty, abounded unto the riches of their liberality: for
they gave to their power, nay, beyond their power; praying the Apostle with
much entreaty to receive their gift, etc. 2 Corinthians. VIII. 1. 2. etc. By which
Noble Example St. Paul provokes the Corinthian Church ( v. 7.) to a pious
Emulation of those excellent Christians; that as they abounded in every thing,
in faith, in utterance, and knowledge, etc. so they might abound in this GRACE
also.

And the like Fruit the Preaching of the Resurrection has brought forth in
abundance, among your worthy Ancestors in this great City: else we should not
have had such a large Catalogue of good Works, as I am now to report to you, of
a a great Number of poor Children, and other poor People maintained in the
several HOSPITALS under the pious Care of the LORD MAYOR, Commonalty and
Citizens of the City of LONDON, the Year last past.

Here followed the Report.

AFTER THE REPORT.
SEE here, Right Honorable and well beloved, what powerful Motives you have to
this Grace, as the Apostle calls it. You have the worthy Examples of those who
have gone before you in welldoing: which it is rank Hypocrisy, to commend and
extol, without imitation. You have the Care and Fidelity of those who are
entrusted with their Bounty, to provoke you to this sort of Charity, in
augmenting the Revenues of the Several Hospitals. Both because you are sure
what is so bestowed, will be faithfully employed; and employed to the relief of
those who are undoubtedly necessitous: and because their Revenues, you see by
the Report, are much impaired; and yet very considerable Numbers have been most
mercifully relieved.

For to the Honor of this Renowned City be it spoken, and to the Honor also
of our Religion, there have not been more noble things of this Kind done in any
Place of the World, than have been done here since the Reformation of Religion.
Which they of the Romish Faction have been wont to revile with most impudent
Calumnies, saying; that good works dyed, together with their way of devotion;
and that we have nothing but an empty faith left among us. Which is like all
the rest of the Impostures, whereby that Religion subsists. For this was
confuted in the very beginning of the Reformation. Forty Years after which (now
above an hundred Years ago) a great Man, Dr. (afterward Bishop) Andrews's
Sermon at the Spittle, 1588. page 17.
upon this very occasion, challenged Rome or any other City in Christendom to
produce such a Show as we see here this Day. And it is much increased, I doubt
not, since that Time: Though then, he says, he was able to prove, that there
had been more done for the increase of Learning, and providing for the Poor,
within those Forty Years, since the Church was reformed from its Errors, than
had been done in any Christian Realm, not only within the same Forty Years
(which was sufficient to stop their Mouths) but in any Forty Years upward,
during all the time of Popery.

And if they were so liberal in those Days, when they were but newly crept out
of the Darkness of Superstition; how much more should we abound in this Virtue,
who by God's singular Goodness have long enjoyed the Light of the Gospel? Who
have had also so many Examples since of bountiful Benefactors: who have been
taught this Duty so frequently: and been taught it, not only by God's Word, but
by his Rod. Whose Discipline some years ago instructed us, how uncertain all
our Possessions are: as we beheld in those dreadful Flames, which consumed so
many goodly Buildings; and spared neither God's Houses nor the Poors.

And now we have been very lately taught this Duty again, in a contrary Method;
by the most merciful Deliverance, God has graciously bestowed upon our King,
this Church, and Kingdom, from the Hands of Blood thirsty Men. Who if they had
succeeded in their execrable Designs of Assassination, Insurrection and
Invasion; this City, in all likelihood, had been exposed to spoil and rapine;
if not laid desolate: By the barbarous Cruelty of that Nation, which has not
been wont to spare those of their own Religion, from the most terrible
Executions; no not their Religious Houses (as they call their Monasteries)
which they have laid in Heaps of Rubbish.

This is a mighty reason we should dedicate some part of those Goods to God;
which might have been all ravaged from us, if he had not most graciously
secured them unto us.

But there is a far stronger Reason; which is, that God strictly requires this
Grace of you, as you hope for Mercy from him, at that great Day when you must
appear before our Lord, who being raised from the dead, is ordained by him to
be the Judge of the quick and dead, X. Acts 41, 42. If he find then you have
been wont to appear before him at these Solemnities, with empty Hearts and
Hands; having put him off merely with verbal Praises; you must not expect a
favorable Sentence from him: For, quite contrary, he shall have judgment
without mercy, that has showed no mercy, II. Jam. 13.

For they who have been unjust and fraudulent in their Dealing, who have
oppressed their Brethren, or used any Extortion, can never answer it unto God;
if they do not by giving Alms, purge their Estates from those ill gotten Goods:
which they cannot restore to their right Owners; because they know not,
perhaps, whom they have particularly wronged or where to find them.

And as for those who have honestly gotten their Estates, they are plainly
bound in gratitude to God, to make him a Present of some Portion of them: who
is the Donor of the whole; and expects such an acknowledgment of his Divine
Blessing upon their true Endeavors.

And whether you have done thus, assure your selves will be strictly examined
at that great Day; as our Savior himself teaches us, in that known Place,
XXV. Matthew. 34, etc. Which I beseech consider at your leisure. Some then will
be apt to say (according as the proceedings at his Tribunal are there
represented) Lord, though I have been a great Sinner, yet I have been very
Penitent for my Offenses: and have not only very sorrowfully bewailed them, but
utterly forsaken them. How does that appear, will the Judge then inquire? Have
you restored that which was deceitfully and unjustly gotten? or have you given
it to the Poor, as I directed you in those Words, give Alms of such things as
you have: and behold, all things are clean unto your, XI. Luke 41? (And) if you
cannot return the Answer of a good Conscience, and faithfully say you have so
done; your Repentance will be rejected.

And if others plead their Justice and honesty; that they never wronged or
defrauded any body; but always paid every Man his own; the Judge will demand,
but what Good did you do; with all the Wealth, that I blessed your honest
Diligence with all? you have been just, it is true; but have you been
charitable? have you supplied the Needs of the Poor? fed the Hungry? clothed
the Naked? taken Care of the Sick, and of the Prisoners, etc. If not; your
Justice will prove a lame and defective Virtue: unable to support you, and make
you stand in that dreadful Judgment.

Now that there will be such an Audit, wherein every Man shall be accountable
to God for what he has done in the Body, the Resurrection of Christ, which we
now remember, is the great and most convincing Proof: As the Apostle teaches
us, in XVII. Acts 30, 31. where he says, God commands all Men every where to
repent, because he has appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given
assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead.

Which leads me now to the next general Head, propounded in the Beginning.

V.
Fifthly, That the Resurrection of Christ is a most evident demonstration of
future Rewards in the other World, to all that live godly in Christ Jesus. For,
as it verified his whole Gospel, of which this is a Part, that they that
believe in him shall have everlasting life: So it is an Instance and Example of
the Truth of it; that they who do well shall not go unrewarded, how ill soever
they be used here. For our Lord is the first fruits of those that sleep: and
has shown by what is done for him, what he will certainly do for us. And it is
to be considered also, that he has power, by his Resurrection, to perform his
own Promise: The Gift of Eternal Life is in his own hands. For this is the
record, that God has given us eternal life, and this Life is in his Son. He
that has the Son, has life; and he that has not the Son, has not life, 1
John V. 11, 12. That is, all the Witnesses to the Truth of Christianity,
testify this; that God will give us Eternal Life; and that it is in his Son's
Power to bestow it: And therefore he that is a Christian, ( i. e. sincerely and
effectually believes on his Son) that Man may be confident of Eternal Life.

VI.
Sixthly, Which is the most powerful Encouragement to patient continuance in
well doing, though after all the good we do here, we should suffer never so
much for Righteousness sake. This, as well as the former, would deserve to be
enlarged, if I had room for it in this Discourse; which is to be confined
within the bounds of a Sermon. Which though I am unwilling to transgress, yet I
beg leave to say a few words of this last thing; because my Text has a
particular respect to it.

The Apostle, you heard in the beginning, had exhorted his Son Timothy to
endure hardship as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ; and not to flinch from his
Duty, though he encountered in the discharge of it never so many difficulties.
Which he knew he would easily overcome, if he did but remember Jesus his Lord
and Master, of the seed of David; and how he was raised from the dead according
to his Gospel. This was sufficient to inspire him with Courage and Resolution,
if he always kept it in mind. For what if he was persecuted? What if he was
reproached, and vilified, and turned out of doors, etc. So was David; so was
Jesus; who was every way of the seed of David: Both as he was born of that
Family; and as he endured the like Persecutions and vile Usage from the
Pharisees, as David had from Saul: But both their Sufferings, David's and and
his, ended at last in a Kingdom; and, as St. Paul says elsewhere of our
Savior, Though he was crucisied through weakness, yet he lives by the power of
God, 2 Cor. XIII. 4.

Let us then be of good courage, for because he lives we shall live also: And
where he is, there shall his faithful servant be also. So he has told us
himself; who is the faithful and true witness; the first begotten from the
dead; the Prince of all the Kings of the Earth: Who will never suffer those who
are faithful to him, to lose by his Service; but beget them all again, after
they are dead unto an endless and heavenly Life; that they being Children of
the Resurrection, may reign with him in his celestial Kingdom.

Ye have heard, says St. James, v. II. of the patience of Job, and have seen
the end of the Lord: that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. For
all his Affliction concluded, in a far more flourishing Condition than he
enjoyed before they befell him: And if we could believe, what is added in some
Copies of the LXX to that Book, he was also made Partaker of such an Honor, as
set a special mark of God's Favor upon him; and declared how highly he valued
his Patience. For after the last words of that Book of Job according to the
Original ( So Job died old, and full of days) some Greek Copies add, (...),
etc. It is written also that he should rise to life again, with those whom the
Lord raises up. The word (...) ( again,) says Olympiodorus, denotes that he
should have another Resurrection here, besides that which he had from Poverty
and Misery to a splendid State of Prosperity: and that was when Christ rose
from the dead. When the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which
slept arose, and came out of the graves after his Resurrection, and went into
the holy city, and appeared unto many, XXVII. Matthew. 52, 53. Now by Suidas and
others it appears, that there was a Tradition which some believed, that Job was
among those Saints that arose with our Savior; which if it be true, was to
demonstrate the high Esteem that God has of humble Patience; which moved him
to do this Man the Honor of accompanying our Savior at his Resurrection, who
had been so memorable for this Virtue. For so Suidas his words are, He
triumphed gloriously after his Agonies; he set up his Trophies: Not such as
those in the Olympicks, or other celebrated Games among the Greeks; but far
more honorable. For besides what God restored to him of worldly Blessings
before he died, this was (...), the last and greatest Prize which he won, to
rise to Life again with our Savior, when he overcame Death.

But howsoever that be, we have a more sure word (as St. Peter speaks) upon
which to build our Faith, and support our Patience in well doing. For if we
believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so, them also which sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him. 1 Thessalonians. IV. 14. For he will appear the second
time (as you have heard) and when Christ who is our life shall appear; then
shall we also appear with him in glory. Faithful is he that called you* who
also will do it. Therefore be faithful unto death, and he will give you a crown
of life.

Thus I have shown you, there was more to be seen in an empty Sepulcher; than
when the Corpse was in it.

For if our Lord be risen, and be not there (a^ the Angel said) then we see, he
was the Son of God. We see him that by suffering death was made a little lower
than the Angels, crowned with glory and honor. We see that God is reconciled
unto Sinners; and that Death has lost its Sting. We see the Gospel is the
Rule, according to which we ought to order our Life. We see our high an^
heavenly calling in Christ Jesus. And Lastly, w^ see that as glorious Things
are laid up in store for those that love and obey him; so nothing can separate
us from the Love of God in Christ Jesus ou^ Lord.

And therefore, my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast^ unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord for as much as ye know that your labor is not
in vai^ in the Lord, 1 Corinthians. XV. 58.

Now the God of Peace that brought again from t^^ dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Sheperd of the Sheep through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant,

Make you perfect in every good work to do his wi^^ working in you that which
is well pleasing in his sigh^ through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever
a^^ ever Amen. XIII. Hebr. 20, 21.

FINIS.

