SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Molucco Nutts, Imported from The INDIES:
SHOWING Their Admirable VIRTUES in Curing the Colic, Rupture, AND All
DISTEMPERS proceeding from the WIND.

Written by a Doctor of Physic in the Country, to Dr. Castle, one of the
Royal Society in London:

Anno 1672.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Molucco Nutts, IMPORTED FROM The INDIES: In a
LETTER, etc.
SIR,
I Understand that the French King has appointed a Society of Ingenious Men,
whose main Business it is to keep Correspondence in several Parts of the World,
and receive Informations of the Novelties that occur in the Cures of Diseases,
by specific Remedies: Diverse of which have been found upon trial very useful
in England and other Parts of the World: And we are greatly Beholding to the
Virtuoso's at Gresham-Colledge, for their Kind Communications, in the
Philosophical Transactions which come forth every Month.

I now recommend to you from my own Experience and Success the Bezoar Nutt or
Bonduck, as an Excellent Specific against all sorts of Distempers that proceed
from Wind in any part of the Bodies of Men, Women or Children. It prevents and
removes flatulent Belchings which arise from the Stomach and Bowels, and by its
Specific Quality dispels those windy Blasts which raise Storms and Tempests in
the Body, sometimes producing Colic, and other times windy Ruptures, which
prove very painful and Dangerous.

Parkinson in his Herbal tells us, that the Egyptians in Alexandria, call it
their Childrens Guardian; and not only give it Inwardly, but hang it about
their Necks, to preserve them from all Evils.

I have known many Children most miserably afflicted with Griping in the Guts
with Wind, who have found great Relief by this simple Medicine given for one
Month.

An old Gentleman extremely Tormented with Chollick pains in his Bowels, and
also with a Hermia Ventosa or Windy Rupture: He had used many Clysters, and
taken many Internal Medicines to expel Wind, and all to no purpose: Yet upon
the use of the Tincture, Spirit and Extract drawn out of these Nuts, was
wonderfully eased.

A Man about Forty years of Age, who was seldom free from Colic Pains and
Ruptures, although he tried many sorts of Trusses and Plasters to keep the Wind
from falling down, yet all failed, until he used these Medicines, and then he
found great advantage. And I don't doubt but others may find the same advantage
with God Almighty's blessing.

I knew a young Gentlewoman who was at some certain times so threatened with
acute Pains from Wind, that there was great Reason for Physicians to suspect a
Gangrene or Mortification of her Stomach and Bowels: She had taken many
Physicians advice, and at last I advised her to the use of this Remedy, and she
found present Ease.

A Country Farmer far remote from all Physicians, who is very subject to the
abovenamed Distempers, yet speedily helps himself by the use of this Remedy,
without Ointments, Plasters or Fomentations: He finds it sensibly expells the
Wind, and keeps his Rupture from falling down, and therefore I think I ought to
tell the World this Excellent Medicine, and not keep it to my self for Private
Advantage, as is now become the common Custom of the World.

The great miseries that some People endure by Wind in their Bodies, makes
their Lives bitter, and they are afraid of everything they eat and drink, lest
it should create Disturbance to them. In such cases there is nothing better for
such Persons, than to incorporate these Drops with all their Meat and Drink:
And by this Means they prevent that miserable Distemper the Twisting of the
Guts, which sends so many to their long Homes.

I have greatly admired to see what wonderful Ease many have received by these
Nuts, when the Tincture, Spirit and Extract have been given in plentiful
Draughts of Chicken Broth.

The reason why I conceal my Name, is, left the Country People knowing what I
use, should despise it, or left Physicians should think I recommend it for
private advantage.

The Reason why I direct this Letter to you, is, beeause in your Chemical
Galenist, you wisely make Experience a surer Trial of the Goodness of a
Medicine, than either Taste or Smell.

FINIS.

