THE UNLAWFULNESS OF Stretching forth the Hand TO Resist or Murder PRINCES,
WITH THE Principal Cases about RESISTANCE, CONSIDERED, In Two SERMONS.

The First Preached upon the Last Thirtieth of January.

The other, upon the Day of Thanksgiving, for the Deliverance of the King and
Kingdom from the Late Treasonable Conspiracy.

By WILLIAM PAIN Rector of St. Mary White-Chappel.

LONDON, Printed by A. Grover, for Walter Kittilby at the Bishop's- Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir WILLIAM SCROGGS Late Lord Chief Justice of ENGLAND.
My Lord,
I Could be very glad that I had less Reason to justify the publishing of
these Sermons, and that they were altogether as unseasonable, as the putting
out of Bills to Cure the Plague, when no Body is Sick or Dies of it, but
Treason is a Disease that Rages amongst us, and though it be not like the
Sweating-Sickness of old, a Malady peculiar to English Men, yet the plenty and
Luxury of our Country may perhaps make us more Subject to it then others: Were
I able to prescribe any thing, however ordinary, that was likely to be either a
Remedy or an Antidote against it, I should think it my Duty as a Lover of the
Peace and Salvation of Mankind, as a Lover of my King and Country, and as a
Minister of that Church and Religion, which has been often the Mark, but never
the Author of any Treason; and I hope the good meaning of this Endeavor will
compound for the weakness of it, and its Honesty and Charity cover the
Multitude of its Faults and Imperfections; I thought my self more then
ordinarily concerned to do this when the Infection had so largely spread at our
end of the Town and in my own Parish, where two of the Conspirators that are
Executed, and two others that are in the Proclamation had their last Abodes;
for though this, does not like other Contagions, begin in Alleys and the
Outparts, among the Poor and Ordinary Persons, yet the Great ones make it their
Business to spread it among those, and there it settles, and there it generally
breaks out. Had these Men come to our Churches they had learnt other
Principles, then what I am afraid, they have done elsewhere; and that none may
be so malicious as to think we calculate our Sermons merely for the present
Circumstances, as if the Pulpit were but a kind of weather-glass, wherein the
Doctrine of Obedience to Governors is higher or lower according to the
temperature or Variation of outward Affairs, I have put out a plain Sermon
without any addition or alteration, that was Preached long before the Plot, when
I little thought of having any such occasion to make it public; I thought
then, and do so now, that those Obvious and Familiar things, which every one
must use on that Subject, would do good; but there remained a harder part,
which was to keep the good Seed I had sowed clear from the Weeds that are apt
to grow up and choke it, for Treason has stood so long, without being cut down,
especially in the late Times that it has run to seed, and scattered its
Principles that will not fail to nourish and make it grow again, and I thought
the only way to destroy it, was to pluck up those by the Roots.

I know, My Lord, the Subject will commend it self to your Patronage, whose
Loyalty to your Prince is so well known to all, that as it was always your
virtue, so it has been sometimes your Crime; and who have so well shown your
Zeal and Abhorrence of all Plots and Treasons in the late Popish one, where
your Justice and Eloquence were too hard for the cunningest of Traitors, and
the Priests found your Reason outdoe their Infallibility; yet I should not have
presumed to offer these Discourses unto your Lordships hands, who is not only
so great a Judge but so great a Master of sense and of speaking, but that I
know your Candor and Mercy is equal to your Judgment, so that what has
inclined you to approve and encourage me in some other things of this nature,
will I question not, prompt you, at least to excuse me in this.

The Extraordinary kindness and Civility you have been pleased to show me,
would require a much better Testimony of my Observance and Gratitude, then
this, which is the only one I can pay at present, and therefore must beg you to
accept it from, My Lord,

Your most Obedient, and most Obliged Servant William Pain.

A SERMON UPON THE Thirtieth of JANVARY, 1683. Being the Day of the Martyrdom
OF King Charles I.
1 SAMUEL 26.9. For who can stretch forth his Hand against the Lord's anointed,
and be guiltless?


RELIGION, as it makes Provision for us in another World; and is the only Means
to secure us a good State after this Life; a future and eternal Happiness for
our Souls; so it is that also upon which the present Welfare, the Comfort and
Felicity of this Life does chiefly depend; it is that which supports the World,
and preserves the Peace and Order, the Quiet, and good Settlement of it; it is
that which sets a Guard about our Lives, and all our Enjoyments, and restrains
Mankind from ravening and devouring one another: It Is that which is the main
Strength, the true Foundation of Government, which supports the Princes Throne,
and Guards it like an Angel from the Sons of Violence; and as it obliges us to
all those Duties of Right and Justice, that are necessary for the Good and
Welfare of all Mankind; so it especially secures and maintains the Rights of
Princes and Governors; which cannot be violated without the greatest Mischief,
and the most pernicious Consequences to the World.

David, who was the most singular Example of all Religion and Piety to God; who
was the great Example and Teacher of it to the Jewish Church; and who has left
such Memorials and Monuments of it, as make up a great part of the Devotion and
Worship of all Christians: Him was God pleased to make as great an Example of
Loyalty to his Prince, and of Duty and Obedience to his Sovereign; and that
purely from the same Principles of Religion and Conscience that made him so to
God. He had the least Reason otherwise to be so to his Prince that could be
well imagined: Who sought to take away his Life unjustly; he hunted him as a
Partridge upon the Mountains, and intended to make him a Prey to his
unreasonable Fury and Displeasure. Who would have taken away that Right which
God had expressly given him; and deprived him of the Succession to the Crown,
which Heaven had entitled him to. Who destroyed all his Friends he could light
of, and murdered fourscore and five of the Priests of the Lord in one day upon
his account. 1 Samuel 22.18. Who put a whole City to the sword, Man, Woman and
Child, v. 19. and exercised all the Acts of Cruelty and Injustice to him, and
all those that favored him.

How much less than all this would have served some Men to fly out into open
Resistance and Rebellion against their Governors? Yet he that was appointed by
God's immediate Command, to be the next Heir of the Kingdom, and was anointed
by Samuel to that purpose, 1 Samuel 16.12. So that in his Life and Safety, the
common Welfare and Interest, the Safety of the whole Kingdom of Israel was
concerned: Nay, he that was the General of Israel, and a great Officer under
Saul; and to such Magistrates more inferior than David was in Israel, some
People are for giving a Power to restrain and resist the Superior Magistrate;
yet he under these Circumstances, which if any, would make it lawful and
justifiable to have done otherwise, he then only fled away, and made no manner
of Resistance to Saul, who was his Prince, though he was likewise his unjust
Persecutor: And to show that he did this out of Conscience and Religion, and
not for want of Power, or Ability to do otherwise (which is the only Reason
that some men have against resisting) God was pleased to put Saul into his
Hands at the Cave in Engedi; and to give him an Opportunity to have done what
he would with him; and the men that were then with him, would have persuaded
him, That this was a Providence of God that showed he would have the thing
done, 1 Samuel 24.4. And the men of David said unto him, behold the day of which
the Lord said unto thee, Behold I will deliver thine Enemy into thine Hand,
that thou may do to him as it shall seem good to thee. How would a much less
Providence have been thought enough to make this lawful, and a sufficient
Indication of the Will of God to some men who had no such promise at all as
that was? but David was a better Interpreter, both of God's promise, and of his
providence too; and he dared not touch the person, or the Life of his
Sovereign; but only cut off the Hem of his Garment; and for that his Heart
smote him afterward at the 5th. verse. It were well if some Men's Hearts would
smite them, who have cut off not the Hem of their Sovereign's Garment, but his
Royal Head from his Body; and yet their Hearts are so hardened, that they have
shown, most of them, but little Repentance for it.

But this was not enough; David might have lost this Opportunity perhaps out of
Unadvisedness, or Imprudence, and have been sorry for it afterward; or it
might not have been so fit to have dispatched so great a Work at that time; or
he had not time to deliberate and consider well what was to be done with so
lucky an Advantage. Behold, God tries him another time at Hachilah, where Saul
had pitched his Tents in pursuit of David, who was in the Wilderness hard by:
There David in the Night comes with Abishai into the Camp of Saul, and finds
the Soldiers so careless and sleeping, that he got into the very Trench where
Saul lay sleeping, with his spear by him, stuck at his Bolster in the ground,
and Abner, and his other Captains and Guards asleep by him. Here Abishai indeed
was in the mind of other men, not to spare their Sovereign when they have got
him into their power. Then said Abishai unto David, God has delivered thine
enemy into thine hand this day; now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee,
with the spear, even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the second
time: But David, from the same Principles of Conscience, and Religion that had
restrained him before, forbids any such thing, as containing the most horrid
Sin and Guilt in it; and this also from a Reason that holds good as to all
Sovereign Princes and Governors whatever: And David said to Abishai, Destroy
him not; for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed and be
guiltless? This Example of David is very full, and comes up to the greatest
Cases, and allows of no Exceptions that can well be thought of to this his
general Principle; and from that I shall offer to you these two things.

1. The great Unlawfulness of resisting, or drawing the Sword against the
Sovereign Prince. 2. The horrid Guilt of murdering him, and taking away his
Life.
Stretching out the Hand is a Phrase may fairly be understood of both those;
though I confess it is here principally meant of the later; but it is the First is
generally the Cause of the other, and the Principle that leads to it; He that
stretches forth his Hand so far as to resist his Prince, will stretch it a
little farther to murder him too, if it be in his Power, and he finds it
necessary for his Designs. I shall therefore first show the unlawfulness of
resisting the Prince, or drawing the Sword against him; and if we once make
that good, we secure him from all Attempts and Outrages upon his Life: And this
upon several Accounts.

1. From the Practice and Example of the wisest and best Men, who under the
most hard and unjust Vsages, the most cruel Sufferings from their Governors;
and in the worst Cases that can well be put, yet always submitted patiently,
and never made use of any Force, or violent Resistance against them. I have
prevented my self in the Instance of David, which is so considerable as may
serve for a full Example of this under the Old Testament; though I might here
mention the Behavior of the Jews, under the Bondage and Cruelty of Pharaoh,
who when he oppressed them unmercifully, and murdered their Children as soon as
born; and gave them the greatest Provocations to have freed and revenged
themselves, yet they never made any Attempts that way; though by Pharoah's own
Confession, they were more and mightier than the Egyptians themselves, Exodus
1.9. But I choose rather to offer you what more concerns us Christians; though it
would be a great Shame if we should come short in this of the murmuring, and
stiff necked, and Rebellious Jews; and that is the Example of Christ and his
Apostles, and the Primitive Christians; which as they are Patterns to us of all
those Virtues that they taught and commanded; so especially of Loyalty,
Obedience, and patient Submission to the Governors which God had set over
them; and this is more remarkable in them, because they happened to live under
such Governors as were the most notorious for all manner of Wickedness, and
especially for Cruelty and Injustice; and that most particularly to them, as
well as others; and yet even under Tiberius, whom Suetonius relates, as a Man
infamous, not only for Cruelty to his nearest Relations, but even for such
Lusts and Debaucheries as were not fit to be related; our Blessed Savior
showed himself a quiet and obedient Subject, and paid Tribute at the Expense
even of a Miracle, Matthew. 17.27. And under the Emperor's President, which was
Pontius Pilate, he patiently suffered a most cruel and shameful Death, that he
was no ways worthy of; and which he could have rescued himself from by a Legion
of Angels, had he pleased; but he neither thought fit to make use of them, or
his Disciples, to deliver him from the Hands of Violence and Injustice; but had
occasion to show his Dislike of all such Designs, and of all manner of
resisting, or making use of the Sword against the Authority of our Governors,
in that famous Case of St. Peter, Matt. 26.51, 52. who, when in Defense of his
Master, against those who came to apprehend him, he drew his Sword, and smote a
Servant of the High Priest, and cut off his Ear. Jesus made Amends for it by a
Miracle, and commanded him to put up his sword into its place; and that with a
Declaration that does for ever condemn the making use of the Sword against the
Authority of the Magistrate, though it be to defend an innocent person from the
greatest Injury: For all they that take the sword, shall perish by the sword,
that is, who take it against their Rulers, or those whom they appoint or
commission: For this was not against the High Priest himself, but his Servant;
and neither was he the Supreme Governor at that time.

The Apostles of our Savior followed this excellent Example of their Blessed
Master, when all of them, except one, suffered Martyrdom, under that Government
that they so quietly submitted to; and so far was St. Paul from resisting, that
he repented of an hasty and inconsiderate Word, that he spoke against the High
Priest, who was judging him against the Law, Acts 23.5. And never did St. Peter
pretend any such power, by Virtue of his Supremacy, as some that call
themselves his Successors have done since; nor in any of the first and best
Ages of Christianity were there any Tumults, or Seditions, or Factions made
against the Government, though they were vastly numerous, and had filled, as
Tertullian tells the Heathens themselves, all their Cities, and Castles, and
all the places and parts of the Empire; yet Nunquam Albiniani, vel Niquiam, vel
Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani, No Christians were ever of the Number
of any of the Movers of Treason or Sedition, of what Party soever: They endured
unheard of Cruelties from their Governors; the greatest Tortures that the Wit
and Malice of their Enemies could invent; and this often, as they complained in
their Apologies, against Law too, such as would have stirred up those who had
power to defend themselves, had they not learned such Principles from their
Religion as forbad it; and these were then so powerful upon their Minds, being
no doubt often inculcated by their Teachers, as made seven thousand Soldiers,
who were Christians in Maximianus his Army, to suffer themselves to be all
slain and murdered for the sake of their Religion, when they were all armed,
and in a posture to have resisted by force, and defended themselves. More
famous and greet Examples I might give of this; but in the second place.

2. This was a Christian Principle, and a Command of the Gospel, upon which
they grounded their Obedience and Submission to their Governors; else their
Example would not be so considerable; but might seem to have proceeded from
Weakness and Inability, from Timorousness and Caution, or the like; but nothing
is a plainer, or more peremptory Command in the whole Gospel, than to be
obedient to our Governors, and not to resist them. I need name but that very
well known place, Romans 14. 1 Let every soul be subject to the higher powers;
and at the Second, Whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of
God, and they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation; and that this
(...) is not only a temporal, but a Divine and Eternal Judgment, is plain from
the fifth Verse, Wherefore ye must neeeds be subject, not only for Wrath, but
even for Conscience sake: Not only for Fear of that present Danger you may
otherwise incur; but also from the Sense of a future Punishment, and the
Consideration of Religion and another World.

The very Temper and Spirit of Christianity is against Resisting; it commands
Meekness and Quietness, Peaceableness and Gentleness, the bearing of Injuries
patiently from private persons, much more from our Governors; the bearing the
Cross, and suffering all the Evils in the World, rather than doing the least;
the not revenging our selves, but rather giving place unto Wrath; and all those
Duties that take off that turbulent, and furious, and unquiet Disposition, from
whence the resisting of Governors proceeds; all those Rebellious Lusts, from
whence come Civil Wars and Fightings among us: And it is very strange therefore
that Religion should ever put men upon that which it so expressly forbids, that
men should think it lawful to resist their Governors, upon the Account of that
which plainly disallows any such thing. Popery is a Religion most corrupt and
dangerous to the Souls of Men; and therefore to be opposed by all lawful ways
by every honest Man; but to resist and rebel against our Governors for the
fear of it; nay, for the thing it self, should God in his Judgment bring it
upon us, is what the Gospel forbids upon pain of Damnation, and what the first
Christians never did against Paganism; and yet they were as hearty Enemies to
that as we can be against Popery.

3. I might add in the third place, that Resistance is most contrary to the
Constitution of our own Government, to the Fundamental Establishments of it;
the many public Acts and Declarations that are made concerning it; and the
many Oaths by which we are restrained against it; it would be tedious to name
these here; and there are few can be iguorant of them, who are themselves bound
to take, and I hope they think themselves bound also to keep them, though there
have been some who have forgot all those, and could as easily unloose them, as
Sampson did his Withs; and then set themselves free from the Precepts and
Examples of Christ and his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians, by this
Color and Pretense, that the Government under which they lived, was of another
Nature than ours is in England; and that such is our Constitution, as makes all
those impertinent, and of very little Regard here: And by the same way, might
they not discharge Wives, and Children, and Servants from those Duties the
Gospel requires of each of them? Because there was great Difference between the
State and Condition of those among the Jews, the Romans, and the Grecians
formerly, and with us now.

I confess, had we such a Government as the Lacedaemonians under their Kings and
Ephori, or as is in some other places, where the true Sovereignty is not as it
is here in the Prince, they might run the Question into this, who were the
Higher Powers, to whom Obedience and Non-resistance did belong, according to
the Scriptures? But no English man can have reason to doubt of that here, who
knows the Constitution of our own Kingdom, and can no more be ignorant who has
the Sovereign Power, than a Servant, who is the Master of the House he lives in.

4. As Resistance of our Governors is against the Examples, and the Principles
of Christianity; and also contrary to the Constitution of our own Government;
so it is contrary also, to Reason and Equity, and most prejudicial to the Good
of the World, and the Welfare of Mankind: For what would be the Effect of it,
but perpetual Tumult and Disorder, Confusion and Anarchy. Government was
designed for the public Benefit of the World, and next to the Being of a God,
and a Providence, it is that which preserves, and is the greatest Blessing to
Mankind; which secures our Lives from Violence, our Estates from Rapine; and is
a common Fence, or Hedge, that encloses whatever we enjoy in Safety and
Security; and if it were lawful to break this down upon every Pett and Distaste
against our Governors, we should but lay all open, and in Common again, and
become a Prey, and a Spoil to the most strong and crafty: If we might resist,
and fall to Force and Violence, whenever we liked not what was done by our
Superiors, then we should be no longer Subjects than we thought fit our
selves: Their Authority over us should last no longer than we our selves judged
it to suit with our Interest, or Humor, or Inclination; and then it would be
impossible to provide either for Peace or Justice, or attain any of the Ends
for which Government was designed and established.

It is possible indeed that some Inconveniences may happen sometimes to
Mankind, by their Governors abusing their Power and Authority, and using it to
serve their own Wills and Pleasures, rather than public Good, and the Welfare
of those who are under them. This I question not, but may happen, and often has
so and did so, especially under those Emperors, to whom yet the Scripture
commanded Obedience and Non-resistance; but there is much less Mischief likely
to befall Mankind from thence then there would, if they should be allowed to
disobey and resist as they thought fitting. It is not possible to prevent all
manner of Inconveniences, and secure our selves against all possible Evils in
this World; but whatever great ones Mankind may lie open to, from the Princes
abuse of his Power, to the vioalting of his Subjects Rights and Properties; yet
there would be abundantly more and greater, if either upon our Mistakes or
Jealousies, or the unreasonable Fears and Pretenses of designing and
unpeaceable Men, it were lawful to resist, and make a forcible Opposition
against our Governors. And for this very Reason, I question not but that God,
who designs the greatest good to Mankind that here we are capable of, has thus
fixed and determined it; and if Men would well confider it, they might see the
Reasonableness and Equity, and even the Necessity of its being so; but I haste
to the second thing, which is chiefly here meant by stretching out the Hand,
and that is the murdering and taking away the Life of God's anointed; and it is
that for which our Nation does Penance this day, and is the greatest Reproach
to our Nation and Religion.

The horrible Guilt of this I shall represent in two Particulars.

1. From the Consideration that he was God's anointed, which was that which
made David not dare to do so impious a thing, i. e. one appointed or ordained
of God, as all Princes and Governors are: For there is no Power but of God,
the Powers that be, are ordained of God. Romans 13.2. that is, that Authority by
which King's Reign, and Princes decree Justice, is immediately from God, as the
Fountain of all Power and Authority, and the chief Sovereign of the World, from
whom all others do truly receive theirs. The Word anointed, was used from the
Custom of anointing Princes by God's Command, as a Ceremony of Investiture and
Inauguration of them to their Government; but it is given also to those to whom
God has given Sovereign Power and Authority without that; as Cyrus is called
the Lord's anointed, Isa. 45 1. though the way of anointing was not in use among
the Persians.

God, as he was pleased to imprint his own Image and Likeness upon Humane
Nature, so to Princes and Governors he communicates some of his own Power, and
Greatness, and Majesty; and they are his immediate Deputies and Vicegerents
commissionated as it were to govern and rule, and order this Lower World; and
therefore are styled Gods, and have the Name even of Elohim, given them, Psalm.
82.6. and then if it be a kind of resisting God, and a resisting the Ordinance
of God to resist them, what is it to murder, and take away the Lives of these
Earthly Gods, those who are anointed and commissionated, ordained and appointed
by God himself? If it be accounted Treason by Humane Laws, to kill a Judge or a
Justice upon the Bench, or an Inferior Magistrate in the persormance of his
Office, because he bears the Person, as it were of the King; then is it not
Crimen laesae Majestatis divinae, a Treason against God, and of the highest
Nature, to destroy and murder one that is God's immediate Deputy and
Commissioner, and an Officer appointed to govern such a part of the World under
him?

2. It has all the Guilt in it of the most horrid Murder; for such is taking
away the Life of any Man, without a just Power and Authority; and this is
committed only to the Governor by God, who is the Lord of Life and of Death;
and as this is wholly derived from God, and plainly shows, that the Magistrate
has this his Power wholly from him, and not from the People, because they who
have not Power over their own Lives, can never give that to the Prince which
they have not themselves; and therefore this jus Gradii, this Power over Men's
Lives must come immediately from God to the Magistrate, and since God has
declared, that Vengeance is his, Romans 12.19. especially that Vengeance which
appears in all Capital Punishments, the Ruler must be his Minister to execute
Vengeance in this manner, and to this Degree, to all that do such Evil as
deserves it, Romans 13.4. For he is this (...), or Revenger, by an Authority
received, immediately from God, and not from Men, who have not such a Power and
Dominion over themselves, and therefore cannot transfer it to him; from whence
therefore shall the People, or the whole Community challenge to themselves this
Power over the Life of their Sovereign, since the Power over their Lives is
committed to him only by God? As the pretending this is the usurping upon the
Divine Authority, so it is the most horrid and villainous Murder in the World,
not only of a Man, who bears the Image of God, which was the reason given
against Homicide, Genesis 9.6. but of a King, who bears the Image of God upon
another Account also, as he has some Rays of the Divine Majesty and Greatness,
and Authority, communicated to him above other Men; and it is no way an
Abatement, but an Aggravation of the Crime to do this in a pompous way of
ludicrous and pretended Justice: For that is as if a Company of Robbers, before
they took away a Man's Purse, should bring him to some of their Fellows, and
they tell him, that property was an Encroachment upon the natural Right that
all Mankind equally had to the things of the World; and because he had
traitorously and feloniously infringed this, and other Rights and Privileges
that belonged to them, therefore they condemned him to deliver his Purse
immediately. Just such a Mock-thing as this was the High Court of Justice; and
just so much Power had they to condemn and murder their anointed Sovereign.

And if all Murder be a Sin that cries loud to Heaven for Vengeance, and brings
a Guilt, not only upon the particular Shedders; but defiles a Land, as God
expressly says, Numb. 35.33. And even an uncertain Murder was to be expiated by
all that lived within any City of such a Distance from it, Deuteronomy 21. Then what
Vengeance may we think due, besides what we have felt already for the Blood of
our Late Martyred Sovereign? And how shall this City, that was, I am sure, at
no great distance, the nearest I doubt on all accounts, to this bloody Murder,
be expiated and atoned from it? Let us use that Prayer that was appointed in
that Case, though God knows infinitely below and unlike ours, with which I shall
conclude: Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy People Israel, whom thou have redeemed,
whom thou have redeemed at last from the Slavery and the Cruelty of those
bloody and violent Men, and lay not innocent Blood unto thy People of Isreal's
Charge; and God grant that this Blood may be forgiven unto this Kingdom; and
that for the sake of that precious Blood of Christ, which speaks better
things than the Blood of Abel, or the Blood of Charles the First.

Now to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, Praise
and Thanksgiving, both now, and for evermore.
A SERMON UPON THE THANKSGIVING, For the Deliverance of the KING and KINGDOM
From the Late Treasonable CONSPIRACY.
1 SAMUEL 26.9. For who can stretch forth his Hand against the Lord's anointed,
and be guiltless?


I Begun a Discourse to you on these Words the last Thirtieth of January; the
day wherein our Nation stands infamous to Posterity, for the Murder of our Late
Martyred Sovereign: How many such black Days are we to have, to stain and
discredit our English Calendar? Will the Traitors of our Nation equal the
Number of the Romish Saints? They will in time, I doubt not, bid fair for it,
and very much out do them, had they but every one a day: But it is to be hoped,
Posterity will be so kind to us, as to think the Villainy of the one as
incredible as the Miracles of the other; and put our Plots in the same Rank
with their fabulous Legends; else we had need of another sort of Act of
Oblivion, that may make Time forget as well as Law; and blot out our Reproach
to after Ages. How will it else look to those who shall have recovered their
English Virtue and Loyalty, that their Ancestors, who were neither wild, nor
barbarous, ignorant, nor irreligious, should yet stand upon Record for doing
such things as the darkest Paganism did never allow, nor the savagest people
scarce ever commit?

One of the best Princes that ever sat, not only upon the English, but upon
any Throne, brought as a Malefactor before the Bench of his meanest Subjects,
when every man in the Kingdom can claim his Privilege of being tried only by
his Peers; condemned there by a Mock Scene of Justice, and barbarously executed
upon a Scaffold before his own Palace.

And should I now tell you of the Excellent Son of that Good Father, murdered
by as vile, but a more secret way, by a Company of bloody Villains, lying in
Wait and Ambush for him, making His Sacred Body the Mark of their murdering
Weapons, and levelling their loaded Blunderbusses at their Sovereigns Heart:
That Heart which had always so much Clemency and Tenderness for his worst
Enemies; and spared even many of their Lives, who are now, without Pity, taking
away his: Should I tell you how many gaping Wounds they made in his Royal
Breast; and how the precious Blood gushed from every Artery, and ran down from
every open Orifice, like common Water spilt upon the Ground, till the anointed
of the Lord, thus used by merciless Villains, lay gasping and besmeared in his
own, and his Brothers Blood. Lord, how dreadful is it to describe or imagine
what they would have committed! And when they had done this, they could stop at
nothing; but go on like thirsty Bloodhounds, to kill and destroy, to massacre
thousands of his faithful Subjects, to attend their beloved Prince, till they
had made Rivers of Blood flow in every Street, and filled every place with
Slaughter and Confusion: Should I tell you all this, and lay open so bloody a
Scene before your Eyes, 'twould be but the very History of the late intended
Tragedy, of that Hellish Conspiracy, which Heaven, whom we thank this day, and
can never sufficiently thank all our Lives, has delivered us from: When we look
back upon it, and view the Danger we have escaped, the pleasing Horror
confounds us, and scarce leaves us Senses to be thankful as we ought. I shall
therefore take off your thoughts a little from the thing it self, and put you
upon thinking what it can ever be, that should engage men in such stupendous
Villainies as these: what hellish Charms can ever draw men into such abominable
Designs; and how those, who call themselves Men and Christians, and, what they
are more fond of than either, Protestants, should be guilty of what is so
contrary and reproachful to all those Honorable Names.

It had been nothing so strange, if these men had been of a Religion, whose
very Make is Treasonable, which has mingled Treason even with its Offices of
Religion, and its Articles of Faith. Had they been of that Church, which
obliges those of its Communion to worship Traitors as Saints, and to hold
deposing of Kings as a Catholic Doctrine: Had they owned those General
Councils that have decreed this, and acknowledged that Infallible Head, who
could in Cathedra commend the Assassination of a Prince, and compare it to the
best Actions in Scripture, next our Savior dying for Mankind: It had not been
half so much to be wondered at, if they had thus sucked Treason from the Breasts
of their Roman Mother, or been nursed up in it at a Popish Seminary; then it
would have been but natural to have had the Poison broke out sometime or other
into Plots, if the Season had been fair, and outward Circumstances not driven
it in. But to renounce Popery with great Zeal, and yet retain what is the most
Unchristian in it, and to pretend to Protestancy; and yet allow what every
Protestant Church in the World condemns, is to resolve to be a Traitor, and to
be of no Religion at all.

Treason in Papists, is like Original Sin to Mankind; they all have it in their
Natures, though many of them may deny it, or not know it; and though it break not
out in all to the same outward Extravagancies; but in Protestants it is like
the Italian Distemper, it was first brought from another Country, and is no way
natural to our own, though the Infection has been taken by too many, who had an
ill Temper prepared for it, and others, if they take not Care, are liable to
catch it by the Lewdness of Ambition, Revenge, or Discontent.

There is no Church in the World that I know of, but the Romish, which teaches
Treason: I wish I could say, there were no Men but they who did so; but if
there be too many, it cannot however with Justice be charged upon any
Protestant Church, who all disown it; any more than Atheism, or Polygamy can be
charged to the Church of Rome, because some of their Members have defended, and
beenguilty of those Crimes; but where ever it is in Pope or Presbyter, in
Conclave or Classis, in Jesuit or Fanatic, it is to be abhorred, detested,
abominated by every good Christian; and he that can think upon it without doing
so, and not let his Heart and his Tongue rise up against it, may in time I
doubt, be brought to commit it.

Stretching out the hand to resist the Prince is most plainly unlawful, as I
showed you formerly, from the Examples and the Principles of the Christian
Religion, from the Constitution of our own Government, and from the
consideration of the public Good and Peace of the World; and that to Murder,
or take away his Life, is the most horrid guilt that can be; I then understood
that Phrase of Stretching out the hand in both those Senses, and so it takes in
both the Parts of this present Conspiracy; and indeed though Monsters do not
use to be alike, yet this does so much resemble that other Treason in its main
parts and in its manner of production, that I could think of nothing fitter to
show the Villainy of this, and to antidote men's minds against the like, for the
future, then by reviving the same thoughts in your minds, and by proceeding
further on the same Subject; and especially in that Method which shall meet
with those Objections which are brought against that Duty of Nonresistance;
those are chiefly some outlying Cases as they account them, which come not into
this general Duty, but are Exemptions from it; and these are they by which Men
are generally drawn into Treason, which is a Sin too ugly in its looks to tempt
Men, if it wore not a Vizard. It Is these Cases which by a Rebellious
Witchcraft, are cast like Mists before Men's eyes, and so they are jugled and
seduced into the saddest Treasons and Conspiracies; though a great many of them
are like the Proposals of Mathematicians, to move the Earth if you grant them
such and such Postulala, and allow things to be so ordered as they would
suppose, which can never be really done, and the Earth is in no danger to be
moved for all their Demonstrations; yet these Men do really move the Kingdom,
and turn it out of its place by fancied and Romantic Cases, which it is
impossible perhaps, should ever come into practice. But I intend to consider
such Cases as are thought more probable and plausible, and which are the common
Stumbling Blocks that lie in the way of this Duty, and cause a great many, as
they did our present Conspirators, to fall into that Treasonable Gulf, which
wholly swallows them up, if they come too near the brink of it.

They are these four.

The Case of Religion, The Case of Legal Rights, The Case of Natural Defense,
and the otherwise Remediless Case of Mankind, by the Encroachment of Princes.

1. The Case of Religion, which is the greatest and most important Concern to
Mankind, wherein their Souls and their Eternal Fortunes lie all at stake; and
both they and their Posterity may loose what is more valuable then their Lives
or Estates, if they stand not up sometimes and fight for their God and their
Altars, which were Considerations that always inspired Men with the greatest
Courage and Resolution.

If a Prince shall set up a false and Idolatrous Religion, and attempt to
destroy the true Worship of God, here they think, both a Zeal for him and
Religion, and a Care of their own and their Posterities Salvation, calls loudly
upon them to resist him to the utmost, and with the noble Maccabees, to shed
the last drop of their Blood for their Religion and their Temple. If the
Protestant Religion be like to be overthrown and Popery to be brought in, this
is such an allarum to those who love the one and hate the other, as will not
fail to bring in vast numbers forcibly to Resist that Prince who shall ever
attempt it; and think it their duty so to do.

To which I shall give this general Answer.

That we may show our Zeal and our Love to our Religion, a better way then by
thus Resisting and Fighting for it, for that is to do what our Religion
expressly forbids, which can no way consist with that love we should have for
it; They who are such Gallants for their Religion, as immediately to draw and
fight for it, do commonly abuse and prostitute it to some ill and Carnal ends,
and are seldom such chaste, and constant, and pure Lovers of it, as they
pretend. Our Savior and his Apostles had without doubt as much love for
Christianity, and were as zealous to preserve and maintain it as we can be, but
yet never thought fit to show it this way, by Resisting the Authority that then
was, though it did all it could to destroy it.

There is another, and a much better way to demonstrate the highest Affection
for our Religion, and that is by suffering for it, and enduring all manner of
Evils rather then forsaking it; and this is a likelier Method to preserve and
propagate it, and to transmit it down to Posterity both with safety and credit;
By this very way Christianity has come down to us, in a Channel of blood
indeed, but that drawn from its own Friends and Professors who laid down their
Lives for it, but not the least drop from its Enemies.

The Maccabees were zealous indeed for their Law, and fought for it, but not
against their own Lawful Prince, but an Enemy that invaded them, for such was
Antiochus, who used all manner of provoking Impiety and barbarous Cruelty
against the Jews who were not his rightful Subjects, and might therefore rescue
themselves from his Oppression and unjust Usurpation.

At other times when any of the Jewish Kings set up Idolatry, and Worshipped Baal
or other False Gods, none of the Prophets who were the mo^st zealous Lovers of
their Law, and rebuked the Princes for those Faults to their very Faces, did
yet ever call upon the Elders, or encourage the People to Resist them, or to
fight for their Religion.

Popery is an abominable and Idolatrous Religion, the most corrupt of any Sect
or Party that calls it self Christian, and the most dangerous to the Souls of
Men, but it is a better way to keep it out with our Hands bound to the Stake,
then stretched out against our Lawful Sovereign; and we shall show our love to
Protestancy much better, by dying for it our selves, if need be, then by
killing others. One Life of our own Sacrificed to it, is a Nobler Offering, and
more acceptable to God and our Savior, than a thousand Victims at the expense
of other Men's Lives.

2. If Men may not Resist purely for Religion and to defend that, yet when they
have Law on their sides, either for their Religion or any thing else, and their
Princes who are bound to keep the Law, will yet act against it, and despoil
them of their Civil Rights and Privileges, or invade their Properties and
destroy their Religion contrary to Law, and to the settled Constitutions of the
Kingdom; then surely they may forcibly desend their Laws, and consequently
their Religion, or any thing that is thus twisted and complicated with their
Laws which it is not in the Princes power to alter or unloose.

To this I shall return a Treble Answer.

1. If the Law had made a Provision and expressly allowed Resistance, when any
such Cases should happen, however foolish a Constitution that had been, yet the
Case had been much stronger, and the nullity of the allowance not so easy to
be made out, as in the German Empire there is such a Provision made, that if
the Emperor invade the Established Rights of the Princes, who though they are
Sovereigns in their own Territories, yet are sworn Subjects to him, they may
take Arms, and such a Capitulation there was formerly between the King of Spain
and the Low Countries; but in our Kingdom there is plainly no such thing, and
care has been taken that none should imagine that there was any such kind of
tacit or implicit condition, the Law making an express Declaration to the
contrary, to wit, That it is unlawful to resist upon any account whatsoever,
which puts the thing out of all manner of dispute, that we cannot by Law resist
though it be to defend what we have by Law, for that would be to act against
one express Law, whilst we were defending another.

2. As long as the Power of the Sword is wholly in the King by the Law of God
and of Man, who shall ever use or draw it without an authority derived from
him? From whence else shall any Man have a Commission to raise Companies, to
array an Army, to be a Commander or a General over them, and to use that force
which is often necessary for the execution of Justice, and giving force to
Laws? for without that they are often but dead Letters, and therefore no Man
can be the Guardian of the Laws, who is not the Keeper of the Sword, which is
committed to the Prince alone.

3. If a Prince will injure his Subjects, and invade their Rights, nay, and
their Lives against Law; when they have tried all other means, they must as
Christ did patiently submit to an unjust Sentence, rather then resist; and, as
the first Christians did, who often complained that they were punished adversus
formam, adversus naturam judicandi, contra ipsus quoque leges, Tertull.
Apologet. c. 2. and that their Persecutors would not let them have the same
benefit of the Roman Laws with others, aliter in nos quam in caeteros nocentes
disponitis, ibid. and yet the great numbers he there tells them they had, did
not put them upon Resisting; and as St. Paul did, who though inconsiderately,
and in Passion, he called the High Priest a Whited-wall, because when he sat to
Judge him after the Law, he commanded him to be smitten contrary to the Law,
Acts 23.3. yet he presently acknowledged his fault, and owned, that he should
not have so much as spoke evil of a Ruler, though he punished him illegally and
contrary to the Law, and therefore much less have Resisted him.

3. But though the Law of the Land forbids Resistance, yet the Law of Nature,
which no other Law can supersede, will allow it for our own necessary defense
and Self-Preservation; that is such a natural Right as can never be taken from
us, and no Man can ever be supposed to part withal. By this we may take away
another Life in our own defense, and yet fall under no Law of God or Man for
it, and by this a Prince may be resisted as well as a Robber, if he will take
away my Goods or my Life as unjustly as he.

To this I shall Answer Three things.

1. The Law of Nature can at most, be said only to permit this, not to enjoin
it; if there were a Right of Nature that allowed this, yet there cannot be a
Law that commanded it, and obliged us to it, but a Man might still part with
his Natural Right without any fault, and it would be an Heroic instance of
Virtue to do so, rather to give our own Life, or part with any Private Interest
of our own, then take away the Life of another Man, and this to be sure, is
much the safer side, which is out of all danger and undoubtedly lawful, when
there are great Reasons to fear that Resisting even in that Case may prove
Damnable.

2. Positive Constitutions may limit and restrain Natural Right in this or any
other Case, or else all Pacts and Covenants are in vain; nay, and all Civil
Laws whatsoever, because they do all of them, restrain Men from that which
before they had a Natural Right to; and if we cannot by any means be abridged
of that, then there is an end not only of all Government, but of all Property
too, and Mankind may return into a Wild State of Nature, when ever they please.

3. Though the Law of Nature allows us to resist private Violence in our own
defense, yet it does not to resist the Public Magistrate, for that would be
destructive of public good and injurious to the Peace and Welfare of Mankind,
which the other is not; and though I may fairly stand upon my defense when
there is only a competition between my own and another private good, yet I
must not do it when the Competition is between the public good, and my own
private; whoever considers himself as a Member of the vast Body of Mankind, or
of a particular Kingdom, must think it as unreasonable and absurd to prefer his
own private good to the public, as to believe a single part to be as great as
the whole; This is the Prime and Fundamental Law of Nature, to promote as far
as we are able, the public good, and endeavor to increase, not so much our
own private share, as the common and public stock of Happiness which belongs
to the whole Company and Community, in which our own is likewise included; and
never to think that our own private and particular interest is to be put in the
Balance with that, and there is nothing more strong against Resistance which
would not fail to bring in the greatest public Mischief to avoid a less and
more private one, then this very Consideration, which is the true measure,
however large, of Moral good and evil, and the very Foundation of all the Laws
of Nature.

4. If neither upon the account of Religion, nor Laws, nor yet Self defense, it
be lawful to resist the Prince, then Mankind is left in a Remediless Case and
Condition, and must lie open to the continual Encroachments and Tyrannies of
their Governors, and notwithstanding all Laws for their security, yet if they
must not stand up to defend, and if need be to fight for those Laws, they are
in the same condition as if they had none, for the Prince may break those
Spiders Webs when he pleases, and only use them as a Snare to catch others in;
he may enslave and murder us when he pleases, if he may not be Resisted when he
thinks fit to do so.

To which I Answer.

1. We must never expect to find out a Remedy against all possible
Inconveniences in this World, in this low and imperfect State we shall always
be subject to some public as well as private Evils, the body politic will
never be free from all manner of Infirmities and Diseases any more then the
body Natural, such a Temperamentum ad pondus can never be expected in either as
shall keep them from all illness at present, or corruption at the last.

There can no more be a perfect Government, such as we would fain imagine to
our selves, then there can be a perfect Circle or straight line such as
Mathematicians suppose; Matter and Mankind will not be brought to that
exactness, but that some unevenness and irregularity will belong to both, and
if we should go about to pare all those off, the incapacity of the Subject
would not admit it, and we should probably by our trying make them much worse
then they were before, an endeavor to patch up and amend the necessary
Imperfections that attend this our present State, has made them commonly much
greater and wider, as Paracelsus killed himself in his Youth by endeavoring to
make himself Immortal.

The Papists, to prevent all possibility of Error in Divine things, which God
has not, and I Am sure, Man cannot make such a Provision against as they would
have, have brought in an Infallible Teacher into the Church, as a necessary and
plausible Expedient to keep out all Heresy and Error that else we might be
subject to fall into; and see the good of this notable device of theirs, it has
brought more Errors and more dangerous and incurable ones into Christianity,
then it would ever have had without it.

The Projectors of the late times would have the Prince accountable to the
People to prevent the ill use of his Power and Authority, but never was more
Mischief done then by that Traitorous Device, and the People could never have
been in a worse case under the most grievous Tyranny, then under such Anarchy
and Confusion; They who should take account of the Prince, like the Ephori or
the Tribunes, who should take account of them? and who again of them? we must
run into an infinite Circle, or we must stop somewhere, and where ever we do we
shall be just in the same case.

There must be unaccountable Sovereignty somewhere, whatever Politic
Absurdities we may think follow from it, as there must be an indivisible part
of matter at the last, whatever Difficulties Philosophy may charge it with.

2. A Legal Constitution, especially so good an one as our own, is a great
security to us: This makes a Kingdom like a curious and well-made Machine fitly
framed and joined together in its several parts, the Prince is the greater
Wheel, and the first Principle of Motion in it, and the Law is like a Pendulum
that evens and regulates that Motion, and though notwithstanding that he should
happen to be irregular, yet he would hardly be able to spoil the whole
Mechanism, and make all the under wheels and other parts move contrary to their
true make and shape, which the Law has given them; the subordinate Officers are
not bound to act illegally, and would not easily be brought to it against their
Oaths and their Interests, when they know they may be punished here, and shall
be damned for it hereafter; and whilst the Hands and the Legs are to execute
the Commands of the Head, though they must not rise up against that, yet that
cannot when it pleases put them into an unnatural motion and distortion.

But though the Machine might be disordered a little by some great shake and
concussion, yet while it is so strong, and so well made, it would come right
again in a little time, and fall into its true make and proper Motion. Res
nolunt diu male administrari, Things would not stand long bent by an illegal
force, but would by degrees unloosen themselves by a kind of natural Elasticity
which the Law gives them.

3. God's Providence and Government of the World is the best security in this
and all other Evils we are subject to; If Parents will grieve their Children
and be bitter against them, if Princes will injure their Subjects and Tyrannize
over them, if a more powerful Prince will like a greater Pyrat Rob and Spoil
his Neighbors, and make a Prey of them, it is God alone they must appeal to,
and expect to be righted at his Tribunal.

Princes are God's immediate Officers and Lieutenants, and he will take
particular inspection over them, that they abuse not his People committed to
their Charge, to him alone they are accountable, and therefore he who has
exempted them from the Cognizance of others, will take the Matter into his own
hands, and not suffer their faults to go unpunisht; But who art thou, O
Subject, who Judges thy Prince? To his own Master he stands or falls. To
him they have given a Pledge by their Oaths, and if they break those, Satis est
quod Deum expectent ultorem, It is sufficient that he to whom Vengeance
belongs, is the Avenger of all such, and this he is in so terrible a manner,
that nothing has felt his Anger more dreadfully then a Tyrant's Conscience, no
body has had more Horrors and Fears, more Strokes of a Divine Nemesis upon him
then he that has used his Power to cruel and unjust Designs; the meanest of his
Vassals has not felt so much Torment and so many Racks from him, as he has done
from his own Mind, nor has any half so much reason to fear his Power as he has
to be afraid of Gods; that great Patron of Justice, and Great Governor of the
World, who rules the raging of the Sea and the Madness of the People, will set
bounds also to the Power and Injustice of Princes, and so far as is necessary
for the good of the World, and for his Wise Designs, so far they shall go and
no farther, but like Earthquakes and Tempests, and Inundations, we have no
security against them, but from the Providence of God.

These are the chief Cases and Objections against the Duty of Non-Resistance or
not Stretching out the hand against the Lord's Anointed; and by these however
Magical Delusions the Evil Spirit of Rebellion has been conjured up, and still
haunteth this Nation, and fills it with Plots and Treason, with Noise and
Mischief and Disturbance; and I know no such way to lay it from ever rising
again, as a full and clear Resolution to those forementioned Cases which I
have endeavored to give.

As to the other way of Stretching out the Hand to take away the Life of the
Lord's Anointed, that is so Horrid and Villainous, that one would think it
should have none to defend it, though it have had some to commit it, but there
is no cause of interest so bad but it has had its Advocate, and when ever there
has been a Clement or a Ravilliac, there has been a Confessor to encourage if
not a Pope and an Infallible Orator to commend him; the Opinions of the Jesuits
are well known to be positive in the case, and others have fashioned their
Weapons at the Forge of those Philistines which are to take away the Lives of
Princes, and though they are not come to Consecrate Daggers for the purpose,
and that because, they are against the Ceremony rather then the Villainy, yet
Pistols and Blunderbusses are thought to be Blessed Instruments for doing the
great Work; though they expect not to be Sainted for it and adored in Heaven,
yet they expect what they will hardly allow the Saints themselves, to have
their Images erected upon Earth, and Statues set up to their honor, and to the
memory of such Noble Achievements. Like Herostratus they design to make their
Names Famous by doing some extraordinary Villainy, and by daring to be wicked
beyond the rest of Mankind, The committing such a Wickedness as others are
astonished to think of, is to be an Hero in Villainy, and they want nothing to
out do what has been ever done, or ever thought of, but with the old Giants to
pluck God out of his Throne, and so to put down all Rule, and all Authority and
Power, both in Heaven and Earth. I cannot think that Men can seriously argue
themselves into such Villainies as these, but it must be the very same thing
that makes the Devil a Rebel to God, which makes these Men Regicides, and
Traitors to their Sovereign; a Proud, an Envious, a Discontented, and
Diabolical Spirit that infinite Power cannot awe, nor infinite Goodness oblige;
but the Devil and a Scotch Conventicler are such Sophisters as can set off the
most Horrid Villainy, and represent this as an Heroic Bravery, and a sort of
Gallantry that the Grecians and the Romans thought fit to be rewarded with
Crowns, and Statues, and public Insigns of Honor; the killing of Tyrants was
thought, a Virtue like that of Hercules, who destroyed abundance of those
Monsters, and nihil usitatius quam eorum interfectores in Caelo collocari: says
Tully ad Attic. l. 14. Ep. 16. Harmodius and Aristogiton and others were
commended to the Skies for these very Performances; and not only the Greeks and
the Romans did thus commend and honor them, but even in Scripture, Jael, and
Judith, and Ehud, Barack, and Deborah, and those Jewish Deliverers of their
Country stand all upon the Records of Fame and the Divine Approbation for
Murdering Kings and Tyrants that were the Enemies of God and his peculiar
People, and when the Cause of God and His People, the Cause of Religion and
Conscience is the great thing that is to be carried on, who that has a Zeal for
those, would not do any thing that is necessary for so glorious an end?

Lucifer himself could hardly have instilled worse Principles into the Angels
when he persuaded them to turn Devils and to forsake their first Station: I
shall give a particular Answer to the three Parts that it consists of.

1. As to the Grecians and the Romans, when they affixt such worthy Names and
Honors to the killers of Tyrants, they did not mean by Tyrants their lawful
Princes but Usurpers, that by force and violence assumed an unjust Power to
themselves, contrary to the regular form of Government that was established
among them, such as had no just Title to rule by the Laws of their Country, but
invaded the Rights of their proper Governors, and over-turned the whole Frame
of the Commonwealth, and against such as these they were empowered by the
established Laws of their Country, by the Lex Solonis among the Greeks, and the
Lex Valeria among the Romans; and if any were guilty of doing this to their
lawful Governors, it must be reckoned as part of that Ferity and barbarous
Ignorance which was in those Nations before Christianity taught them better,
when to kill themselves was accounted as Heroic a Virtue as to Murder a Tyrant;
but the Soberest amongst them taught otherwise, (...), says Aristotle in his
Politics, the very Doctrine of Non-Resistance, and (...), says Plutarch, Agis
and Cleom. The very words almost of David, It is not lawful to stretch forth
the hand against a Prince, and we have Examples even amongst both the Greeks
and Romans of the same Punishment against those who were concerned in the
Murder of their Princes, that David inflicted upon the Amalekite for the Death
of Saul 2 Samuel 1.16. Alexander put him to Death who killed Darius that was his
Sovereign, though he had been a great while Alexander's Enemy, and so did
Domitian, Nero's Freeman, who was but accessory to his Masters Murdering of
himself.

2. As to the comparing this Villainy with the actions of Jael, and Judith, and
Ehud, and others who destroyed those their Enemies with whom they were in a
State of War, or had particular Commissions from God to authorize them in the
doing such extraordinary Achievements, they might as well, and with as good
reason argue, that because David killed Goliath and destroyed the Philistines,
that therefore he might have taken away the Life of Saul; nay, that he might
have made no more to kill him then the Lion and the Bear, for God's Anointed
are accounted by these Men, but as a sort of Wolves and Tigers, and Beasts of
prey, that ought to be destroyed; and they may as well make use of the Example
of Abraham to Sacrifice and Murder their Children when they please; as of Jehu
and others in Scripture, to destroy the House and Family of their Sovereign.

3. As to the last thing, that they may do anything for the carrying on a good
Cause and Design, as they will be sure to call what they are promoting, that if
it be the Work of the Lord, and the maintaining the true Religion, and the
Protestant interest, the keeping out Popery and destroying Antichrist, or any
such good end they are to accomplish, they may then do any thing that is
necessary to this, and not stick at any means that come in their way, be they
never so bad, because a good end and intention will not fail to hallow and
Sanctify the whole action, or at least to expiate and at one for all the guilt
that is in it; This I believe is a Principle that draws in a great many into
the most villainous and unwarrantable Designs, into Treasons and Murders, and
the greatest Villainies when they think them necessary to go through with that
great and good Cause they have undertaken; and this is an excellent principle,
like an Elixir that turns the worst Matter into Gold, to transmute Treason and
Murder into the purest Virtues; and by a certain sleight of Intention and
Spiritual Legerdemain to put the worst actions in the place of the best, and
Hocus Pocus Vice into Virtue, when ever one pleases; Nay, it is to destroy the
very nature of good and evil, and to make nothing so in its self, but as our
own Intentions put a stamp upon it; if we can but graft a good intention upon
never so bad an action, this shall change the very kind, and make all it bears
fair and lovely; one drop of this good intention shall take away all the venom
out of the most poisonous wickedness, turn bitter into sweet, evil into good;
it will make good and evil that are naturally and immutably fixed, melt and
soften in our hands, so that we may form and fashion them as we please, and
makes them merely relative and dependent upon our Thoughts and Designs, which
is to destroy all Religion. If a Man do but winck and aim well, tho he Murder
his Sovereign, nay, if it were his Savior, he should be justified by this
Principle, and the Jews who killed Christ and his Apostles, and thought they
did God good Service thereby, as many of them probably did, may plead it in
their own full defense. I cannot imagine how any one can have a good intention,
who ventures upon such plain and notorious Villainies, but if these be gilded
over with never such fair Pretenses, and are thought necessary for never so
glorious a design, yet Resisting and Murdering the Lord's Anointed are so
manifestly sinful and unlawful, that none can do such evil that good may come,
but their Damnation must be just both with God and Man. But sad is it when Men
shall form such Principles to themselves as shall lead them into such Hellish
Villainies, when they shall think these abominable Practices not only lawful but
necessary to God's Glory, as if he could not bring about his own ends without
their Wickedness, but the Devil must be called in to assist God, and to carry
on the Cause of Religion.

God preserve Christianity from that Reproach and Blasphemy which these Wicked
Men have brought upon it.

God preserve the Protestant Religion from that advantage is hereby given our
Enemies to destroy it.

He who orders all things unto his own Glory, be pleased to bring good out of
this Evil, and make it a means to unite us all unto his Church, and make us
Loyal and Faithful unto his Anointed.

And for ever blessed and praised be the Providence of that God who has
brought to light the hidden things of Darkness, and has not given us over as a
prey to Bloodthirsty Men, who lay in wait to destroy us.

And thou, O King of Heaven and Earth, who have graciously delivered thine
Anointed from the hands of wicked Men stretched out against him, and have
miraculously preserved him from the Plots and Conspiracies of all his Enemies,
keep him always, we beseech thee, under the shadow of thy wings, preserve him
as the Apple of thine Eye, and guard thou his Throne with Legions of Angels,
that the Sons of Violence may never approach to hurt him; the Lord preserve him
and keep him alive, that he may be blessed upon Earth, and deliver thou not him
unto the Will of his Enemies. Psalm. 41.2.

FINIS.

