A SERMON Preached before the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, IN THE ABBY-CHURCH
at Westminster, On the 5th of November, 1696. BEING THE Anniversary
Thanksgiving, For the happy Deliverance from the Gunpowder Treason. AND ALSO,
For the happy Arrival of His present MAJESTY on this Day, for the Deliverance
of our CHURCH and NATION.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, SIMON Lord Bishop of ELY.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, M DC XC VI.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the LORDS.
IV. DANIEL 35. -- And he does according to his will, in the army of heaven,
and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto
him, what do thou?
THESE Words are part of a Pious Declaration which King Nebuchadnezzar set
forth, unto all People, Nations, and Languages, to show (as he says in his
Preface to it, ver. 2.) the signs and the wonders which the high God had
wrought toward him. Which having profoundly admired and adored in the next
words, v. 3. [ How great are his signs, and how mighty are his wonders?] he
proceeds to give the World an account, what an amazing turn there had lately
been in his Affairs. For, when he was lifted up to the highest pitch of
Princely Power and Glory, and had nothing to fear on Earth; he was admonished
from Heaven in a Dream, of his sudden fall into a condition as low as the
Beasts: In which he was to remain, till he should be made sensible, That the
most high rules in the kingdom of men and gives it to whom soever he will, v.
17. Accordingly he relates how all this, not long after, came to pass. The
effect of which was, that it took down his Pride, (for which so great an
abasement was the most proper remedy) and brought him to a sober sense, that
God governs the World; and orders all things every where by his Overruling
Providence; with an Absolute Power, which none can withstand or (...).

Which is a Meditation very seasonable at this time, when we are met together
to commemorate the Wonderful Providence of God over us in this Church and
Kingdom, upon a double account. First, In Discovering and Defeating one of the
deepest and most desperate Conspiracies against us, that ever was hatched in
Hell: Secondly, In disappointing the same restless Enemies again; when by their
Fraud and our (...) they had contrived themselves into such an height of Power,
that we had no means left to preserve our Religion and Liberties.

Had we no other Arguments of the Overruling Power of Gods Eternal Providence
in the World, but these and such as these; they might be sufficient to awaken
the sense of it in your minds; and to make us conclude, That He does according
to his will in the army of Heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and
none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What do thou?

In treating of which Words, I shall only consider these Two things:

First, The Extent of God's Sovereign Dominion and Government. Secondly, The
Way and Method whereby he governs.
I.
I. For the first of these, my Text resolves us, that there is nothing exempt
from it; but it reaches to every Creature throughout the whole World: which are
comprehended in these Words, The army of heaven, and the inhabitants of the
earth.

By the former of which, the Army, or Host of Heaven, the Holy Scriptures are
wont to express, both those Beings in the Heaven, that are Invisible, and those
that are Visible, Viz. the Angels; and the Sun, Moon and Stars. Both these are
called the Host of Heaven; and with respect to both God is styled, the LORD of
Hosts.

And First, Let us look with our minds into the Invisible World: The World of
Spirits, both good and bad. For, that there are such Beings has been the Sense
of all Mankind, in all Ages, (as it were easy to show, if this were a place
proper for it) but the Holy Scriptures have given us the clearest and fullest
account of them; not only informing us, but giving us particular Instances, how
God rules and Governs them with an absolute Authority: The good Angels obeying
his Voice, and the Devils trembling at his Presence. That is, he governs the
good by his Will; and he restrains the evil by his Almighty Power. The good
cheerfully perform his Pleasure; and the evil are constrained to do it: Being
made to serve the ends of his Wise Providence, where they design to gratify
their own malice.

Out of those Sacred Records therefore, I shall briefly lay before you the
devout sense which the most excellent Persons have had of the extent of God's
Providence; without entering into the other evident proofs we have of this
Doctrine.

Read then, and consider those words of the Royal Psalmist, (CIII. 20.) and
they will inform you how God governs the Holy Angels. Bless the LORD, ye Angels
that excel in strength, that do his Commandments, hearkening to the voice of
his words. Bless the LORD all ye his Hosts, ye Ministers of his that do his
pleasure. The like you read, in the very next Psalm CIV. 4. He makes his
Angels Spirits; his Minister is a flaming fire. For, so did the Angels
sometimes appear; in a glittering and shining manner, like a flame of fire.

And hence it is, that they are styled The Chariots of God; because they are an
Host or Army to execute his Will and Pleasure, Psalm. LXVIH. 17. The Chariots of
God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: the LORD is among them, as
in Sinai, etc. And hence also they are said, more particularly, to be
Ministering Spirits set forth to Minister, for them who shall be Heirs of
Salvation, 1 Hebr. ult. That is, they Minister to the Will of God, for the
preservation and safety of good Christians: unto whom God designs a happiness
beyond this World, in his heavenly Kingdom; and therefore will not let them
want his care of them, while they continue here.

And in like manner the same Sovereignty of God is represented in Holy
Scripture, as Governing the Devils also: whom he aws and restrains by his
Power. For, when he cast them out of Heaven, for their Rebellion against him,
he delivered them into Chains of Darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment, 2 Pet.
11. 4. This Judgment they expect, and tremble at the Thoughts of it; because
they know they cannot avoid it: and thence are said, to believe and tremble, 2
Jam. 19. And they expect it in Chains; feel, that is, the Power of God upon
them, tying them up and restraining them; so that they cannot do what, nor go
whither they please: but are like great Malefactors, who till they are brought
before the Judge, are bound in Chains, and cannot stir; but whether their
Keeper thinks fit to suffer them.

Thus we find they were perfectly subject to our Blessed Savior; and by him,
to those whom he sent to Preach the Gospel: who at their return came and told
him, Lord, even the Devils are subject to us, through thy Name, 10 Luke 17.
They fled, when they did but hear of him; they quitted their Possession when
his Power approached: they were not able to stand before his Authority. Which
is sufficient to show how God Rules the Invisible World, in every part of it:
over all the Hosts of Angels and Legions of Devils, who cannot resist his Word.

And now if we lift up our Eyes unto the Visible Heaven, we behold there
another Army, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, run^ing the Course that God has
appointed them; and we read also of their standing still at his Commandment.
For, he brings the Sun as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, (says the
Psalmist) and it rejoices as a strong young Man to run a Race, XIX. 5. But if
he pleases, he can stop its Course, and hinder its Motion; as he did in the
Days of Joshua, when he said, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon
in the Valley of Ajalon. And the Sun stood still, and the Moon stayed, until the
People had avenged themselves upon their Enemies, X. Josh. 12, 13. The Stars
also are said to have fought in their Courses against Sisara, V. Judge. 20, by
pouring out, perhaps, some violent Storm upon him: which discomfited his
numerous Army, and broke their Ranks, and put them into such Disorder, that it
was apparent Heaven fought against them.

And accordingly the Thunder, which is said also to come out of Heaven, is
called the Voice of God, (XXIX. Psalm. 5, 7, 8.) who is said also in the first
Lesson appointed for this Day (2 Samuel XXII. 14. 15.) to shoot out Lightning,
like Arrows; whereby David's Enemies were scattered. The Clouds of Heaven,
likewise he is said in other places, to make his Chariot, (CIV. Psalm. 3.) and
to walk upon the Wings of the Wind: because he has often employed those in
terrible Blasts, and furious Tempests, of Rain, and Hail, and stormy Winds;
which as the Psalmist elsewhere says, fulfill his Pleasure.

II. And now if we bring our Thoughts down from the upper Regions of the World,
unto these lower, wherein we live, we have the same devout Acknowledgments of
all good Men, that he has an absolute Dominion there; and does according to
his Will among the Inhabitants of the Earth, as well as in the Army of Heaven.
For, the Earth it self is said to tremble and shake before him, (2 Samuel XXII.
8. CIV. Psalm. 37.) as it did at the giving of the Law from Mount Sinai, and at
other times. He Rules also the Raging of the Sea: when the Waves thereof
arise, he stilleth them, LXXXIX. Psalm. 9. Nor is his Dominion limited to
inanimate Creatures, but extends also to every living thing, to whom he opens
his Hand, and satisfies their Desire, CXLV. Psalm. 16. But the principal
Inhabitants of the Earth are Mankind; to whom he has given Dominion over all
other Creatures, (I. Genesis 28.) and Rules over Men, as Men Rule over other
things. For, he turns Man to Destruction, and says, Return ye Children of
Men, XC. Psalm. 3. He lifts up, and casts down according to his Pleasure. He
sets up one and puts down another: for, he is the Judge; whose Sentence none
can reverse.

Nor does he Rule over Men's outward Concernments only; but sways their Minds,
and moves and influences their Hearts. For, the preparation of the Heart of
Man, and the answer of the Tongue is from the LORD, XVI. Prove. 1.

Which is true, not only of mean Persons; Men of low Degree, of easy and
flexible Minds: but of the highest and mightiest Orders; of the stoutest and
most undaunted Spirits; of Kings and Princes, of their great Captains and
Commanders, their wise Counselors, and deep Statesmen, whom he frequently
infatuates, and brings their Councels to naught, when they cross his Will. For,
with him is both Strength and Wisdom, (as Job admirably speaks) he leads
Counselors away spoiled, and makes the Judges fools. He leads Princes away
spoiled, and overthrows the mighty. He removes away the Speech of the
Trusty, and takes away the Understanding of the Aged. He powers Contempt upon
Princes, and weakneth the Strength of the Mighty, XII. Job. 16, etc. This was
the Sense of that Holy Man in the most ancient Times; and Posterity made the
same Observations. For, many Kings (says the Son of Sirach) have set down upon
the Ground; and one that was never thought* of has worn the Crown. Many mighty
Men have been greatly disgraced: and the Honorable delivered into other men's
Hands, XI. Ecclus. 5. 6.

Nor, Lastly, does he Govern single Persons only; but Kingdoms also, and the
greatest Societies of Men. From whence he is called the God of all the Kingdoms
of the Earth, 2 Kings XIX. 15. and said to Rule over all the Kingdoms of the
Heathen, (as well as over his People Israel) with such a Power and Might, as
none is able to withstand, 2 Chronicles. XX. 6.

Thus I have as briefly as I could, represented the Extent of God's Dominion
and Providence; which Rules over the whole World, Visible and Invisible:
reaching to all things in Heaven, and to all in Earth; to all and every
Creature, and to all the Concerns of every one of them.

II.
I proceed now to the Second thing I undertook, which is to show the Way and
Method of this Divine Government: whereby it will appear, that all this that I
have Reported from the Holy Scripture, is evidently true; and cannot be denied
by those who believe God to be the Creator of Heaven and of Earth.

And here I shall consider only these Four things,

First, That God sees and knows all things throughout the World. Secondly, That
nothing can come to pass, but what he either effects or permits. Thirdly, He
effects and permits nothing, but for wise and worthy Ends. And Fourthly, He
certainly accomplishes these Ends, and that by such Means as he pleases.
I. First, I say, God sees and knows all Things, all Persons, and whatsoever
appertains unto them; and that in all possible Measures, in Measures Infinite
and Incomprehensible by us: but which we are sure to be true, because he made
and formed all Things; and therefore must be privy to every Motion which it is
possible for them to have, and is present to every the smallest Inclination
they make to any Motion. He knows their Nature; he understands the Virtue of
every Cause; he perfectly comprehends what it can do, and how far it can go; he
discerns its Intentions, and what it designs: Nothing can be concealed from
him, but every thing lies naked, bare, and open before him. For, the Eyes of
the LORD, says his Prophet, run to and fro throughout the whole Earth, 2 Chronicles. XVI. 9. that is, his Knowledge comprehends all things, everywhere.

And as for Man, his Ways are before the Eyes of the LORD, and he pondereth all
his goings, (V. Prove. 21.) for his Eyes are in every Place, beholding the Evil
and the Good, XV. Prove. 3.

Nor are his outward Actions only exposed to him; but all the Thoughts and
Designs of his Heart: For, Hell and Destruction are before the LORD: how much
more then the Hearts of the Children of Men? XV. Prove. 11. The most secret
Imaginations of their Minds, the deepest Desires of their Souls, all the
Windings and Turnings of their Spirits, in their most retired Consultations;
even those Motions which are not observed by themselves, are all known to God.
Whence those Expressions in the Prophet Jeremiah XVII. 10. I the LORD search
the Heart, and try the Reins, even to give to every Man according to his Ways,
and according to the fruit of his Doings. And in the Prophet Ezekiel, XI. 5.
Thus says the LORD, thus have ye said, O House of Israel: for, I know the
things that come into your Mind, every one of them. Which declare, that God
does not only see and know what is subject to outward View; but the very
Thoughts of men's Hearts also: yea, and every one of those Thoughts, and the
Entrance or Beginning of them.

II. But further, as he infallibly knows all things, so nothing comes to pass,
but what he either effects or permits: and permits, not because he cannot, but
because he is not pleased to hinder it; for, he Acts everywhere according to
his Will. There is a Providence in all things under his Government; but there
is a Difference in the Exercise of it. That which is good and worthy of God in
the Mind, and Counsels, and Actings of Men, that may and ought to be ascribed
to God, and to his Grace; as guiding, aiding, and assisting therein. But that
which is wicked in them, must not be thus ascribed to him; as if he moved or
excited them to it, (for, he cannot will any thing that is Evil) but only that
he did permit it, when he could have hindered it: for the Accomplishment of such
Ends, as those wicked Agents did not think of. In both these are the clear
Lines of Providence; though in different Characters.

For, how often do we Read of God's Working, what he pleases throughout the
World? particularly CXXXV. Psalm. 5. 6. I know that the LORD is great, and that
our LORD is above all Gods. Whatsoever the LORD pleased, that did he in Heaven,
and in Earth, in the Sea, and all deep Places. Where as he effects what he
thinks good; so nothing can be effected by any Agent, unless he think good to
permit it. For, he aws the Thoughts, and restrains the Passions, and binds the
Hands, and fetters the goings of Men; so that they cannot move a step, but as
he suffers them. Whence that of Jacob to his Wives, your Father has deceived
me, and changed my Ways ten times: but God suffered him not to hurt me, XXXI.
Genesis 7. That is, let him proceed no further in his Projects then to show his
ill Intentions toward me. And thus David speaking of the Patriarchs, and of
God's respect toward them, and care of them, says, he suffered no Man to do
them wrong; yea, he reproved Kings for their sake, saying; Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, CV. Psalm. 14. 15. The greatest Resolution
can proceed no further, the strongest Power can effect no more then the supreme
Governor of all will allow.

III. And as nothing comes to pass, but what he either effects or permits, so
he effects and permits nothing but for Wise and Holy Ends. He that is
infinitely Wise, cannot but Exercise that Wisdom in all that falls under its
View; for, did he not so, he were not infinitely Wise. And for the same Reason,
he that is infinitely Holy, cannot but design most Holy Ends in all the
Contrivances of his Wisdom. From whence it is, that the Holy Books ascribe the
Event of Things not merely to his Will, but to the Counsel of his Will. For,
with him is Wisdom and Strength, as Job admirably speaks in the Chapter
before-named, (XII. 13, 14.) he has Counsel and Understanding. Behold, he
breaks down, and it cannot be built up again; he shuts up a Man, and there can
be no opening. Which he manifests to be true sometimes, in such surprising
Ways, that the Prophet Isaiah says, he is wonderful in Wisdom, and excellent
in Working, XXVIII. 29. And Jeremiah, that he is great in Counsel, and mighty
in Work, XXXII. 19. and as St. Paul Sums up this Matter, works all things
after the Counsel of his own Will, I. Ephesians. 11.

Nor does his Wisdom manifest it self in his Doings only, but in his
Permissions too: in what he suffers to be done, even contrary to his own
Commands. The Sinner intends one thing in the Sin he commits; and God intends
another, in permitting it. The Sinner to gratify his own Lusts, his Pride, his
Rage, Ambition, Covetousness, or Revenge: But God to magnify his Justice, his
Power and Wisdom; whereby he punishes, corrects, amends, improves, and perfects
Men; according as they are severally Qualified for his Favor or Displeasure.

Thus what Joseph's Brethren did to satisfy their Envy, God suffered for most
excellent Purposes: to save their whole Family, in a sore and General Famine;
and to accomplish what he said to Abraham, that his Seed should long sojourn in
Egypt: And thus the Invasion of the King of Assyria was permitted by God, as a
Chastisement of the Jews for their many and great Sins: but intended by him, to
fill his Coffers by Spoil and Rapine. O Assyrian, says the LORD by the
Prophet, the Rod of my Anger, and the Staff in your Hand is my Indignation, X.
Isa. 5. Did he then intend to serve God in this Expedition, and execute his
Anger? No such thing: For, thus it follows, v. 7. Howbeit, he means not so;
neither does his Heart think so; but it is in his Heart to destroy, and to cut
off Nations not a few. That is, to make all the Ravage he is able.

Thus you see that whatsoever Men design and intend, God always designs some
Just, Wise, and Holy End; in all that he effects or permits in the World.

IV. And as he designs these Ends, so they certainly come to pass; in despite
of all Opposition, that contrary Powers can make against them: For, none can
stay his Hand, or say unto, what do thou? And as none can withstand his
Power, so none can avoid his Counsels, or control his Purposes: For, there is
no Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor Counsel against the LORD, XXI. Prove. 30. But
the Counsel of the LORD, says David, stands for ever; and the Thoughts of
his Heart to all Generations, XXXIII. Psalm. 11. And thus it stands against
all Opposition and Contrivances of Men: For, there are many Devices in Man's
Heart; but the Counsel of the LORD that shall stand, XIX. Prove. 21. And all the
Skill wherewith any understanding Creature is or can be endued, all the Devices
and Projects of Men's Hearts, are as subject unto his incomprehensible Wisdom,
and the Counsel of his Will, as the Life, Being, and Motion of Natural Things.
Which Subjection does no way deprive them of all Liberty and Freedom, in
consulting, devising, and projecting: but only of Power to appoint such Success
as they please, to their own Projects and Devices. And the more ample we allow
the Sphaere of any Creatures Liberty to be, in devising and projecting; the
more Admirable does the Counsel of the most High appear, in directing and
ordering its free Courses, to such Ends as he appoints.

Now these Ends God accomplishes sometimes by common and ordinary Means:
sometimes by Means wholly Miraculous: and sometimes by such as not wholly
Miraculous, but have something Extraordinary in them.

First, Sometimes by common and ordinary Means: as when the diligent Hand
gets Riches; and Slothfulness and Negligence brings Men to Poverty. When the
Proud and Ambitions fall into a Snare, which intangles them in Destruction; and
the Meek, the Humble, and Patient, inherit the Earth. These Means commonly
produce such Ends; yet not without Success from God: who sometimes is pleased
to hinder their Production; for Reasons best known to himself. So the Son of
Sirach has observed, XI. Eeclus. 14. Prosperity and Adversity; Life and Death;
Poverty and Riches, come of the Lord. The last of which he thus Explains in the
foregoing Verses; 11. 12. There is one that labors and takes pains, and
makes haste; and is so much the more behind. Again, there is another that is
slow and has need of help, wanting Ability, and full of Poverty; yet the Eye
of the Lord looks upon him for good, and sets him up from his low estate.
In these common things (particularly in Ploughing, Sowing, and Harvest, etc.)
we do not attribute to God so much as we ought to do; and one reason of it is,
that we either are not conversant in the Holy Scriptures, or do not mind them
when we read them. And the often repetition of the Words of Life (as an
excellent Man of our own long ago observed) without due Reverence and Attention
to them, breeds an insensibility or deadness in men's Souls.

II. Which is so true, that though God sometimes produces the Ends he designs
(as I observed in the second place) by such Means as are wholly miraculous; yet
Men's Souls continue benumbed and stupefied, unless they seriously consider, and
lay them to Heart. For, thus he often Ruled among the Stubborn Jews: whom he
seems to have Chosen, to be a Theater of his Providence; in them to give a
Demonstration unto all the Nations of the World, and to all following
Generations, of his Power Ruling everywhere. Thus he delivered them out of the
Hand of Pharaoh, by an outstretched Arm, (as Moses speaks). Thus he passed
them through the Red Sea; thus he fed and maintained them in the Wilderness;
and at last brought them into Canaan, by a continued Succession of Wonders
wrought by his mighty Power among them; that all the Ends of the Earth might
fear him.

III. But sometimes he Works his Ends by a middle sort of Means or Causes; such
as are not perfectly Miraculous, but yet have something extraordinary in them.

When second Causes are not proportionable to their Effects; when they produce
things unexpected, and which seem altogether improbable; when lesser things
prevail over greater, weaker overthrow the Strength of those that seemed in all
humane Judgment to be far Mightier: here is something that is very
Extraordinary, something that is Remarkable, a mavelous Hand of God; though
nothing, perhaps, perfectly Miraculous. Read the Story of Esther and Mordecai,
and observe how they prevailed against the potent Interest, and dreadful
Project of Haman, (in which the whole Empire was engaged) and you will find
such a Concurrence of strange things, as will convince you, there was a
wonderful Hand of God in it. Every one of those Occurrences apart, may seem
usual and ordinary: as that King Ahasuerus could not sleep; and that he called
for a Book to divert him, rather than Instruments of Music; and that they
brought the Chronicles of the Kingdom, rather than any other Book; and that
they read there, where Mordecai's good Deeds were Recorded, but had been
forgotten by him; and that Haman should just then come into the Court, when the
King inquired what had been done for Mordecai; and should himself unwittingly
contrive the greatest Honor to be put upon him; and appointed to be the
Instrument of it: These, and all the rest, considered severally and singly,
alone by themselves, cannot be called Extraordinary: but take them all
together, in their entire Frame and Composure, it is such as cannot be ascribed
to any but his Workmanship, who Created all things, by an astonishing Artifice.

Thus are things that seem unlikely brought to pass by the secret Counsel of
God, against the most powerful Interest, Contrivances, and Combinations that
can be raised upon Earth.

And of this sort were those two great Providence of God, for which we bless
him this Day; and are met here together to celebrate the Remembrance of them
publicly, with our thankful Acknowledgments.

First, The happy Deliverance of King JAMES the First, and the Three Estaes of
this Realm, from the most Traitorous, and Bloody intended Massacre by Gunpowder.

Secondly, The happy Arrival of his present Majesty on this Day, for the
Deliverance of our Church and Nation.

The former of these was a Deliverance so wonderful, if it be considered in all
its Circumstances, that it can hardly be paralleled in any humane Story. I will
mention but these Two things,

First, The Inevitableness of our Danger, according to Humane Reason. Secondly,
The Mavelous Manner of its Discovery and Prevention.
I. In the former of these, there are two Circumstances, which show the
intended Destruction was Inevitable, if God by an extraordinary Providence had
not interposed to prevent it.

They are the Secrecy of its Contrivance; and the Persons by whom it was
Contrived and Managed.

1. As to the Secrecy of the Contrivance, it was so great, that the
Conspirators themselves boasted of it, in the Letter which discovered all:
wherein were these Words; They shall receive a terrible Blow this Parliament;
and yet they shall not see who Hurts them. For, so secret was the Design, that
though it had been long Working; yet it lay Concealed, without the least
Inkling of it, till within XII Hours of its intended Execution. It was a Work
of Darkness, framed under Ground; where no Eye (but God's) could see them. They
buried their Counsel in the Depth of the Earth; and bound themselves likewise
by the most Sacred Ties, never to disclose, Directly or Indirectly, by Word or
Circumstance, the Matter propounded to them to keep Secret: Nor desist from the
Execution thereof; unless the rest should give Leave.

Thus every Man Swore that entered into this Conspiracy, by the Blessed
Trinity, and by the Sacrament; which then they received.

2. After this it was not likely they should either Disclose it, or Desist from
it; if we consider Secondly, The Persons engaged in it: who were Men of
desperate Resolution, as well as of desperate Principles. They were all
Inspired with a false Religious Zeal; spurred on by a Fancy, that they were
about an Action Meritorious; whereby they should highly serve God, and his
Catholic Church. Which so hardened their Hearts, that he who was first
apprehended, was not so much as abasht, nor expressed the least sign of
Trouble; but only for this, that he had not done the Execution. When the rest
also came to Suffer for this Treason, they did not repent of it; nor beg
Pardon: unless upon this Condition, that the Pope and the Church should declare
it a Sin. Which I do not find they have done to this Day.

Now how could Men of such Principles and Resolution, relent or think of going
back; when they certainly believed they were set on Work by God, and were
warranted by his Will; and infallibly guided by his chief Minister, to bring
the greatest Glory to God, and to advance his Religion? These and the like
Advantages, made the Discovery of this Conspiracy so unlikely; that they were
fully assured in their own Minds of the Success.

II. And yet, now behold, how this Work of Darkness was brought to Light, even
by themselves; for, it could no other ways be Discovered: And that it should be
discovered by them, is little short of a Miracle. For, you have heard how they
were Bound by a solemn Oath, not to give the least Intimation of it, Directly,
or Indirectly, by Word or by Circumstance. And yet so it was, that one of them,
who was willing to work such a Public Mischief, had a desire to secure a
private Friend from the Danger. And this against his own Intention; against his
Resolution; against his Oath, as well as against his Interest: Nay, and against
the Judgment of their Oracle ( F. Garnet, the Jesuit) who had settled this
Point in a deliberate Answer to this Question proposed to him; Whether the
Innocent (that is, those of their Religion) might be Destroyed with the Guilty,
(that is, with those of ours) when the Good that would come thereby would
abundantly compensate their Loss? Unto which he gave this Resolution, That they
might: Nay, That it would be a thing of great Merit, if thereby some great
Benefit would be procured to the Catholics. Notwithstanding all which
contrary Obligations, one of them opened a little Crevice, whereby there was a
way made to look into this Work of Hellish Darkness.

This most certainly was the extraordinary Hand of God; and ought to be so
acknowledged by us. It was not extraordinary indeed, that one of them should
Admonish an honorable Friend of a Danger; unless it were in this, that there
should be so much good Nature left in the Breast of a Man, who had consented to
the Ruin of his Country. But without question, this was Extraordinary, that a
Man under such sacred Ties of the strictest Secrecy, should give the smallest
Notice of a Danger; and that he should express his Mind in such Terms as gave
Apprehensions of some unusual hidden and unseen Danger; and (Lastly,) That the
mind of the King should be awakned to apprehend a Danger by some Blast of
Gunpowder.

These things ought to be ascribed to that most watchful Providence of God,
whereof I have been discoursing: which sometimes in an extraordinary manner
disappoints the Devices of the Crafty; so that their Hands cannot perform their
Enterprise. To this alone, the King and the whole Kingdom, ascribe it in that
Act of Parliament, which is appointed to be read in all Parish-Churches this
Day: wherein they acknowledge, God was pleased by inspiring the King's most
Excellent Majesty, with a Divine Spirit, to interpret some dark Phrases of a
Letter, above and beyond all ordinary Construction, miraculonsly to discover
this hidden Treason, not many Hours before the appointed time for the Execution.

They call it Miraculous in a large Sense; because it was Extraordinary,
Wonderful, and Amazing, as miraculous Events are.

And therefore those Protestants who would entitle a great Statesman to the
Discovery, have justly been thought to have a Spice of Atheism in their
Breasts; as a great Man observed, who lived in those Days. They would have
nothing (says he) imputed to God; whose Hand was so visible in this Discovery,
that it could not be denied, but by ascribing it to an Oracle of Ingelligence
in those times: who they say (without any other Authority for it, but their
own) knew of this Conspiracy long before, and let it go on; because he could
catch them, when he pleased.

But as this is for private Men to give the lie to the whole Kingdom, King and
all; so it is to rob God of the Glory of his mavelous Works: and therein to
be worse then Heathens, who ascribed such strange Events to some unknown God,
or to the Goddess Fortune; rather than think, there was nothing but humane
Contrivance in them. Far be it for any of us to entertain such a Thought; which
can spring from nothing but an unwillingness to believe that Doctrine of
Providence, which Nebuchadnezzar himself here Proclaims to all the World; when
he says, He does according to his Will in the Army of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth, etc.

Nor is the Providence of God less apparent, in that other great Mercy, for
which this Day is become Memorable, as might be shown in all the foregoing
Particulars. But let it suffice to remember you in general, that when the
Design of Destroying our Religion and Liberties, had been laid with great
Secrecy, and carried on with such Subtilty for many Years, that our Foot was in
the Snare, before we perceived that it was laid for us; when the Nation had
been so deluded by fair Promises, and by their own Credulity, that the Danger
wherein we were, did not appear, till we knew not how to avoid it; When our
Romish Adversaries had gotten such an absolute Power over us, that it imboldned
them to break through all Restraints of Law, and every other Obligation: Then,
when we were in these Straits, God was pleased to raise up the Spirit of our
present Sovereign, to enterprise our Deliverance; and with the hazard of his
own Person, to endeavor our Preservation.

And as nothing could Discourage him in this Undertaking (but though he was
driven back by a Tempest at his first setting out, he calmly persued his
Resolution, trusting in that Almighty Providence, unto which he had committed
himself), So he found all things in the Issue succeed much beyond all
Expectation. God turned the Hearts of the whole Realm to favor his Design so
far, as to wish Prosperity to him in his Voyage hither. And he turned the Winds
also to be so favorable; that if they had been absolutely at his own Disposal,
he could not have commanded them to be more obsequious to him, then he found
them. For, when he was brought to our Coast by a strong Gale, in a very speedy
Course; and had over-shot his Port; the Wind changed immediately, and brought
him back to his desired Haven. These are but a few of those wonderful things,
that concurred to his safe Landing here, on this Day eight Year, without any
Opposition: And made him appear like an Hand out of a Cloud to rescue us from
our eminent Danger: being so befriended from above, that with an Handful of Men
in comparison, he struck such a Terror into his Enemies, that they melted
before him, as the Wax before the Fire; and were scattered as the Dust before
the Wind. He was Received everywhere with the joyful Acclamations of the
People: and in a short time placed peaceably upon the Throne of these Kingdoms.

Thus God dashed in a Moment, the Projects that had been forming, no body knows
how many Years. Their long-laid Designs miscarried on a sudden; when they
thought nothing could hinder the Execution. A Deliverer was sent unexpectedly
to us, when we were ready to perish; and without any contrivance of ours, we
saw all the Contrivances of those that hated us, utterly broken in pieces.

This we must acknowledge, was brought about by the singular Providence of God;
who, when we were left in very great Confusion, wrought things beyond our
Hopes, into the happy Settlement we now enjoy. We cannot ascribe such a
wonderful Revolution of Affairs, to mere humane Force, which was very small:
But to the omnipotent Hand of God, whose Kingdom, says the Psalmist, Rules
over all: And who scatters the Proud (as the Blessed Virgin speaks in her
Song) in the Imaginations of their Heart; putting down the Mighty from their
Seats, and exalting them of low Degree, I. Luke 51. 52.

Of which Doctrine great Use may, and ought to be made; both by them whom God
has thus wonderfully defeated; and by our selves, whom he has preserved from
their wicked Contrivances.

To the former, another Holy Woman has given most excellent Counsel, in her
Song, I. Sam. 11. 3. Talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not Arrogance come
out of your Mouth: for, the LORD is a God of Knowledge, and by him Actions are
weighed. The Bows of the mighty Men are broken; and they that stumbled, are
girt with strength.

But we our selves are most concerned to make a right use of what has been
said; and therefore, I say no more to others, but apply my self to those who
enjoy the Benefit of these great Deliverances which God has vouchsafed to us.

I.
And First, we should all learn to live in a constant Sense of God, and of his
overruling Providence; and accordingly in all our Affairs, whether Public or
Private, to have a regard to him, to acknowledge him, and to put our whole
Trust in him: considering that he Governs the World, and Governs it according
to his wife Will and Pleasure. His Eyes behold all the Concernments of the Sons
of Men: Nothing comes to pass, but what he effects or permits among them: He
effects and permits nothing, but out of Wise, Holy, and Excellent Ends; and
whatsoever Ends he absolutely purposes, those he will certainly accomplish: And
therefore in all our ways, we ought, as I said, to have a Respect unto him; and
commit our selves and Undertakings unto the Direction of his good Providence:
And above all things take care, that we be found in such Courses as he
approves, and we may rationally hope he will Favor and Bless. For, there is
not a greater Comfort in the World, than this Doctrine, if we render our selves
capable of the Favor of his good Providence. Which is, by endeavoring that
our Ways may be so pleasing to God, that we may humbly expect he will succeed
and prosper them; unless he intend some greater Good to us, by the
Disappointment.

II.
That Is the next Use we ought to make of this Doctrine; to take the strictest
care, that we never so much as design, much less undertake any thing, but what
we know is agreeable to God's most Holy Will, and upon which we may look for
his Blessing.

For, though he may permit Sinners to do Evil, and for the present to work
their own Ends by it; yet, as this is no excuse to those Sinners, so it will
prove no advantage to them in the Issue: Nay, he often dashes all their Hopes,
and spoils all their Projects in a Moment, when they little expect it. But if
we Delight our selves in the LORD, and do good, (as the Psalmist speaks,
XXXVII. 3. 4.) he will give us the Desires of our Heart: or make even
Disappointments to prove advantageous to us, by that good Providence, which
knows how to Work all things for the good of those that love him. And on the
other side, whatsoever Mischief wicked Men devise against us, he will either
wholly put it by, or let it proceed so far only, as to make his Wisdom appear
in their Defeat; or let it succeed to produce the greatest Good to those that
fear him.

We must live therefore in the Fear and Love of God; in dutiful Obedience to
our Sovereign, and to the Laws; and be just, and charitable, and kind one to
another. For, in these, and such like things, we are sure we fulfill the Will of
God; and therefore may promise our selves to be favored by his Almighty
Providence.

III.
Unto whom we are bound to be very thankful, for the prosperous Issues and
Events of all good Designs in the World, whether of our own or other Men; and
for the defeating of all wicked Contrivances: and more particularly those
wherein the public Safety and Tranquillity is concerned; especially such
singular Providence of God, as we this day Commemorate.

If God demonstrate his Providence in any thing here in this World, (and I have
proved he shows it in all things) he exercises it in the Governing* Defending,
and Protecting of public Persons and Societies. And never was there a more
visible Appearance of the Divine Providence over a Kingdom; than in the
Discovery and Prevention of the Gunpowder-Treason; and in the late Defeat which
he unexpectedly gave to the same Conspirators against our Religion and
Liberties. Concerning both which Deliverances, we may say, as the Psalmist does
in another case: They imagined a mischievous Device, which they were not able
to perform. They traveled with Iniquity, they conceived Mischief, and brought
forth Falsehood. They made a Pit, and dug it, and are fallen into the Pit
which they made. For, the Event of the Gunpowder Conspiracy, by the merciful
Providence of the Almighty, proved the discloser of it to be a false Prophet,
and to have spoken Presumptuously; when he said in his Letter; That God and Man
had concurred to Punish the Iniquity of those Times; by that Blow which they
intended. The Blow, blessed be God, fell upon themselves; and they suffered the
just Punishment of their own Iniquities. In the Snare which they laid, was
their own Foot taken; and they fell by their own Wickedness: but we escaped as
a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler: the Snare was broken, and we were
delivered.

So that I may say as King JAMES did upon this Occasion, Whereas they thought
to Extirpate us and our Memory; their infamous Memory shall by this means
remain, to the End of the World. Upon the one part, and upon the other, God's
great and merciful Deliverance of his Anointed, and of us all, shall remain in
never-dying Records: And the same God grant, that it may be Engraven in
Marble-Tables of Thankfulness in our Hearts.

IV.
But we must not express our Gratitude merely in rendering Praise and
Thanksgiving unto the Author of our Deliverances; but in the faithful
Improvement of them also to his Glory: by the sincere Love and Practice of that
Holy Religion, which has been so often, in such a mavelous manner preserved,
and still is continued to us.

A Religion which teaches us to Worship God most purely; and to believe all
things that he has revealed unto us; to Honor and Obey the King also, most
conscientiously, next to God: for, it acknowledges no Superior to him, in
these his Realms and Dominions; nor will let us believe, that any body can
dispense with the Duty we owe him. A Religion which abhors private Conspiracies
and Rebellion, as much as it does Heresies and Schisms. Which leads us in the
way of the truly Catholic Church of Christ; which does not allow us to do any
Evil, for the obtaining the greatest Good. In short, a Religion which is wholly
Built upon the undoubted Word of God, and not upon the uncertain Traditions of
Men.

Unto this therefore let us adhear with a steadfast Affection, and unshaken
Fidelity. Let us preserve this most carefully, which has been wonderfully
preserved by God. And there is no way to preserve it like a sincere Practice of
that Piety which it teaches us: In which let us endeavor to grow more and
more; and be quickened to it by these Two Motives.

First, That the Work of Reformation it self, was at first Effected by an
extraordinary Providence of God; through mean and weak Instruments: when many
greater Persons, who wished for a Reformation, thought it impossible to be
brought about. Secondly, That it has been here among us, in as extraordinary a
manner preserved; by the same Almighty Providence, whereby it was wrought. So
our Forefathers have testified unto us, who saw this day which God himself
made Memorable, by the mavelous Deliverance which he vouchsafed to them. And
so we our selves are able to testify, who have again seen his Salvation upon
this very day; which he has made anew, to be a day of Praise to him, and
Blessing to us.
Let us be afraid of Provoking so gracious and bountiful a Benefactor, by
obstinate Disobedience to his holy Laws: which he has bound upon us by such
endearing Obligations. Let us cheerfully do his Will; who has done for us
according to our Hearts desire. This was the End for which God vouchsafed such
wonderful Deliverances unto Israel, as are Recorded in the CV. Psalm, That they
might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws. So that Psalm concludes, and the
very same, no doubt, God expects from us: who ought to charge ourselves with
these Two things.

First, To preserve the Memory of what God has done for us: For, he has so
done his mavelous Works, that they might be had in remembrance, as the
Psalmist speaks, CXI. Psalm. 4.

And Secondly, To consider, that then we remember them as we ought, when we
remember his Commandments to do them. Then we may have a good hope, that the
LORD who has been mindful of us, will still bless us, he will bless the House
of Israel, he will bless the House of Aaron. He will bless them that fear the
LORD, both small and great, CXV. Psalm. 12. 13. For, the Mercy of the LORD is
from everlasting to everlasting, upon them them that fear him; and his
Righteousness unto Childrens Children. To such as keep his Covenant, and to
those that remember his Commandments to do them, CIII. 17, 18.

Which the God of all Grace give us Hearts, sincerely to Resolve and Study, for
the sake of Christ Jesus: To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be
Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now and ever. Amen.
FINIS.
Books Written by SIMON PATRICK, D. D. now Lord Bishop of ELY; and Printed for
Richard Chiswell.
THE Parable of the Pilgrim, written to a Friend. The 6 Edition. 4to. 1681.

-- Mensa Mystica: Or, a Discourse concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper: In which the Ends of its Institution are so manifested, our Addresses
to it so directed, our Behavior there and afterward so composed, that we may
not lose the Profits which are to be received by it. With Prayers and
Thanksgivings inserted. To which is annexed

-- Aqua Genitalis: A Discourse concerning Baptism: In which is inserted a
Discourse to persuade to a confirmation of the Baptismal Vow. 8vo.

-- Jewish Hypocrisy: A Caveat to the present Generation. Wherein is shown
both the false and the true way to a Nations or Persons complete Happiness from
the sickness and recovery of the Jewish State. To which is added, a discourse
upon Micah, 6. 8. belonging to the same matter. 8vo.

-- Divine Arithmatick: A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Samuel Jacomb, Minister
of St. Mary-Woolneth-Church in Lombard Street, London. With an Account of his
Life. 8vo.

-- A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Tho. Grigg, Rector of St.
Andrew-Vndershaft, London. 4to.

-- An Exposition of the Ten Commandments. 8vo.

-- Heart's Ease: Or, a Remedy against all Troubles. With a Consolatory
Discourse, particularly directed to those who have lost their Friends and
Relations. To which is added Two Papers, printed in the time of the late
Plague. The sixth Edition corrected. 12mo. 1695.

-- The Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth mentioned by St.
Paul, in 1 Timothy 3. 15. 4to.

-- An Examination of Bellarmin's Second Note of the Church, viz. A NTIQVITY.
4to.

-- An Examination of the the Texts which Papists cite out of the Bible to
prove the Supremacy of St. Peter and of the Pope over the whole Church. In Two
Parts. 4to.

-- A private Prayer to be used in difficult times.

-- A Thanksgiving for our late wonderful Deliverance.

-- A Prayer for Charity, Peace and Unity; chiefly to be used in Lent.

-- A Sermon preached upon St. Peter's Day; printed with Enlargements. 4to.

-- A Sermon preached in St. James's Chapel, before the Prince of Orange, Jan.
20. 1688. on Isaiah 11. 6.

-- A Second Part of the Sermon before the Prince of Orange, on the same Text.
Preached in Covent Garden.

-- A Sermon preached before the Queen in March 1688 / 9. on Colos. 3. 15.

-- A Sermon against Murmuring, preached at Covent Garden in Lent, 16 on 1 Cor.
10. 10.

-- A Sermon against Censuring; preached at Covent Garden in Advent; 1688. on 1
Cor. 4. 10.

-- Fast-Sermon before the King and Queen, Apr. 16. 1690. on Prove. 14. 34.

-- A Thanksgiving-Sermon before the Lords, Nov. 26. 1691. for reducing of
Ireland, and the King's safe Return. On Deuteronomy. 4. 9.

-- A Fast-Sermon before the Queen, Apr. 8. 1692. On Numb. 10. 9.

-- Sermon before the Lord Mayor at St. Brides Church, on Easter-Munday, 1696.
on 2 Timothy 2. 8.

-- A Commentary on the First Book of Moses, called Geneses, 4to. 1695.

-- A Commentary on the Second Book of Moses, called Exodus, 4to. 1697.

-- A Sermon before the Lords, Nov. 5. 1696. on Dan* 4. 35.


