THE ANSWER OF A Citizen of LONDON, TO A LETTER FROM A Citizen of OXFORD,
Concerning the Dissolution of the Parliament.
25 Jan. 1680/1 SIR,
THis with all manner of Acknowledgment that I received yours yesterday, but
must assure you, That the Thoughts you have of the present Juncture, are very
different from those we have here; and that only to repeat them would be looked
upon as a kind of Heresy: For we cannot imagine, how any other Interpretation
can be given to our Zeal, than a sincere and ardent Desire for the Sitting of
the Parliament, that Traitors might be brought to condign Punishment, that the
Plot might be destroyed, and Popery rooted out; so long as which is in being,
we cannot think there is any Security for the King's Person, and the Protestant
Religion, but that They, our Lives, and Liberties, are in continual Danger.

And we are very much mistaken by those who charge us with being jealous of the
King's Authority, and as if We suspected he had a Design of depriving us of our
Privileges. Far from that, we agree with you, That never any Nation enjoyed a
more gracious Prince; and all the Paces and Motions we have made, were to no
other intent, than that His Life and Government might be secured, and that we
might be blessed with, and still enjoy under his Reign, that Happiness, and
flourishing Condition, which made us envied by all our Neighbor Nations, and
they desirous to be under a Scepter, whose Subjects are happier than other
Sovereign's. We could not think there was any better Means for the Securing to
us this Blessing, than the Sitting of the Parliament, who so zealously took in
hand the destroying the Enemies of His Throne and Religion. And such as blame
us for being desirous of having it continued, are like those who should find
fault with Children, who seeing their Father attacqued, and in Danger, and such
of their Elder Brothers, as were armed, capable, and passionately bent to
prevent his Ruin, by cutting off his Enemies, should beg of him, that they
might have leave to pursue their Point, and procure his, and the whole Families
Safety, by the destruction of those who aimed at nothing but its Fall.

If such a Care was faulty in such Children, then I must confess, we are very
criminal: But I shall leave you to judge of that, and shall only beg, that you
would furnish me with all possible Occasions of showing how sensible I am of
your Favors, and making appear the Passion and Respect, with which I am,

Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant, N. P.


