The Bishop of ELY's FAST-SERMON BEFORE THE QUEEN. April 8. 1692.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL, April VIII. MDCXCII.

BEING THE FAST DAY APPOINTED By Her Majesty, to implore God's Blessing on
their Majesty's Persons, and the Prosperity of their Arms both at Land and Sea.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, SIMON Lord Bishop of ELY.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCII.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
NUMBERS. X. ix. And if ye go to war in the Land against the enemy that
oppresses yon, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets; and ye shall be
remembered before the Lord your God, and ye shall be saved from your enemies.
THE World, we see, is made up of Vicissitudes and Changes; there being a
season for every thing, a time to every purpose under heaven: a time to kill,
and a time to heal; a time of war, and a time of peace, as Solomon speaks in
^^^ Eccles. 1. etc. One of those does but make way for the other: the true use
of War being to seek a good Peace; and the ill use of Peace being wont to beget
a War.

My Text makes mention of both; their going to War being supposed in the
beginning; and their being saved from their enemies and so settled in Peace,
being promised in the conclusion of it. For it consists of three Parts.

A Supposition; a Duty; and the sucoess of its performance.

1. The Supposition is double: that the Israelites, as well as other people
might be oppressed by their Enemies; and that in this case they might lawfully
go to War with them. 2. The Duty is single, though containing many in it: which
is to blow an alarm with the trumpets. 3. The Success is again double, to be
remembered before God, and to be saved from their enemies.
I.
I shall say little of the first of these; which is as true now as it was then.
Unless all the world would become Christians, and those Christians likewise
obey the Gospel; there will be such Injustice and Oppression, Violence and
Rapine, as will make War necessary for the safety and preservation of those who
are innocent.

In an Ill-natured, Angry, and Covetous World, we must not expect that all men
will be our Friends: and some people love themselves so much, that they have no
affection left for their Neighbors. Nay, this very thing makes them hate
others, because they love themselves so inordinately: They cannot be their own
Friends, they imagine, unless they be other men's Enemies. Their own well-being
consists in making others miserable. And they never think themselves to have
Riches, Honor, Dominion and Greatness enough; if there remains any of these to
their Neighbors.

Now what greater service can be done to these ravenous Oppressors, than to
broach such a welcome Doctrine as this; that the hands of good Christians are
so tied up by their Religion, that they may not oppose their Ambition, Rapin
and Cruelty by force of Arms? nor demand reparations by that way, when all
other fairer means are ineffectual, for all the damages they have sustained,
and are likely, without remedy, to endure forever?

A fancy so absurd, that I do not think it worth the Confutation. But shall
only note, that the Israelites extended this liberty, of going to War, which
the Law gave them, a great deal too far: as Christians since have been apt to
do. For they did not confine it to their necessary defense, or seeking redress
of wrongs, and the casing themselves of the burden of Oppressors; but there
being two sorts of War which they managed, one by the Divine Commandment (which
was only against the seven Nations in the Land of Canaan, whom God for their
abominable wickedness had doomed to utter destruction, and made the Israelites
the Executioners of his Vengaence) the other at their own choice, against any
other people, as occasion should require: their Doctors fancied it a sufficient
reason for this later sort of War upon their Neighbors; merely to advance the
Glory and Dominion, the Empire and Majesty of Israel (as their V. Seld. de
Jure. Not. L. V. c. 12.
phrase is) though they had done them no manner of injury.

Whic is the very notion, by which the Grand Oppressor of this Age governs
himself, and justifies his Wars. But the ancient Christian Doctors, have taught
us, better than those old Masters in Israel, or the new Christian Politicians.
Among whom St. Austin fears not to call such a War, Grande Latrocinium a
greater sort of Robbery, L. IV. de Civ. Dei Cap. 6.
a public Burglary (as I may call it in the language of our Law) which is so
much the more Villainous because committed by Authority. Nay, it is an ancient
Tradition recorded by Eusebius, Epiphanius. In An^ora^^.
and others, who received it from the East, that when Noah* divided the Earth
among his Sons and Nephews, he bound them by an Oath, not to Covet, nor invade
each others Territories: and whosoever transgressed the Law of this Oath, was
solemnly cursed, by the very words of it, with all his Posterity, to utter
Perdition.

These were the old principles of Religion (unto which blessed be God, their
present Majesty's closely adhere) that Wars are not to be undertaken, but for
the defense or the necovery of our rights.

II.
In which case, there was a duty incumbent upon the old Israelites before they
began the War; which shall be the Principal Subject of my Discourse, together
with the Success or Fruit of it, when Religiously performed. It was, to blow an
alarm with the trumpets: which is the only phrase in my Text, that has any
difficulty in it, and must be explained a little, before any useful Instruction
can be drawn from it.

You read in the beginning of this Chapter, that God commanded two Silver*
Trumpets to be made, which served for two uses: for the calling together of the
Assembly, and for the journeying of the Camps, as the words are v. ^. When they
did merely blow with them; that is, with a long, continued, equal breath, then
they were to understand that the Assembly was summoned to meet together. In
which there was this difference* that if they heard them both blow, then all
the Congregation was to assemble; if one only, then the Heads or Captains alone
of the thousands of Israel were to (gather themselves to Moses at the door of
the Tabernaele, as you read, v. 3, 4. If they did not merely blow, but blow an
alarm, that is, with a short, concife, and interrupted breath, not continuing
the sound, but often breaking it; then it was for the journeying of the Camps,
as you read v. 5, 6.

So here was a Civil, and a Military use of them: Besides which, there was also
a Religious. Which was twofold likewise; either to give notice of a Fast, or to
give notice of a Feast: to call them together to pray and humble themselves
before God; or to excite them to rejoice in his praise, and giving him thanks.

Of their sounding for a Fast you read II. Joel 15. Blow the Trumpet in Sion,
sanctific a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the people, etc. And in the
like terms the Psalmist proclaims a Festival LXXXI. Ps. 3. Blow up the trumpet
in the new moon, in the time appointed, on our solemn feast day; For this was a
statute for Israel, etc. The like you read XCVIII. Ps. 6. And thus my Text and
the following words are to be understood; if we will follow the interpretation
of the best of the Hebrews, who vouch it to be the sense of the Eldest times.
For if blowing the trumpets here were not for a Religions purpose, how could
the effect of it be, God's remembering them, so as to save them from their
Eemies? Could the bare sounding with them procure such a blessing? Without
doubt there was something more in it, to which God makes such a gracious
promise. And therefore though Moses speaks here of blowing an alarm (because it
concerned the Soldiery) yet the Hebrews understand thereby, the calling all
together unto a Fast; that they might humble themselves before God, and seek
his face ( i. e. his favor) when they were forced to betake themselves to
their Arms; and appeal to Heaven, for the deciding, by this means, the
controversy between them and their Enemies.

And then in the beginning of the next verse, when he adds in the day of your
gladness ye shall blow with the Trumpets, some of them understand that Clause,
of their thanksgiving to God for Victory over their Enemies. Which was as
reasonable, as their sounding upon their other solemn days, and in the
beginning of their months, and over their burnt offerings, and over the
sacrifices of their peace offerings; which are there likewise mentioned. As
they were to blow with the trumpets; proclaim a Fast, that is, when they went
to War: So they were to blow with them again, when the War was happily ended;
that is, proclaim their thankfulness to God, for giving them such success as
they desired.

This exposition I shall follow, which makes these words, you see, an
injunction to the Israelites for solemn fasting; before they took in hand so
weighty an Affair, as making War upon their Enemies. For which end we are now
here assembled: and I pray God we may perform this duty according to the full
intent and meaning of this Injunction. For then we may hope God will remember
us in the day of Battle, and Crown our Arms with such success against our
injurious Neighbors, as he promised to the Israelites against their Enemies.

Now by solemn fasting, you all know, is meant the setting some day a part for
this purpose: which was always of two sorts. One private, which pious people
enjoined themselves of their own accord, with respect either 2 ^am. 12. 16. IX.
Dan. 3.
to their own particular, or to the common concerns: of both which we have
examples in Scripture. The other was Public enjoined by the supreme Authority:
and those either stated and ordinary at certain times of the year (of which we
find only one enjoined by God, in XVI. Lev. but four more enjoined by the
Elders during their Captivity in Babylon VIII. Zech. 19.) or extraordinary and
unfixed, in time of some imminent danger or great distress: of which we have
many examples, Tertul. de Jesui^.
not only in Scripture, but also in Ecclesiastical Story, XX. Judge. 26. 2 Chronicles. XX. 3. VIII. Ezra.

Of such a Public Fast, and of this latter sort, my Text speaks. For the
blowing with the trumpets, signified the calling all the people together, as
appears by the place before named in the Prophet Joel, V. 16. Gather the
people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the elders, gather the children
and those that suck the breasts, etc. All were to appear before God, to Implore
his Compassion, by their Cries and Tears. I say before God, because they were
to be gathered together at the Tabernacle while it was standing, and afterward
at the Temple. Which is the reason of that expression XXXVI. Jerem. 9. Proclaim
a fast before the Lord, to all the people of Jerusalem: That is, at the Temple;
where his Majesty dwelt, and where they came together for Religious Worship.
And accordingly he bids Baruch, v. 6. to go and read the words of the LORD in
the ears of the people, in the Lords house, upon the fasting day. After which
example, we are all here now assembled before the Lord, in the place of his
Worship and Service. And that we may understand what our business is, I shall
as briefly as I can show you, First, what the Scripture means by fasting before
the Lord; and consequently what will obtain his Blessing upon our Forces:
Secondly, how fit and necessary it is, at such a time as this, to employ our
selves in this holy duty.

I. Now the word Fasting in its ordinary signification imports no more than
abstinence from all sorts of Food, for such a time as was appointed to that
purpose. But being designed for a religious end, they used it, no doubt, as a
Token and a sort of Confession, that they were not worthy of the common
supports and comforts of life, not so much as of a bit of Bread; and
consequently not worthy to live. They intended also thereby to afflict their
Soul, as the Scripture speaks, to put themselves, if not to trouble and pain,
yet into a state of Sadness and Mourning; as a just chastisement for their
sinful pleasures. For which reason, the Jews understand by solemn fasting a
great deal more than it literally expresses; viz. not only abstinence from all
manner of refreshment, by so much as washing their Faces, or any thing of that
Nature; but putting on sackcloath next their Skin (on some great occasions
especially) lying in Ashes, rending their Garments, and such like acts of
Humiliation.

But we shall be very much mistaken, if we think this was the whole business of
a fasting day, to deny themselves the comforts and refreshments of Nature.
There was something more, and more excellent, in it; and that which was
properly the worship of God: which were abstinence from food is not. And
therefore,

II. The intention of such a day was, to make solemn addresses to the Almighty,
by Prayer and Supplication: which is frequently joined with fasting; and, when
any blessing was obtained, never separated from it* I could direct you to a
multitude of places both in the Old Testament and the New, and the Apocryphal
Books XII. Tobit 4. IV. Judith 9. 10. etc. VI. Judith 21.
, also, to this purpose: but a few may suffice. In the Chapter now read, for
the first Lesson; 2 Chronicles. XX. 3. you find that when news was brought to
Jehosephat of an invasion by a great multitude of several Nations, He feared
and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.
This was so much the business of such a day, that the Prophet Jeremiah speaks
as if it was the thing for which fasting was immediately designed. XIV. 12.
When they fast, I will not hear their cry. He does not say he would not regard
their fasting; but give no Audience to their Prayers: Which, it appears by
this, was a great part of the employment of such a day. And therefore when the
Prophet Joel had called upon them to blow the trumpet, proclaim a Fast, gather
all together, Elders and People, great and small (in the place before
mentioned) he subjoyns these words v. 17* to show what it was for: Let the
Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar, and
let them say; spare thy people, O LORD, and give not thine heritage to
reproach; that the heathen should rule over them* Wherefore should they say
among the people, Where is their God? For that purpose we are now assembled on
this fasting day, to put up our humble and fervent Petitions unto the Divine
Majesty; to cry earnestly to him for his Grace and Mercy; for his help and
assistance; for good success of our Forces by Sea and Land; for a blessing upon
our selves and upon this whole Kingdom.

A very great work! A most weighty employment! For which we had need seriously
(...), whether we be well prepared. Are we fit to appear before the Lord of
Heaven and Earth? To be intercessors for a whole Nation? To bespeak his favor
in those great actions that are on foot among us, and in the neighboring
world? Can such as we hope to prevail for a gracious Audience, of such
important suits? May we not rather fear that he should hide his face, from such
obstinate sinners? That he should cover himself with a cloud (as Jeremy speaks
in his Lamentations III. 44.) that our prayer should not pass through? and that
he should turn away from us, when we spread before him, our necessities or
dangers, and implore his pity on us?

Let us inquire, and make a diligent search into our hearts, whether we have
not brought something along with us into his presence; which may obstruct the
passage of our Prayers to the Throne of Grace; and render them ineffectual.
Which leads me to the third thing.

III. On their fasting days, every man, who hoped for acceptance with God, was
bound to search and try his ways; to enter into the very secrets of his Soul,
and see what he could find there displeasing unto God: which might cry louder
for Vengeance, than his Prayers could do for Mercy.

For which end their iniquities were declared and set in order before them, by
the Prophets (if there were any) and those that instructed them* So I we read
that Jeremiah sent Baruch (in the place before named) to read the words of the
LORD in the peoples ears, on the fasting day. And this charge is given to the
Prophet Isaiah (as you will hear in the first Lesson appointed at Even Prayer,)
LVIII. Isa. I. Cry aloud and spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and
show my people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. When
you have considered the Chapter, you will find he speaks of the day of the
great Fast (which was a Sabbath of rest to them, on which they were to afflict
their souls, XVI. Levit. 30, 31.) upon which he was to imitate the Trumpet,
which had called them together; to sound a new Alarm in their ears; to rouse
them from their security; to awaken them to a sight of their sins and move
their* Hearts to set themselves against them, with all their might. And of what
sins does he admonish them? In the first place, he takes notice of their vain
pretenses to Religion. For though they sought God daily, and heard the Law, and
observed the Ordinances of Divine Worship, yea, took* delight in approaching to
God* (as you read v. ^.) yet they continued in their open disobedience to the
rest of his commands? For they were notoriously unjust; Nay, many miserable
Souls proclaimed their unmerciful Dealing and Cruelty. Thy were full of Strife
and Debate* Hatred and Contention: And so given over to voluptuousnes, that on
the very day of their Fast they sound pleasure, as well as exacted all their
labors (v. 3, 4.) and could not forbear to speak evil one of another, when
they were all confessing their Sins to God. Their hands were defiled with
blood, and their fingers with iniquity; their lips spoke lies, and their
tongues uttered perverseness, etc. as you may read in the rest of the Chapter,
and in that which follows.

These Sins therefore the Prophet proclaimed in their Ears, with a loud voice:
and told them it was in (...) to Fast and Pray, while these Iniquities
continued, and separated between them and their God; so that he hid his face
from them, and would not hear, LIX. ^. And do not our iniquities, in like
manner, testify to our faces (as another Prophet speaks, V. Hos. 5.) that is,
Are they not notorious, though we should seal up our Lips, and say nothing of
them? Nay, search and examine, I beseech you, whether we be not worse than
they? Do we seek the Lord daily? Dare we affirm this of our selves, which the
Prophet acknowledges they did* Do we delight to know his ways, as a Nation that
does righteousness, and forsakes not the Ordinances of their God? Can we say
(as he confesses of them) that we ask of him the Ordinances of Justice, and
take delight in approaching unto God? Alas, alas! these, I fear, are not become
National Virtues: but too many of us are like that People in Malachi's time,
who said of the Divine Service, What a weariness is it? What a burden is such a
Day as this to us? And what great numbers, may we justly fear, are now
wallowing in their Sins, when they should be rather humbling themselves before
God, in Dust and Ashes?

But let us suppose better things; that we are a People, who do not forsake the
Ordinances of their God: Yet, Can we say that our Religion has made a general
Reformation of our Lives? How often have we approached unto God, and become no
like^ to him? How many Fasts have we observed, and forsaken no one Sin? Are we
not still as unjust and uncharitable, as those that know not God? Or, Are we
not lovers of Pleasure, more than lovers of God? Oh this love of Pleasure, How
easily does it bewitch Men's Hearts, and draw them from their Duty? Idleness and
Sports are apt to swallow up the most of their time. Besides, the Gluttony and
Drunkenness, the Filthiness and Uncleanness, that are wont to attend upon a
negligent and careless Life: The Quarrels also, and Contentions; nay, the
Bloodshed and Murders, which they many times commit; when they are crossed in
their Sinful Pleasures, or contradicted in their Drunken Humors. And what
shall I say of the Oaths* and Blasphemies, where* with such Men's Mouths* are
too often filled? And, there is still a worse thing behind, which is* putting
forth of the finger* and speaking of vanity, mentioned by the Prophet, v. 9.
which seems to denote that there were Scoffers, and open Mockers among them:
whose insolent boldness, when it proceeds to derision of Religion, jearing at
holy things, and playing even with the Word of God it self; it is the height
of impiety, the filling up of a Peoples iniquity.

There is no Prophet now among us, who can confidently charge these Crimes upon
this Nation; or tell us how far it is guilty of them: But if they abound every
where, they will certainly render our Sacrifices unacceptable unto God. And
therefore let every one descend into his own Breast, and make a strict
Inquisition there, into the state of his own Soul; and when he is acquainted
with it,

IV. The next thing in a Fast to the LORD is in genuously to confess and
sorrowfully bewail, in the bitterness of our Souls, those sins of which we find
our selves guilty. An example of which you meet withal in the days of Samuel,
who, in a great destress, gathered all Israel to Mizpeh, where they drew water
and powered it out before the LORD, and fasted on that day, and said there, We
have sinned against the LORD. But I cannot stand to open that place, and many
more in the books of Ezra, Nehemiah and Daniel, which relate to this matter:
because there is something further and more considerable, which requires my
care to explain, and press upon your hearts.

V. And that is a sincere purpose of forsaking our Sins, and reforming our
Lives according to God's holy Word: Which must accompany all the foregoing acts
of Religion, to make them effectual. For to what end do we examine our selves,
unless it be to correct and amend whatsoever we find to be amiss? It is an
unprofitable labor, to confess and bewail what is past, unless it move us to
do better for the time to come. Nay, to pray to God for mercy, while we
continue to provoke him to anger by our transgressions, is a perfect
contradiction: and accounted by him no better than a piece of gross hypocrisy.
Which the Psalmist calls, flattering him with our mouth; pretending that fear
and reverence of him which is not truly settled in our heart. Therefore see what
he replies to this people, when they cried to him saying, Thou, O LORD, art in
the midst of us, and we are called by thy name; leave us not* XIV. Jerem* 9.)
Thus says the LORD unto this people, thus have they loved to wander, they have
not refrained their feet; therefore the LORD does not accept them, he will now*
remember their iniquities, and visit their sins. Then said the LORD unto me,
Pray not for this people for their good: when they fast I will not hear their
cry; and when they offer burnt offerings and an oblation, I will not accept
them, etc. v. 10. 11, 12.

When there was no true repentance, and resolution to turn from their evil
ways; you see the Prayers of the Prophet himself were of as little avail for
their safety, as their own Prayers and Sacrifices which they offered to him.
And more than this, he expected their holy purposes should be performed: and
that they should not content themselves with good resolutions; which many times
are as soon broken, as they are made. When the people therefore, in their
distress, lamented after the Lord, the good man tells them (1 Samuel VII. 2, 3.)
if you do return to the LORD with all your heart then put away the strange
Gods, and prepare your hearts unto the Lord, to serve him only: and he will
deliver you. That is, Let us see the proof of your unseigned sorrow for what
you have done amiss: let your fair promises and good purposes bring forth fruit
meet for repentance: And accordingly you read, v. 4. Then the children of
Israel put away Baalim and Ashtaroth; and served the LORD only: i. e. they did
according to their resolutions.

But one place may serve instead of a great many, XXXIII. Ezekiel. 3. 6. where the
Watchman is commanded to blow the trumpet, and warn the people when he saw the
sword coming. What was this, but to call them to Fasting and Humiliation; to
Repentace and forsaking their Sins? So you find it explained v. 7. 8. (as you
may read at your leisure) and observe how the Prophet is directed to treat with
them in these terms, v. 11. Say unto them, as I live, says the LORD God, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his
way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O
house of Israel? This conversion from their evil ways, was the only means to
save them: to which therefore the Prophet most earnestly importunes them.

And thus Maimonides, a most learned Writer among the Jews, describes one of
their fasting-days* in his Treatise upon this Subject In Taani^oth. cap. 4.
. An Elder, says he, is appointed, who stands and calls upon the people to
turn unto the Lord; speaking to this purpose. O my Brethren, it is neither your
fasting, nor your Sackcloth, nor your Ashes, which will be able to turn away
the anger of God from you: but your Repentance and good works must ensue, to do
the business. Do you not find it so in the case of Nineveh? How do you read in
their story? Look into the Book of Jonah, and observe how they proclaimed a
Fast, and put on Sackcloth, from the greatest to the least III. 5. And the King
caused it to be proclaimed throughout the City, saying, Let neither man nor
beast taste any food, let them be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto
God: yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that
is in their hands. v. 7, 8. And what the effect was, you may find, v. 10. God
saw their works, and that they returned from their evil ways, and God repented
of the evil, etc. Observe, Brethren, he does not say that he saw their
Sackcloth, and took notice of their Fasting, but that he saw their works, and
that they returned from their evil ways. And so God speaks by the Prophet Joel,
Turn ye unto me with all your heart, and with fasting, weeping, and mourning.
Rend your hearts and not your garments; and turn unto the LORD your God; for he
is gracious, who knows if he will return, and leave a blessing behind him.

This, says Maimonides, the Elder was required to speak with all his might;
that he might humble their hearts, and turn them with a perfect Repentance. And
after they had thus spent the Day in Prayer, hearing the word of God, and other
Duties (which I shall mention in the next particular) all the People, he says,
were wont to go into the Burying place; and there they wept and prayed again.
And one spoke to them in this manner; Behold, ye shall all die and perish, like
those whose Graves here lie before you; unless you be converted from your evil
ways. Which is much what such a saying, as that of our Blessed Savior's in the
Gospel for this day, XIII. Luke 3. 5. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish.

You see then, what is the great work of this day: Wherein no Exhortation is
more proper, than that of Jeremiah to this People in his Lamentations, III. 40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the LORD. Do not presume of
mercy without this; though you should perform all the other. But fear rather,
lest that should be verified in us, which was said to the Jews, I. Isa. 15.
When you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; when you make
many Prayers, I will not hear you. A very lamentable case! to lose the favor
of God, and all this labor likewise to obtain it. What should they do then?
What course would God have them take? He informs them, in the very next words,
Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
Eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed,
judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. Come now and let us reason together,
says the LORD (now I am willing to be reconciled) though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, etc.

From which words I am directed to another necessary part of a Solemn Fast,
which is the last I shall mention.

VI. And that is, doing public Justice upon Notorious Offenders, by inflicting
those Punishments upon Vice and Wickedness, which the Law requires. Judge the
Fatherless: The Prophet speaks to the Rulers and Governors of the People, that
they should see right done, and Abuses corrected. And accordingly you find,
that upon their Days of Humiliation, this was a considerable part of their
care. For when Samuel, gathered all the People to Mizpeh, where they kept a
Fast (as I showed before) and confessed their sins, etc. the Day concluded with
this, 1 Samuel VII. 6. And Samuel judged the children of Israel in Mizpeh. When
Ezra, in like manner, mourned and did neither eat bread, nor drink water, he
summoned all the People to come to Jerusalem, upon pain of forfeiting all their
Goods, if they did not; and when they appeared, he examined who had taken
strange Wives contrary to the Law; and he caused them to be put away; as you
read X. Ezra 6, 7, etc.

And thus Maimonides tells us, in aftertimes their Ib. Cap. ^.
manner was, upon their Fasting Days occasioned by any Public Trouble, for the
House of Judgment (as their Phrase is) to sit in the Synagogue of every City,
and there examine the Lives of the Citizens, after Morning Prayer until Noon:
And so they removed, says he, the Stumbling Blocks of Transgression. They
inquired, for instance, after the Men of Violence; those who had been
Extortioners and Oppressors of others, whom they Excommunicated: They sought
after the Scorners and those that despised the Law, whom they humbled; with all
the like Offenders. And then from the middle of the Day till three a Clock,
they recited the Blessings and Curses that are in the Law; according to what
the Wise Man says, My Son, despise thou not the Chastening of the LORD. III.
Prove. 11. And then, having read such Reproofs out of the Prophets, as were most
suitable to the present strait wherein they were; Evening Prayer began; in
which they spent the remaining part of the day, crying unto God with all their
might.

This certainly very much concerns all the Magistrates and Officers of Justice
among us in this Kingdom: Who should blush to be found more remiss than those
who lived under a lower Discipline. I wish I could lift up my Voice, and speak
so loud, as to awaken every one of them, to chastise all Public Offenders; to
do Justice strictly upon those who dishonor God, and are a Scandal to
Religion. Stir up yourselves, and be Zealous for your God (as the Scripture
speaks) Let not the Drunkards, the Blasphemers, the Prophaners of the
Lord's Day, who despise his Worship and Service, go unpunished. See good order
kept in all Houses of Public Entertainment. Find out and suppress all places
of noted Uncleanness. Make a strict Inquisition after false Weights and
deceitful Measures. Discountenance Make-bates, and sowers of Discord among
Brethren. And execute the severity of the Law against all open wickedness.

This would be indeed to keep a Fast unto the LORD. This would be the ready way
to make us an happy People. For though there might still be a great many sins
committed among us: Yet they would not be National sins, nor be imputed to us
as the guilt of the Kingdom; but every Man should bear his own Iniquity.
Whereas, without such Reformation as this, or an hearty and honest endeavor
after it, our Fastings, and Prayers, and Lamentations, will serve only for
marks of our insincerity, and of the mean Opinion we have of God: As if he
could be moved with such Services; wherein we have respect only to our selves*
and not at all to him. Who is not honored, while Profane Wickedness openly
appears, to the high affront of Piety and Religion, without check or
Controulment.

This bold Commission of Sin without Correction, He will account the Sin of the
Kingdom: And it will lie more especially at the door of the Magistrates and
Officers of Justice; if they can, and yet will not redress such Impieties. For
it was always an acknowledged Rule, That he who does not forbid sin when it is
in his power, does in effect command it: and he that does not punish it when it
is in his power, incourages and upholds it.

As we expect then the Blessing of Heaven upon us; as we wish the happiness of
these Kingdoms, and desire that the great designs which are now on foot may
thrive and prosper; let us every one, in our several Conditions, Relations, and
Places, set our selves seriously against Vice and Wickedness, and labor to
root it out. For not only our Eternal, but our Temporal Interest is concerned
in this, as I shall now endeavor briefly to demonstrate; by showing how
rational and necessary it is, to perform this Duty, of which I have been
treating; in the full extent thereof.

That, you may remember, was the Second thing which I undertook to do; when I
entered upon this part of my Text. And I shall not press you by general Reasons,
but such only as particularly relate to those who are in a State of War. Who
ought to consider in the First place,

I. That as Fasting and Prayer are an open acknowledgment that God is the
Sovereign Disposer of all Events, so it is never more necessary to make this
acknowledgment than in a time of War: when his Overruling* Power and Wisdom is
most eminently apparent. For it has been frequently seen, that a little
Chance, as we call it, has disordered mighty Armies: A small Accident has
turned the fortune of the Day. The mistaking of a word in Fights at Land; the
shifting of the Wind in Fights at Sea, or some such like single event; has
sometimes ravished Victory from those, who had it just in their hands. There
are innumerable instances in Story, of such sudden Contingencies; as have
utterly defeated the fairest hopes. We have one, in the first Lesson for this
Days Morning Prayer; where we read how three Nations that were combined against
Jehosaphat, by a mistake of a Party of them, who were laid in ambush, fell upon
one another, and were utterly destroyed by their own hands, 2 Chronicles. XX. 22,
23. Which is to be ascribed to the secret interposition of the Divine Power,
which governs all things, both great and small: And by very little things,
produces very great alterations.

The skill and prudence of those that Command in Battles may do much; the
Courage of the Soldiers is of great moment; the strength and number of Ships is
very considerable. But (as one of the Heathens speaks) one single chance; that
is (in the Christian Language) one turn of the Divine Providence can do more
than them all.

Thus far then, Blessed be God, we are in the right; the very appointment of
such an Assembly as this, being a public acknowledgment which their Majesty's
make, that there is a mind (to use the words of (...)
Plato) an eternal mind, which is the King of Heaven and Earth; governing and
ordering all things every where: And our meeting together, at this time, being
a solemn Recognition of that Supreme Authority and Providence of his. Whereby
we declare our sense of humane weakness, though never so well armed and bravely
appointed: And disclaiming all confidence in the arm of flesh, testify to the
World that we hope not for Salvation from thence; but from the living God,
whose favor is at all times to be most humbly implored; but then especially,
when not only Men, but the Wind and the Seas, Storms and Tempests; nay, all
other things, may rise up against us. And we ought further to consider that,

II. Our Fasting and Prayers, being an acknowledgment, likewise, of the
Obedience we owe to Almighty God in all things; there can be nothing of more
dangerous Consequence, than to persist in our Rebellion against him; after we
have made such open Confessions of his Supremacy, and of our dependence on him,
and the need, in which we stand of his favor and help. Upon which account, we
ought to take care that these Religious Addresses to him, be attended with such
a Reformation, as I have now mentioned, before we venture to engage with our
Enemies. That so we may have no more Enemies, than they to oppose us: But we
may be in peace with Heaven, when Men make War upon us. For he is in a bad
condition, who has a great many Enemies, to deal with all at one time: And he
in a worse, who carries a secret Enemy along with him in his Armies; as all
those do who go in their sins, to sight with their Opposers. And thence it
follows; that none are in so dangerous a condition as those, who have God for
their Enemy: Who threatens to wound the head of his Enemies; of such an one as
goes on still in his trespasses, LXVIII. Psalm. 21. But never are they in more
danger than when by their Prayer and Fasting the Devil is not cast out; but
they still resolutely persist in their Disobedience.

Before we blow the Trumpet then of War against our Enemies; we ought in all
reason to proclaim War against our Sins. It is our highest interest, to call up
all the Forces of our Souls (if I may so speak) to encounter these, and tread
them down under our Feet: before we take the confidence to look our other Foes,
who are not so deadly, in the Face. There is a peculiar Precept of God by Moses
belonging to this matter, which ought to be often pondered. XXIII. Deuteronomy. 9.
When the host goes forth against thine Enemies, then keep thee from every
wicked thing.

III. By which means we shall be disposed to manage all other Wars, after a
Christian manner. We shall not commit any injustice or violence when we go to
redress it: nor exercise Cruelty, when we take in hand to punish it. We shall
never be guilty of that, of which we complain: but fight like those, that hate
fighting. We shall love even our bitterest Enemies; and wish we could conquer
them by that weapon, rather than any other. But if that cannot be, we shall be
able, however, which is the next thing considerable,

IV. To place a good hope in God, that he will take our part, and send us
Auxiliaries from Heaven, when men rise up against us. The race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, etc. (as the wise man observes IX. Eccles.
II.) but time and chance happens to them all. It is God only, as you have
heard, that can make opportunities favorable to us, and cause things to fall
out advantageously on our side; yea, make little means bring mighty things to
pass: And we may hope he will do so, when in all our ways we acknowledge him,
and live as becomes those who believe* that let us devise what we please, it is
the LORD who directs and orders the success, XVI. Prove. 9. XX. 24.

V. And then to him we shall not fail to give all the praise, and ascribe
nothing to our selves: as that admirable Prince David does; who after all his
wonderful achievements makes the most humble acknowledgments to God, in the
last of those Psalms now read, XLIV. 1, 2. etc. Blessed be the LORD my
strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my singers to sight. My goodness,
and my fortress* my high tower* and my deliverer, my shield (observe how many
words he uses to express his sense that he owed all to God) and he in whom I
trust: Who subdueth my people under me. LORD, what is man that thou take
knowledge of him? Or the Son of man, that thou make account of him? Man is
like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that passes away. As if he had said,
LORD, what am I? what is the best or greatest of men, that such things should
be effected by them, as the subduing so many people, as have submitted unto me.
Alas! we are but vanity; a mere shadow: and what can a whole Army of shadows
do, without the power of God. Unto which I must and do ascribe entirely all the
victories which have been won over great and strong Nations, by such a feeble
creature as I am. And thus Jonathan a Friend of David's speaks to his
Armor-bearer 1 Samuel XIV. 6. Let us go over unto the Garrison of these
uncircumcised; it may be the LORD will work by us. For there is no restraint to
the LORD to save by many, or by few.

VI. With him therefore if we can make friendship, by abandoning all his
Enemies, it is visible that this good hope in God, will inspire us with true
Valor, and make us fear nothing inordinately; no, not death it self. The
righteous, says Solomon, are as bold as a Lion, XXVIII. Prove. 1. they can look
dangers undauntedly in the Face. Whereas, all the natural courage and boldness,
which abundance of natural spirits, in a vigorous constitution of Body and
Health, may indue some men withal, will grow faint and languish; whenever
the terrors of an evil Conscience seize upon them, and their guilt starts up
and stares them in the face. If a wicked man chance to reflect upon this one
thing alone, that he is issued forth into the field of danger without God (more
confident in his own strength, than in the Power of the Almighty, whom he does
not seriously acknowledge, nor study to engage) it will amaze his spirit, and
quench his courage. This will daunt him more, than all the Enemies in the
World: and strike a greater terror into him, than the noise of Cannon, and the
shrieks and groans of dying men. And what man on Earth is there, so resolute
and confident, so high spirited and a despiser of danger, as to be able to
secure himself from these invisible strokes of Heaven? which will trouble and
confound him; and baffle him in all his enterprises. It is necessary then to
make a man a thoroughly good Soldier, that he have first conquered himself. He
that would fear nothing, must in the first place, fear God. Unto which if we
would all apply our selves, with due seriousness, we should have reason to
expect that God would remember us (as my Text speaks) that is own us for his
Friends; and save us from our enemies. Which he can do either by overcoming
them, or by overcoming their Enmity and making them Friends; which is the best
way of all. For, When a man's ways please the LORD, he makes even his enemies
to be at peace with him. XVI. Prove. 7.

III.
This is the last part of my Text; of which let me beg your patience, while I
give a short account.

It is possible indeed that success may wait upon the wicked; but as they
cannot reasonably hope for it, so they will be in fear and dread, whenever
they reflect upon their wickedness, that at last they shall miscarry. Whereas
truly good men can never fail to have a good hope in God; that whatsoever
success they meet withal at present, he will not abandon them utterly: but turn
even Crosses to their future advantage. And who so happy as he, that lives not
in suspense and doubt about the final issue of things? but can commit himself
to God, and to his wise Providence, with an assured confidence, that it shall
go well with him at the last; though his Faith and Patience be exercised a
while with dubious, or with adverse events.

It is the Observation of Isocrates, In A^chida^^ (...)
in several places of his Orations (and he lived almost to an hundred years of
age, and so could the better take notice of the carriage of things in his own
Country) that the conclusion of all the Wars in Greece were not according to
the strength of their Forces, but also according to the justice of their Cause.
For though there were different successes in the intermediate Acts, which made
some men doubt which side was in the right, yet the Catastrophe (as they speak)
the Conclusion of those tragical Commotions declared the righteous Cause
Victorious: and they who were unjustly oppressed, were vindicated into their
ancient liberties.

But however that be, there is no greater truth than what was said by Cassius
(...), Nothing gives a man such Apud. A^ppian.
hope in War, as to have right on his side. God and my right, is the best
inscription that ever was in any Escutcheon; and the greatest support of a
Christian Prince.

But of all the stories you ever read or heard of, there is none like that
which reports the confidence and assured hope of Jehoshaphat King of Judah, in
the first Lesson this day, which I have often mentioned. Where after he had
proclaimed a Fast, and made a most admirable Prayer to God (in which he briefly
sets forth these two things, his trust in God, and the justice of his cause) he
was so mightily encouraged, that he ordained the people to go singing, when
they went to fight with their numerous enemies. A mavelous confidence in
God's Power and Goodness; which inspired them with such hope of success, that
they sung their (...) or song of triumph beforehand, as you read 2 Chronicles. XX.
21. When he had consulted the people, he appointed singers unto the LORD, that
should praise the beauty of holiness, as they went out before the army, saying,
Praise the LORD for his mercy endures for ever. They had a Prophet indeed who
came and assured them of Victory; but they who had none have done the same, and
it is probable from this example. For Cedrenus tells us, that the ancient
Christians used to sing in their Battles; as if they would praise God for
assured success before the Victory was obtained.

This was the issue of a pious Fast in those old times: and we might see the
same again, did we not merely forsake our food on this day, but likewise our
sins. If we would not only humble our selves before God to day, but always walk
humbly with him, I might with some confidence use the words of the Prophet in
that place v. 17. and say, Stand ye still, and see the salvation of the LORD;
fear not, nor be dismayed, for the LORD will be with you. He will certainly
remember us, and we shall be saved from the hands of all that hate us.

Not so speedily perhaps as we may desire: but as soon as we are fit for the
mercies he intends to bestow upon us: and with such speed as is consistent with
the wonted methods of his most wise proceedings. We expected, I remember, to
have seen Ireland reduced that year his Majesty went over thither: and thought
it very hard that, after so much expense, we did not see, our enemies
elsewhere, humbled the last year. But were we a much better people than I can
suppose we are, God might justly deferr the accomplishment of such hopes; and
yet be as good as his word here in my Text, and in other places.

First, That he may keep us in a continued dependence upon him; and quicken us
to pray with all prayer, watching thereunto with perseverance, and patiently
waiting till he have mercy upon us.

Secondly, That he may work in us a through Repentance: Which alas! is very
imperfect; and therefore so is our Deliverance. Let us complete the one, and
God will finish the other. But while our Repentance remains so defective; it is
rather a wonder that God has done so much, than that he he has done no more
for us. Particularly,

Thirdly, God may justly defer to do all that I hope he intends; till we become
more sensible of what he has done already. He wrought a mighty deliverance for
us not long a go; when we were not able to deliver our selves, nor deserved to
be delivered by him. But so it is that our angry fits of discontent, because we
were not delivered in our own method, and after our way, have made us not to
take sufficient Notice of the Deliverance it self; and of that mighty hand of
God, which (as we sing in our daily Hymn, which I wish we would mind) has
scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts. It is hard to find a
greater instance of this any where, than here in this Nation: where men that
had proudly projected the alteration of the whole frame of our Government, and
of our Religion, and in their own opinion had laid their design so strongly
that they thought it could not be defeated; were scattered and dispersed in a
moment: and all their towering imaginations confounded, and brought to naught.
This was certainly the LORD's doing; which ought to have been mavelous in all
our eyes. And when it is, then He will still work wonderful things for us in
righteousness, as the Prophet speaks: and Crown our deliverance with a
Conclusion suitable to its Beginning. Besides all this,

Lastly, We must consider, that God is not wont to pour out his indignation all
at once, even upon those whom he intends to destroy: But consumes them by
degrees. Whence that remarkable Phrase very frequent in the Prophets, who are
said to drop, when they were sent to denounce God's Judgments against a People,
XXI. Ezekiel. 2. Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, and drop toward the
holy places: So it is in the Hebrew; which (to make out the sense) we
translate, drop thy word, and Prophesy against the Land of Israel. The like you
read, II. Micah 6. where the People said, Prophesy not to them that prophesy:
In the Hebrew (as the Margin of the Bibles tells you) it is drop ye not, etc.
Thus Amos speaks also, VII. 16. Thou say, prophesy not against Israel, and
drop not against the house of Isaac. Upon which words St. Hierom has this
pertinent Observation, This is the Idiom of the Scripture, Quod non totam Dei
simul inferant iram, etc. because the Prophets do not denounce the whole anger
of God at once; but threaten it by little drops.

So patient is the Goodness of God, that he does not presently suffer, his
whole displeasure to arise; but punishes those by little and little whom he
intends to ruin: That they may have time to repent and save their Souls, though
they shall by no means save their Temporal Estate. Thus he dealt with all the
proud Tyrants of old; with those, for instance, of Niniveh and Babylon. And it
may give us some account of the Method, wherein it is likely he will proceed
against the grand Oppressors of this Age; particularly him in these Western
parts of the World. Whose Humiliation (which so many Nations groan for) is not
to be expected, perhaps, by a sudden pouring of the Vials of God's Wrath upon
him, all at once: But drop by drop, as the Prophets speak. Till the time come,
that the sins of that insolent Nation be ripe: And then God no longer proceeds
in this leisurely Method, but is wont to pour out his Indignation in larger
measures, to a speedy destruction.

If you please, for a conclusion, look into the Prophecy of Nahum: Where you
will find all this declared more fully, and admirably expressed. He was sent to
denounce utter destruction to the Ninivites, who had abused the Patience and
Goodness of God in the days of Jonah; by returning to those wicked works; which
for a time they reformed upon his Preaching. Therefore this Prophet tells them
from the LORD, 1. 9. He will make an utter end, affliction shall not rise up a
second time. That is, one blow should strike them down; and there should be no
need of a second to perfect their overthrow.

But hitherto it had been much otherwise, as you may see in the beginning of
that Prophecy: Which is very remarkable for the account it gives of the way of
the Divine Providence; in the description he makes of the Divine Nature, v. 2.
God is Jealous; that is, he cannot always endure to behold his Friends
oppressed, and his Enemies triumph, but will in due time take Vengeance: as he
three times repeats it, in the words immediately following, to show the
certainty of it. God is jealous, and the LORD revengeth, the LORD revengeth,
and is furious, (that is, can do it suddenly and easily when he pleases) the
LORD will take vengeance on his adversaries; and he reserveth wrath (till the
time proper for it) for his Enemies. The LORD is slow to anger, i. e. to
execute his displeasure; and great in power, to do it when he thinks good; and
will not acquit the Wicked; i. e. not suffer them to escape, though he long
forbear them. And when he does come to execute his anger, it is in a terrible
manner; after there has been long forbearance. So it follows, The LORD has
his way in the Whirlwind, and in the Storm, etc. the mountains quake at him,
and the rocks are thrown down by him, etc. with an overflowing stood will be
make an utter end of the place thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies.

The Prophet, that is, could not tell how to represent the dreadful vengeance
God took of those, who had tired his long suffering Goodness, better than by
Storms and Hurricans, Deluges and Inundations: which sweep all before them with
such an irresistible violence, as is impossible to be opposed. So he concludes,
in the very next words, what do ye imagine against the LORD? to hinder, that
is, the execution of his wrath, and to escape his vengeance. Alas! all your
contrivances to avoid the stroke, will prove vain imaginations, foolish
devices; when he designs to ruin you. So it follows in the next words, which I
read at first, He will make an utter end; and affliction shall not rise up a
second time. Which he repeats again v. 12. Though I have afflicted thee (by
various sorts of punishments) I will afflict thee no more: But this once, that
is; for it shall be a concluding stroke, that shall utterly confound thee.

Thus the Lord did with that Great King (as he would needs be called) the King
of Assyria. And thus, we may rationally expect, he will treat all other haughty
Tyrants: who assume to themselves the name of Great* only because they are so
strong, as to be able to crush their weaker Neighbors. For it still remains
true, what the next Prophet says concerning the Chaldaeans, who succeeded the
Assyrian Tyrants, The LORD is of purer eyes then to behold evil* and cannot
look on iniquity 1. Habakk ^^ that is* he cannot approve of the Violence and
Cruelty of such Oppressors, Who deal treacherously (as it there follows) and
devour the men that are more righteous than themselves. For how bad soever the
Israelites were in those times; the Chaldaeans were much worse. And I hope I
may say the same of this sinful Nation, with respect to our injurious
Neighbors. Unto whom the Cup of the LORD's right hand shall (at last) be
turned: and shameful spewing shall be upon their glory, II. Habakk. 16.

Then let them set their cunning wits on work, to imagine and devise all the
means they can invent, to save themselves from drinking of that Cup, they shall
not be able to turn it away: but be so intoxicated with it, that they shall
Reel and Stagger, and Stumble at noon day; being unable to see the things that
belong to their peace. Then shall all the fine Politics of that subtle
Nation, quite fail them. They shall not be able to serve themselves, by any of
their wonted Artifices and Illusions: but only expose themselves the more to
shame and disgrace, by trusting to such falsehoods and impostures as those,
whereby they have long amused and deceived many of their Neighbors. For there
is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the LORD, XXI. Prove. 30.

All whose works are truth, and his ways judgment; and those that walk in pride
he is able to abase, IV. Dan. ult.

For he loves righteousness: but the wicked and him that loves violence his
soul hates, XI. Psalm. 6, 8.

And will preserve the faithful, and plentifully reward the proud doer, XXXI.
Psalm. 23.

In which humble confidence, let me conclude as he there does, v. 24. Be of
good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the LORD.

To that great LORD, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be
Glory and Power and Dominion, both now and for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

