THE WORK OF THE MINISTRY Represented to The Clergy of the Diocese of ELY.

By SIMON Lord Bishop of ELY.

LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's-Church-Yard. School.

ERRATA.
Page 23. lin. 2. r. Temple, and to.

p. 29. l. ult. r. though not in every.

p. 34. l. 11. r. peculiarly.

p. 46. l. 16. r. mere creature.

p. 49. l. 24. r. teach.

p. 50. l. 21. r. Historia.

p. 52. l. 13. r. (...).

p. 56. l. 5. r. (...).

p. 70. l. 17. r. celebrated.

The WORK OF THE MINISTRY REPRESENTED To the CLERGY OF THE Diocese of ELY.
Dear Brethren,
TO shorten my own Labor, and your attendance at my approaching Visitation, I
send you this little Treatise beforehand; which may serve in stead of the
Exhortation, which is wont to be made on that occasion. You will read it, I
hope with as serious consideration, as you would have heard it, had it been
spoken, with due attention. By which means you will receive a greater benefit,
than you could have done the other way: for you may read that often, and
imprint it in your minds; which you could have heard but once, and might have
slipped out of your memory.

You see by the Title of it, that it treats of the Duties which belong to that
Function; in which it has pleased the Most High, to do you the honor to
employ you. A Function so truly noble, that it is not in my power to set forth
the Dignity of it. For the Blessed Apostle St. Paul, thought it so great an
honor to be made a Christian, that he thought no words, too lofty, to express
the dignity of their state: which he calls, not only our High Calling, III
Philip. 14. but our Heavenly Calling in Christ Jesus, III Heb. 1. Which I
cannot think of, but it makes me reflect; what an honor then it is, to be made
a Minister of Jesus Christ, whose business it is, to bring others into this
glorious state of Christianity; and to breed them up, and keep them in it.

What preferment is there comparable to this, to be constituted a Servant, and
a Minister of the King of Glory; a Steward of the Heavenly Mysteries; an
Ambassador for Christ; a Labourer in his Vineyard or Harvest; which implies
indeed great pains, but carries in it also the great honor of sowing the Seed
of Eternal Life in Men's Souls; and cultivating, that is preparing and making
them fit to be carried into Christ's Heavenly Kingdom? I do not name all the
places in the Holy Writings, where you find your selves described under these
Characters; because you cannot but be well acquainted with them. I shall only
add, that we do not assume too much to our selves, when we call our selves the
Clergy, i. e. God's Portion, or Inheritance; being peculiarly separated to his
Service; as our Famous Mr. Mede has most judiciously observed. Discourse
XXXVI. p. 270. For the prime Ministers of our Lord Christ, are called by
himself; The Angels of the Churches over which they presided, I Revel. 20. And
therefore St. Chrysostom in his third Book (...), feared not to say, That the
Priesthood is a Dignity raised far above all the honors of this World, and
approaching to the Angelical Glory.

Which if it be duly weighed, and laid to heart, we can never cease to give God
thanks, who has advanced us to such a noble Station; nor be unmindful of the
service he expects from us: but both study all the duties belonging it; and
endeavor to perform them with a Spirit suitable to our Function.

What those Duties are, it is the principal business of this small Treatise to
lay before you. And with what Spirit they ought to be performed, I shall, in
the Conclusion of it, briefly admonish you. These Two will comprehend all that
I have to recommend to your Consideration. For there is no necessity, sure, to
prove, that they whom God has set apart to himself, for a peculiar service,
and therefore have a special relation to him, and have received a special
favor from him; have a singular Obligation, to do all they can to express
their gratitude to him; by discharging faithfully that great trust which he
has committed to them.

PART I.
NOW as to the Duties which are incumbent upon the Ministers of Christ, I shall
First treat of those which are to be performed in Private; and then of those
which are of Public concernment.

SECT. I.
The Private Duties, being to qualify them for the right discharge of all
Public Offices, are principally, the Study of the Holy Scriptures, and Prayer.

We profess at our Ordination, that we are Persuaded the Holy Scriptures
contain sufficiently all Doctrine required of necessity for Everlasting
Salvation, etc. and we declare that we are determined out of the aid Scriptures
to instruct the People committed to our charge, etc. Which supposes that above
all things we ought to apply our selves to the serious study of these Holy
Books; that there we may learn, our own duty, and the duty of those whom we are
to instruct in the Christian Religion. And accordingly a solemn Exhortation is
made to those who are to be admitted to the Order of Priesthood; to consider
how studious they ought to be in reading, and weighing, and learning the
Scriptures; that they may wa^ riper and stronger in their Ministry And more
than this, we promise before God and his Church, that we will be diligent
herein: which no Man can think of, if he have any Conscience, and live in the
neglect of this Sacred Study. For after we have given our Faith (...) God and
to his Church to be careful in this matter; we Seal it by receiving the Holy
Communion of Christ's Body and Blood. Which one would think should be of mighty
force (and will be so if duly weighed) to stir us up to this part of our duty;
that we may not be guilty of the breach of such solemn promises, as were made
to God at his Altar.

And here it may be proper briefly to remember you that this is so conformable
to the Doctrine and practice of the Ancient Church; that Theophylact (upon the
X St. John 1 etc.) says the Scriptures are the door by which the true Pastor
enters; and that he is a Thief, who comes not in by these, (...), etc. for he
does not use the Scriptures as witnesses and vouchers for what he says. By
these, says he, we are brought to God: these will not permit Wolves to enter;
they keep out Heretics, placing us in safety and security: These give us right
notions of all things wherein we desire to be infomed.

And therefore, My Brethren, apply your selves devoutly to the Study of these
Divine Books; or rather of these Books which will make you Divine. For so they
were called in the Ancient Christian Language, Deificos libros, and Deificas
Scripturas, and Instrument a Deifica (as Aelianus Proconsul of Africa calls
them in Optatus lib. 1.) Which Name the very Heathen had learnt, it was so
common, as appears by the enquiries they made after Bibles to burn them: this
being an usual question in the examination of the Martyrs, Libros Deificos
habetis? Which we should look upon therefore, (as they did) as an invaluable
Treasure: and let the word of Christ dwell in us richly in all wisdom, as the
Apostle S. Paul speaks III Colossi. 16. Such wisdom, as will not indeed make us
Philosophers, or Rhetoritians, etc. (to use the words of Justin Martyr) (...),
etc. But gives such instructions, that of Mortals it makes us immortal; of Men
it makes us God-like; from the Earth it translates us above the top of Olympus.
Exhort. 2. ad Graecos. p 40.

And the very same in effect the Holy Scriptures speak concerning themselves,
when they tell us they are able to make such a Man as Timothy was, wise unto
salvation; being profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness; that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works. 2 Timothy III. 15, 16, 17. which should move us to
follow his Exhortation in the foregoing Epistle, 1 Timothy IV. 13, 15. Give
attendance to reading, etc. Meditate on these things, give your selves wholly
to them, that your profiting may appear to all, or in all things.

For this end you must join with this, such other Studies, as tend to lead you
into a right understanding of the Holy Scriptures: Of this you were admonished
also at your Ordination; when you promised to be diligent in reading the Holy
Scriptures, and in such studies as help to the knowledge of the same, laying
aside the study of the World and of the Flesh. And chiefly you are to study to
understand the Language, in which the Holy Scriptures were Originally delivered
to the Church: especially the New Testament; in which we ought to be as
perfect, as Lawyers are in Littleton's Tenures. For this is our standing Rule,
of Faith, and Manners: in which if we be not well skilled our selves, we shall
never be able to direct others. And next to this, it is necessary to study
diligently some approved Commentator upon the Bible; especially Dr. Hammond on
the New Testament: which is not only to be read over, but to be digested so
that you may be Masters of the sense of our Savior and his Holy Apostles. I
shall not lanch out into any further directions about the study of the Fathers,
and the Church History, which are necessary to accomplish a complete Divine:
for that would swell this Book to a much greater bulk, than I design it should
have.

To conclude this Section, let Ezra that Restorer of Religion among the Jews be
your pattern: who tells us himself, that he was a ready Scribe in the Law of
Moses, VII Ezra 6. Such we should be, well versed in the Holy Scriptures,
especially in the Laws of Christ: so as to have them ready at hand for our
purpose. And in the 10th Verse, he tells us how he came to deserve this
Character. First, he had prepared his heart to seek the Law of the LORD. i. e.
understand it: and then Secondly, it follows, he prepared his heart to do it:
that is, to act according to his knowledge; and so, to teach Israel statutes and
judgments.

SECT. II.
Which that we may be able to do with good success, we ought as the Psalmist
speaks most emphatically, give our selves unto prayer, CXIX Psalm. 4. This is a
duty incumbent upon all private Christians, whom our Savior and his Apostles
command, to pray always, and to pray without ceasing, and to watch unto prayer:
but the Ministers of Christ ought more especially, to be instant and incessant
in it; because they have need of a special assistance and blessing from above,
upon their labors to make others good Christians.

Which cannot be done without the blessed presence of God's Holy Spirit with
us: which must constantly and earnestly be implored; to give us a right
judgment in all things; to fill us with a lively sense of Divine Matters, and
to enable us to convey it into the Minds and Hearts of others.

Of this also we are put in mind at our Ordination; and therefore should never
forget it. For in that admirable Exhortation, which goes before the Questions
to which we are to make Answers, the great excellence, and the great difficulty
of our Office is represented to us; to make us sensible what need we have to
pray earnestly for God's Holy Spirit: without which it is impossible for us to
have either a will or ability to perform it as we ought. And accordingly this
is one of the things, which immediately after we promise to God and to his
Church: That we will be diligent in Prayers, as well as in reading the Holy
Scriptures.

Let us therefore, as it follows in the forenamed Exhortation, Pray continually
to God the Father, by the Mediation of our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
for the heavenly Assistance of the Holy Ghost. For as the Holy Scriptures are
(...) the Door whereby the good Shepherd enters to the performance of his
Office, as Theophylact I observed before Expounds our Savior's words, X John
1. So the Holy Spirit of God, in the opinion of the same Father, is the (...)
mentioned in the third Verse of that Chapter, which we translate the Porter, or
the Doorkeeper, who opens the Door for us; and lets us into the sense of the
holy Scriptures. So his words are; because by the Holy Spirit, the Scriptures
being opened and understood, Christ is made known to us; therefore it is called
the Doorkeeper. (...), etc. By whom he being the Spirit of Wisdom and
Knowledge, the Scriptures are opened unto us: and by that means, our Lord the
good Shepherd enters to take us into his care and conduct.

To be Strangers then to this Holy Duty, is to be Strangers to God, and to all
that is good: who as He is nigh to all those that call upon him faithfully; so
he withdraws himself from those who neglect him. Of which we cannot be guilty,
if we remember, in what need we stand above all other Men, of his blessed
Presence with us, to guide, and strengthen, and further us in the discharge of
our weighty trust for his Honor, and the Salvation of Men. This will stir us
up not only to ask, and seek, but knock also (as our Savior Speaks) that is
pray with the greatest importunity for the Holy Spirit, which our Heavenly
Father is more ready to give, than Parents are to give food to their hungry
Children.

Let us be awakened by the example of King David, who prevented the morning
light to pray to God, and to meditate in his Statutes, as he tells us, CXIX
Psalm. 147, 148. Though he was a man that had abundance of Cares upon him, and
was engaged in many Wars (as Theodoret glosses upon that place) yet God still
was in all his thoughts; without whose aid he durst not undertake any thing,
much less hope for success in his Affairs. And shall we who have no such load
of business upon us, roll our ^e^ves up and down in ease, and (as that Father
there speaks) (...), etc. not so much as in the beginning of the day, offer up
an hymn of Praise and Thanksgiving to the giver of all good things; and implore
his Blessing upon us? A most stupid negligence, and an unpardonable
insensibleness of our constant and most bountiful benefactor: without whom we
can do nothing.

His Grace and Mercy we ought to seek as soon as we rise; and as often, as we
can in the day; retiring our selves on purpose into our Closets, to beseech him
to be with us in our Studies, and in our Labors for the good of Souls. For as
Clemens Alexandrinus speaks (Lib. VII. Strom.) a Priest ought to be of such an
heavenly Spirit, that (...), his whole life is Prayer, and Conversation with
God. Which St. Basil (in his Homily upon the Martyr Julitta) thinks is the
Apostles meaning, when he bids us, Pray without ceasing: not by putting up
Petitions to Heaven perpetually, in so many words (for that is impossible)
(...), etc. but rather by the settled Disposition of our mind, and bent of our
Wills toward God (into which our Prayers ought to put us and preserve us
therein) and by a regular Life: whereby we shall draw down still more of his
Grace upon us.

For this I must observe in the Conclusion of this part of my Discourse; that
careless and frigid Prayers, which make no alteration in our selves, have no
effect with God. To whom we must address our selves with such fervent and
earnest Desires, as turn our Hearts toward him; and give us such a lively
sense of him, as brightens and chears our minds, knits our Wills and Affections
to him, and makes us like him. Thus Daniel represents this Duty to us, when he
complains of the Children of Israel, that They did not make their prayer to the
LORD their God, to turn from their iniquity, and to understand the truth, IX.
Dan. 13. Which as it denotes their dull formality in their Prayers, (which no
doubt they continually made in their Captivity) whereby they were not converted
to God, and reformed in their lives: So it implies withal that serious and
devout Prayer, has a power in it to turn about the Heart, and give God the
possession of it: which is the best way to understand the truth.

Employ therefore as much time as you can, in secret Prayer to God; with such
Affection, that you may feel your selves really bettered by it. Pray for your
selves and pray for your Flock (that God would bless your Labors among them,
and pour the Dew of his Heavenly Grace upon them) for the whole Church of
Christ; yea for all Mankind. For such is the Nobleness of this Duty, that in
the exercise of it, we extend our Charity to all the World, which we cannot do
by any other means. It enlarges our Souls into a kind of infinity and immensity
in our good Desires and Wishes; and in the readiness of our Mind to do good to
every one, were it in our power.

SECT. III.
Thus having briefly laid before you the private Duties intumbent on the
Ministers of Christ, I proceed to those which are of a public Concernment. And
in treating of them, I shall take them into consideration, in that Order
wherein they lie in the public Liturgy of our Church.

Where the first thing that presents it self unto us, is the Order for MORNING
and EVENING Prayer, daily throughout the year. Which is to be performed by him
that Ministers in every Parish Church or Chapel, being at home, and not being
otherwise reasonably hindered. This is the standing Law of this Realm; and a
most reasonable Law it is. For who can imagine, that God who so strictly
enjoined the Jews, to offer to him a Lamb every morning and every evening at
the Temple, to double this Sacrifice on their Sabbath, does not expect that we
(who are made a peculiar people to him, by far greater benefits than were
conferred on them) should offer unto him the Sacrifice of prayer, and praise
and thanksgiving, Morning and Evening in our Churches? All Christians from the
beginning ever did it. At this day all the Eastern Churches, both Greek and
Armenian constantly do it. I need say nothing of the practice of the Roman
Church; which in this matter is truly Catholic. The Lutherans and Calvinists
(as they are called) in Germany, have their daily public Offices; and full
Congregations. The Socinians in Poland, as Ruarus tells us (Cent. 2. Epist.
page 99.) had public Prayers Morning and Evening, which lasted three Quarters
of an Hour. Yea, the Mahometans themselves have their stated times of Prayer;
five times in the day. For Mahomet had so much sense, as to call Prayer, The
Pillar of Religion (as Dr. Pocock observes upon Abul-Pharagii, p. 304.) For
take this away, and Religion falls to the ground: as this Pillar of i^ will
soon do, if it be not supported by public Assemblies.

How they came to be so much disused among us, here in this Church, except only
on Sundays it is sad to consider, and extremely to be lamented. We herein
forsake the practice of all Churches; and fall short of those who are not
Christians. The Constitutions indeed of our Church, are conformable to all
others; and strictly enjoin that which we do not now practice. Which is a
public Witness against us, that we are degenerated from our first Principles;
and by degrees grown cold and remiss in our Religion. The fault perhaps may
have been very much in the People; but it is to be feared we have been to blame
also: in not admonishing them of their Duty, and calling upon them to assemble
themselves daily to Worship their blessed Lord and Savior.

It must be allowed, that in some Parishes, the Houses are so scattered, and
lie so far distant from the Church, that they cannot possibly meet together
daily for the Public Service of God. But this Plea cannot, with any appearance
of truth, be made for all Parishes; especially for Market Towns: where the
Houses are built closer together, and not far from the place of public
Worship. Many are at leisure also in such Parishes, to attend daily, if they
had Hearts to do it, upon the public Prayers: Whatsoever may be alleged in
the excuse of poor laboring People.

Therefore use your best endeavors to bring the People to a sense of their
Duty, in this matter; and to the performance of it: where no tolerable reason
can be given for the neglect of so necessary a part of our Religion; and which
tends so much to the honor of it, and to the Glory of God. To attempt such a
good thing, though you should not succeed in it, will give you great
satisfaction. But whosoever considers the Condition of the Cities of London and
Westminster, as they were formerly, and as they are now, will not despair of
Success. For before our unnatural Civil War, I have been informed by a Reverend
Divine, there were few Churches in those Cities, where daily public Prayers
were read; and where they were, very few People to join with the Minister in
them. But now there are very few Churches that want them; or a Congregation to
attend them. And though such Assemblies were but thin, when this first begun, a
little after the happy Restoration of our Monarchy and Church; yet I my self
can witness, that their Numbers daily increased: in so much that in some places
there are public Prayers four times a day, and good Congregations; where, in
my Memory, there were none at all.

This is a great Encouragment to try what may be done in other great Towns;
where People are not far distant from the Church.

Begin with persuasions to come, at least, upon Litany days: And so, by
degrees, they may be induced to wait upon God constantly at his House, to make
their Prayers and Acknowledgments to him. Represent to them frequently how much
the public Service of God, excels all that we can perform in Private: Because
then God appears more glorious in Praises, when his People join together to set
them forth. Bid them mark how David and other inspired Persons, have, in the
Book of Psalms, stirred up the Affections of the whole Body of God's People, to
meet together for his Divine Service: saying, O praise the LORD, all ye
nations: praise him all ye people, CXVII. 1. O magnify the LORD with me, and
let us exalt his name together, XXXIV. 3. Praise ye the LORD. Sing unto the
LORD a new song, and his praise in the congregation of Saints, CXLIX. 1. Or, as
it is in the Hymn appointed every day, after the second Lesson at Morning
Prayer, C Psalm. 4. O go your way into his Gates with thanksgiving, and into his
Courts with praise: be thankful unto him, and speak good of his Name. In short
instruct them, that every Hallelujah, they meet withal in the Holy Scriptures,
or, Praise ye the LORD, suppose public Assemblies (to which all the foregoing
Exhortation are directed) where many met together for Divine Worship: not
contenting themselves to praise God alone by themselves; but with all those who
were Members of the same Body with them.

But if by all your endeavors you cannot bring this to pass, yet there is one
thing of which I must admonish you, that I am sure is in your power. It is
this, That all Priests and Deacons are bound by the Law of this Realm and of
this Church, to say daily Morning and Evening Prayer privately, when they
cannot openly: Not being let by sickness, or some other urgent Cause. See the
first Rubric in the Common Prayer Book, after the Preface, concerning the
Service of the Church: Do not fail therefore, I beseech you, to read the daily
Prayers, Morning and Evening, privately in your own Family: That the Divine
Service, according to Law, may be performed daily in every Parish, though not
every Church. There cannot be constantly nor commonly urgent Causes, much less
Sickness, I hope, to hinder this: And when there is not, look upon your selves
as bound in Conscience, to read the Prayers at home.

And when you do officiate Publicly on the Lord's Days, or other times, in the
Church, let it be in such a solemn manner; that it may move the People to
attend, and make them in love with our Prayers. There is a careless, overly way
of reading them, so fast, and with such little Devotion, as has exceedingly
disgraced them: and given great offense to the better sort of People among us,
and hardened the bad in Profaneness and Irreligion. I hope none of you are guilty
of this; but it becomes me to admonish you of the danger of it, and to beseech
you constantly to compose your selves with the greatest seriousness, and
reverence, and affection, to perform Divine Service in the Church. This will
keep up the Majesty of our Worship, and preserve it from Contempt. For I can
see nothing that should move those that Dissent from us, to call it dead and
formal, but only the deadness and formality that has appeared too often in him
that Officiates. Stir up your selves therefore to Officiate in every part of
the Divine Service, with a becoming Gravity and Deliberation; and yet with such
Life and Affection, as may express your Concern to have your Petitions Granted,
and the word of God Regarded.

Avicenna (as he is vulgarly called) an Arabian Philosopher, has an excellent
Discourse upon this Subject, in the third part of his Metaphysics: Where
having said that they who instruct the People, ought to teach them Forms of
Prayer, wherein to address themselves to God. He adds this Direction to them.
As a Man uses to prepare himself to come to the King, in purity and cleanness;
with graceful Language, and an humble Gravity: with a comely Deportment of
Body; ceasing from all disorderly Motions there, as well as from perturbation
of mind: so it is fit there should be laudable Modes and Forms of serving God
at all times. For these do highly conduce to imprint on the minds of the People
a sense of the most high: and to confirm them in their Devotion to the Laws and
Rules of Life. Which if they were not preserved by this solemn Commemoration;
Men would quite forget in one or two Generations. Thus I find him quoted by Mr.
Seldom in his Comment. in Eutichii Origines, fol. 57. And he does but express
the sense of the Ancient Christians; from whom the Mahometans derived that
solemnity and seriousness which they use in their Divine Service.

It is no small part of the Study of Priests in the present Roman Church, to
learn how to compose their Looks, and Gestures, and Voices; in the several
Offices which they are to perform. Which as it has too much of the Theater in
it, so that pains may all be spared, by possessing our Minds with a deep sense
and feeling of the Majesty of God to whom we speak; and of our great need of
the things which we pray him to bestow upon us. This will naturally compose our
Countenances, and regulate the tone of our Voice, and make us pronounce the
Prayers as gracefully, as we would a Petition to the greatest Majesty on Earth.
The Organs of Speech indeed in several Men, are of a very different Frame and
Figure; so that all cannot speak no more than sing alike: But some more
harshly, some more sweetly. Yet an awful Sense of God upon our Minds, and an
hearty Love to him, would form every Man's Voice to as good an Accent, as his
natural Capacity will permit.

SECT. IV.
The next Office in our Liturgy, is The Order for the Administration of the
Holy Communion; which being the highest Duty of our Religion, that which is
most peculiar Christian Worship; the greatest Care ought to be taken about the
due Performance of it. That is:

1. First of all you ought to invite your People to a frequent Participation of
it. We are not told in Scripture how often we are to do this in remembrance of
our Savior: But when we consider, that this is the end and intention of it, to
Commemorate the wonderful Love of our Lord, in his Death and Passion for our
sakes, we cannot think fit to let there be a long time between one communion
and another. Especially when we consider that the first Christians, it is
manifest, met together every LORDS Day, at least, to magnify the mercy of God,
in giving his only begotten Son to be our Redeemer; and the inconceiveable love
of the Son of God, in making himself an Offering for our Sins. This they
thought their great business, when they assembled together; so that our
Assemblies never look so like Christian Assemblies, as when the Holy Communion
is celebrated.

2. In order to which frequently open to your People, the Nature, Necessity,
and the great Benefits of communion with Christ, and one with another, in this
Holy Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood. Answer their Scruples, and remove
their Objections: but especially awaken them out of that lazy indifference
wherein too many live; whether they live like Christians or no.

3. When the time is appointed for its Administration, warn them to prepare
themselves for it; and direct them how to do it: and require them who intend to
partake of it, to signify their Names to you, at least, sometime the day
before. So the first Rubric before the Order for Administering the Holy
Communion, requires with great reason: because you ought to have time to do
what follows.

4. If any Person in your Parish, be a notorious evil liver, or have done any
wrong to his Neighbors, either by word or deed, so that the Congregation be
thereby offended, you ought, having knowledge thereof, to admonish him (as the
next Rubric directs) to amend his naughty Life; and not presume to come to the
Lord's Table, till the Congregation be satisfied of his Repentance; and that he
has made such a recompense to those he has wronged, as they accept of. The
like is to be done when you perceive Malice and Hatred to reign among any of
your Parish: endeavoring to bring them to a reconciliation; before you suffer
them to partake of the Holy Communion.

5. And more than this, the Third Rubric requires you, if these private
endeavors have no effect, openly to repel such Persons from the Communion, if
they offer themselves to receive it, who will not be reconciled, nor reformed:
giving notice of their obstinacy to the Ordinary, within the time there
prescribed.

6. In the Administration of the Holy Communion, compose your selves, to the
most serious and solemn deportment, and perform every part of this most
Christian service, with the highest degree of Devotion. So St. Justin Martyr
tells us, in his Second Apology (where he gives an account of what was done in
the Christian Assemblies in his time) that Bread, Wine and Water, being set
before him that presided, He sends up Prayers and Thanksgivings (...), with
all his Power, or Might. Which is an expression that has been much abused by
those who separate from us, to prove that no forms of Prayer were used in the
Church in those days: but he who officiated, conceived a Prayer of his own, as
well as he was able. So they interpret that Phrase (...): which is manifestly
an expression of that earnestness of Devotion with which the Bishop or Priest
came to Consecrate the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood. It being a Phrase
very much used among the Jews, when they speak of their Prayers; For their
Ancient Doctors, have this saying among them (as our excellent Mr. Thorndike
observes) Whosoever says Amen WITH ALL HIS MIGHT, the gate of the Garden of
Eden is opened to him: And Maimonides describing their Morning Service uses
the same form of Speech. The People answer, Amen: be his great name Blessed for
ever and ever, WITH ALL THEIR MIGHT: See Service of God at Religious
Assemblies, Chap. VII. To which may be added what we read in the Apostolical
Constitutions; where there is a large Form of Thanksgiving at the Eucharist,
for all Gods Blessings; Especially in our Lord Christ, from his Incarnation to
his Sufferings, Death and Resurrection: And then it follows, Therefore being
mindful of these things, which he suffered for us, We give Thee thanks, O
Almighty God, (...), not so much as we ought, but as much as we are able. Which
exactly answers to the (...) ALL THE MIGHT in Justim Martyr, and explains the
meaning of it.

But there have been so many excellent Books written about the Holy Communion,
that I will enlarge no further upon this Subject.

SECT. V.
In that Office there is a Rubric directing where the Sermon is to come in:
and therefore I shall in the next place say something to you concerning
Preaching. Which is a Duty to be performed by every Priest, according to the
Authority given to him at his Ordination, in those words, Take thou Authority
to Preach the Word of God, and to Minister the Holy Sacraments, in the
Congregation, where thou shall be lawfully appointed thereunto: And the Prayer
made after the Ordaining of Priests, That God's Word spoken by their mouths,
may have such success, that it may never be spoken in vain.

Now to make it thus successful a great many directions might be usefully
given, concerning both the Matter of Sermons, and their Form; their Style also,
and manner of Delivery, with distinct Pronunciation, and such like: into which
if I should launch out, they alone would be sufficient to fill a little Book. I
shall therefore only briefly desire you to consider, the state and condition of
your Auditory, and to suit your Discourses thereunto. Country People are not to
be troubled with Controversies and Disputes; but to be plainly taught, what to
believe and practice.

1. Therefore endeavor to instruct and settle their minds in the Principles of
Religion. And for this end study well the Works of Two Late Bishops of Chester.
One of which (Dr. Wilkins) has wrote a Treatise of Natural Religion: and the
other (Dr. Pierson) has given a full account of the Christian, in his
admirable Book upon the Apostles Creed.

2. Especially instruct them in the great Fundamental Article of our Religion,
the Divinity of our Blessed Lord and Savior; and of the Holy Ghost: showing
them how all our comfort is built upon this. And truly I look upon it as a
singular Providence of God, that he did not (...) Heretics who now boldly
strike at this great Article of our Faith, to start up in an ignorant Age; but
in a time when there are so many able Men in the Church to beat them down. God
has furnished us with a great number of such excellent Persons, as have
thoroughly studied the Holy Scriptures, and the Ancient Doctors of the Church:
And they who have not had opportunity to make such improvement in Divine
Knowledge, may furnish themselves out of their Writings, which these Heretics
have occasioned. Particularly out of the Bishop of Worcester's Discourse about
the Blessed Trinity; which is not long, but very full and satisfactory.

3. Yet I must admonish you, when you find it necessary to discourse to your
People upon this Subject, that you be mindful of His Majesty's late
Injunctions; and not presume to invent any new ways of explaining so sublime a
Mystery, as the Holy Trinity, or use any other terms to express it, but such as
the Ancient Christians used, and are in the Articles of our Religion, the Three
Creeds, and our Liturgy. Which teach us, that our Blessed Savior is the Son of
God, in the highest and most proper sense of these Words, by Eternal
Generation. In like manner we are to believe that the Holy Ghost is God,
proceeding from the Father and the Son. This may be evidently proved out of the
Scriptures, wherein God has thus far revealed his own most Blessed Nature, as
well as his Mind and Will unto us. But how the Son is Begotten of the Father,
and how the Holy Ghost proceeds from both he has not revealed unto us (because
it is as incomprehensible, as the Divine Essence is) and therefore we must not
adventure to say any thing about it. For though we know that the Son is God,
and the Holy Ghost is God, and yet there are not Three Gods, but one God in
Three Persons (because the Holy Scriptures plainly declare the Son to be a
distinct Person from the Father, and the Holy Ghost from both) yet what it is
that makes the distinction of the Person of the Son, from the Person of the
Father, etc. that is not declared to us by God, who only knows it, and
therefore is not to be enquired into. Accordingly the Holy Fathers of the
Church frequently admonish us to forbear such enquiries, in that Memorable
saying of theirs, (...) search not into the manner, how such things can be, but
shun such enquiries. For the manner of the Sons Generation, and the Holy Ghosts
Procession, can be comprehended by none but themselves.

But such things being let alone, as out of our reach, let it be your business
to establish the People in this great Truth, that Jesus Christ is really the
Eternal Son of God, begotten of him before all Worlds: By representing this to
them as the great support of their Souls; which may safely rely upon one so
mighty to save. For he who is persuaded that our Savior, is perfect God, as
well as perfect Man, can no more doubt of his Power to communicate all Divine
Grace to us; than he can doubt of the Virtue of his Sacrifice, to make
satisfaction for our Sins, and work our Reconciliation with God: whereby
whatsoever might hinder his Divine Communications to us, is taken out of the
way. We are sure, if this be true, that he is an Everlasting Spring of Divine
Grace, to the whole World; would they but believe on him: Whereas it is
inconceivable how any mere Creatures, should be so highly exaulted, as to be
possessed of Omnipotence and Omniscience; that is to be able to know all our
needs, as well as to supply them. Which it is easy for our Blessed Savior to
do, if he be the Eternal Son of God; who has taken out Nature into a personal
Union with himself.

4. Which great truth being firmly established in their belief, endeavor I
beseech you to improve it all you are able, to the amendment of their lives.
Such an amazing love of God, ought to have a mighty effect upon us all; and
will make a great change in us, if it be heartily believed, and pressed home by
serious consideration. Let that therefore be the great business of your
Preaching, to reduce this and all other Christian Truths, to Christian
Practice. Make them sensible what manner of Persons they ought to be in all
holy Conversation and Godliness (as St. Peter speaks) being so nearly related
to the Son of God. Whatsoever Sin you know them to be addicted unto, lay the
heynousness of it before them; especially after God has loved us so much, as
to give his only begotten Son to redeem us from all iniquity, and purify us to
himself a peculiar people zealous of good Works. Whatsoever duty you know them
to neg lect, or to be remiss in the performance of it, represent to them how
dangerous it is to disobey our Blessed Savior, who has made this the test of
our love to him; that we keep his Commandments. Remember them frequently of
what he said to his Disciples, in his last Discourse he had with them, XV John
14. Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.

5. Endeavor to convince their judgment about these things, by clear Reasons;
and then to awaken their Affections by your Zeal and Fervor. And that will be
excited in you, by an inward sense and feeling in your own hearts, of that
which you deliver to your People. It is an admirable observation of Erasmus (in
his Book De ratione Concionandi) upon those words of our Savior concerning
John the Baptist, V John 35. He was a burning and a shining Light. ARDERE PRIUS
EST, LUCERE POSTERIUS. To burn (with Zeal, that is, for God, and fervent
affection to the People) is the first thing; and then we shall shine, by
Christian instructions. Which will be faint and feeble, if they do not proceed
from an ardent Spirit.

6. And there is very much in another thing of which the same great Man, put me
in mind, in another part of his Works; Lib. V. Epist. 27. Where he tells
Jodocus Jonas, Non parum ponderis adder orationi tuae, si quae doces,
potissimum ex arcanis voluminibus haurias, si vita doctrinae responderit; si
docendi Officium, nulla gloriae, nulla quaestus suspitione vitietur. It will
add no small weight to thy Sermons, if thou draw those things that thou tacheth
chiefly out of the Holy Scriptures; if thy life be correspondent to thy
Doctrine: and the Office of instructing, be tainted with no suspicion of vain
glory, or worldly advantage. The proof of what you say out of the Holy
Scriptures, rightly expounded and fitly applied, will certainly make it very
powerful. For what is there that has so much force in it; as the Authority of
God? All Believers have a great reverence to his Word; which the Ancient
Christians thought the highest learning. Insomuch that the Abyssines (who
retain much of the ancient Simplicity) are never so pleased, as to hear the
Word of God alleged; and the more Scripture any Man has in his Sermons, the
more learned they esteem him. So Ludolphus informs us in his late Historica
Ethiopica, Lib. III. Cap. V. N. 16.

7. And there is nothing in the Holy Scripture that you ought to explain with
greater care, or inculcate more frequently, than the Covenant of Grace, which
God has made with us in Christ. The terms and conditions of which you should
endeavor to make your People thoroughly to understand; both on Gods part, and
on their own: together with the Mediator of this Covenant, and the means
whereby he purchased such gracious Conditions of Salvation for us.

But above all things we must take the greatest care that our life, do not
contradict our Doctrine: for it is not sufficient that our Conversation in this
World be innocent and unblameable, but we must endeavor to make it exemplary
and useful: It must be so ordered as to convince the People that we firmly
believe, the excellence of those Virtues which we commend to them: and that our
chief aim and design, is to save their Souls. This will procure us love and
esteem; and make the People look upon us with Reverence, as Men of God. Our
Office, which is indeed very honorable, is not sufficient to secure us from
contempt; if we act not according to it. Nay, men are prone to pry into our
lives, to see if they can find a justification of their own evil Practices, by
ours. Which is the argument that Isidorus Peleusiota uses to a Bishop to be
very cautious (Lib. IV. Epist. 219.) (...). because his Life is scanned, and
strictly examined, by a thousand eyes and tongues.

I shall say nothing particularly of our care to avoid, any tang of Vain Glory,
and desire of applause in our Preaching; but conclude this matter, with this
plain admonition. That in an age so degenerate, as that we now live in, we
ought to give all diligence, to shine as Lights in the World, as well as to be
harmless and blameless, the Sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Nation; holding forth the Word of Life: by our examplary
conversation, that is, as well as by Preaching, II Philip. 15, 16. This St.
Paul there makes the duty of all Christians: but above all it concerns the
Ministers of Christ; whom he himself calls (V Mat. 13. 14.) in a peculiar
manner, the Salt of the Earth, and the Light of the World. And there never was
greater need than now, that we should study to season Men, not only with
wholesome Doctrine, but an holy Example: that we may preserve them from the
Corruption, which is in the World through lust. There is a most dangerous
putrefaction of manners (as I may call it) which has so universally spread
among us, that I look upon the Nation as lost, if we should lose our Savor.
Nothing can then preserve it from utter ruin and destruction. And therefore let
us distinguish our selves from others, by our diligence in our calling, by our
exemplary Piety and Holiness; that if it be possible, we may save our Nation
from perishing.

SECT. VI.
The next Office wherein you are concerned, is the Ministration of Baptism of
Infants. Concerning which I shall only briefly admonish you of these things
following.

1. First, that it is your duty to instruct your People frequently, in the
nature of this Sacrament: that they may not imagine it an indifferent thing
whether their Children be Baptized or no; nor bring them carelessly to the
Font, as an old Ceremony that has been long used in the Church: But they may
look upon it as, indeed it is, a solemn dedication of their Children to Christ,
and their entrance into the Covenant of Grace; which they stand bound sacredly
to keep. And consequently call upon them often to consider their Children after
this, as Christ's Children; by whom they are regenerate and boru again: and
therefore ought to be carefully brought up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord. VI Ephesians. 4.

2. More particularly put them in mind that in Baptism a solemn profession is
made of belief in the Blessed Trinity: that is of God, in Three Persons,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Unto whose Service we are there devoted. For it is
no frivilous observation of Theophylact upon those Words of our Savior, XXVIII
Mat. 19. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, That (...); he does not say, Baptize
them into the Names, but into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. For
though they be three, yet their Name, viz. (...), Their Godhead is but one, as
he there explains it. One God in three Persons, of whose Love and Favor we are
assured in Baptism: and should value it above all the Riches in the World.

3. And therefore admonish them what care they ought to take to give up their
Children, as soon as they can to this Blessed Trinity: That they may be under
their Care, and partake of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the Love
of God, and the Communion, or Communication, of the Holy Ghost, as St. Paul
speaks, 2 Corinthians. XIII. 14. And the first Rubric before the Office for
private Baptism directs them to admonish the People often, that they defer not
the Baptism of their Children, longerthan the first or Second Sunday next after
their birth, or other Holy Day falling between; unless upon a great and
reasonable Cause to be approved by you.

4. Next of all you are bound by the following Rubric, to warn them, that
without great Cause and Necessity, they procure not their Children to be
Baptized at home in their Houses. The reason of which is given in the first
Rubric before the Office of Public Baptism, which sets forth the convenience
of administering Baptism, only upon Sundays or other Holy Days, when the most
number of People come together: First, For that the Congregation there present
may testify the receiving of such as be newly Baptized into the Number of
Christ's Church; and Secondly, that every Man present may be put in remembrance
of his own Profession made to God in his Baptism. Which are such wise and holy
Reasons, that every Man of Conscience, who is Considerate, will yield unto them.

5. Advise Parents also about the Choice of Godfather and Godmothers, and of
the usefulness of them. First, about their Choice, that they be such Persons as
have a sense of Religion and understand it; and will take some care, it may be
hoped, of their Children, if they themselves should die before they be grown
up. It is supposed that as long as Parents live, they will put their Children
in mind of their Vow in Baptism: which is the reason that no new Obligation,
besides that they have already, is laid upon them, by making them Sureties for
their Children. But without this solemn undertaking for them, other Men would
not be so ready to assist them, and look after their Education; as it is to be
hoped this will make them. Which shows the other thing; the usefulness of this
Institution: Which in the beginning of our Religion, was in a manner absolutely
necessary. For when Parents were sometimes snatched on a sudden from their
Children, by bloody Persecutors: They might have been brought up in Paganism,
if these Spiritual Parents had not been engaged to look after them, and instill
Christian Principles into them.

6. You give a charge, after Baptism, to the Godfathers and Godmothers, that
they take care, the Child be brought to the Bishop to be confirmed by him, so
soon as he is fit for it: And therefore you would do well to remember them, as
you have opportunity, of this part of their Duty; and in order to it to see
they be instructed in the Church Catechism set forth for that purpose.

SECT. VII.
Which is the next part of your care diligently, upon Sundays, and Holy Days,
to instruct and examine openly in the Church, so many of the Children of your
Parish sent unto you, as you shall think convenient, in some part of the
CATECHISM. They are the very words of the first Rubric, in the end of that
Office where, in the next Rubric, Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and Dames, are
ordered to cause their Children, Servants, and Prentices (which have not learnt
their Catechism) to come to the Church at the time appointed, and obediently to
hear and to be ordered by you, till they have learned all that is appointed in
the Catechism for them to learn. It is to be hoped they will do this, if you
call upon them, and beseech them to take care of it: letting them know that you
are ready and desirous to perform your Duty, if they will do theirs.

And mark, I beseech you, what is required of you, not only to examine the
Children in the Catechism, (that is, to ask them the questions, and receive
their answers) but to instruct them therein; that is, teach them the meaning,
and make them understand the weight of every word. If you would spend a quarter
of an Hour, in this exercise all the Summer long, when the days are long, at
Evening Prayer, after the Second Lesson (as the Rubric appoints) it would be
of wonderful use both to your selves, and to your People. I say to your selves
as well as the Parish: because it would put you upon Considering, Collecting
and Digesting, such proper places of Scripture as relate to every Article of
the Creed, and to the Commandments, and to all other parts of the Catechism.
And upon studying also and framing the plainest and clearest Explications, and
Illustrations of every Point; couched in so few words, that they might easily
be carried away and remembered. Which being once well done, it would serve you
all your Life: The same thing being to be repeated over and over again every
Year. For I suppose you may be able once a Year to go through the whole
Catechism: Which would certainly edify your People very much, and make them
more capable to understand your Sermons, by having a clear Notion of many
Terms, which you have constant occasion to use in them. It would bring People
also to Church in the Afternoon: For they would soon perceive this short
Instruction to be as useful as any Sermon. And consequently they would observe
the Lord's day better: For I cannot but think, that many would by this means,
have your Explication of the Catechism by Heart; and be able to instruct their
Children again at home.

I shall quicken you to this, by what I find was done about it in the Reign of
King James I. who sent strict Orders to the Archbishop of Canterbury, both
concerning Preaching and Catechizing; especially the latter: Which he would
have by all means continued in the Afternoon, according to the former custom in
England (so his words are) which it seems then began to be disused. And of this
the Lord Keeper Williams says the King was so desirous, that he declared, If
his Bishops would not take care that it should be done, he would recommend it
to the care of the Civil Magistrate. And in a Letter to the Bishop of London,
he tells him the reason of all this. He saw many going away to Popery, or
Anabaptism, or other points of Separation, and considering with much
admiration, what should be the cause of it (especially since he opposed both so
much himself) he could think of none in greater probability, than the
lightness, affectedness, and unprofitableness, of that kind of Preaching, which
had of late Years been much taken up in Court, University, and Country. The
usual scope of very many Preachers being noted to be soaring up in points of
Divinity, too deep for the Capacity of the People; or the mustering up a great
deal of reading; or the displaying of their own Wit; or an ignorant meddling
with Civil Matters; or the venting their own Distasts, etc. So the People being
bred up with this kind of teaching, and never instructed in the CATECHETICAL
and Fundamental Points of Religion, were easily led aside from their Religion,
either by Papists, or Anabaptists, or other Sectaries. This I find in the
Cabala of Letters, p. 112. which is necessary to be considered now: Because
since that time, the Explication of the Catechism in the Afternoons has been
much neglected; unto which we have reason to impute the instability of many
Souls in their Religion.

SECT. VIII.
When the Children of your Parish are thoroughly instructed in the
Church-Catechism, and are come to a competent Age, (as the words of the third
Rubric are, in the end of that Office) you are to take care that they be
brought to the Bishop, to be Confirmed by him.

Now such little Children as are commonly presented to the Bishop, cannot be
thought to be of a competent Age. Which is explained, both in the Title of the
Order of Confirmation, and the Preface to it, to signify such as are come to
years of Discretion. That is, to understand what they do; and consent to renew
the solemn Promise and Vow, that was made in their Name at their Baptism,
ratifying and confirming the same in their own Persons, and acknowledging
themselves bound to believe and do what their Godfathers and Godmothers
undertook for them.

As you are bound therefore, (by the last Rubric, at the end of the Catechism)
when the Bishop gives notice of his intention to Confirm, either to bring or
send in Writing, with your Hands Subscribed thereunto, the Names of all such
Persons within your Parish, as you shall think fit to be Presented to him to be
Confirmed: So I beseech you take care you set down the Names of none, but such
as have a sense that they take upon themselves an Obligation, to keep their Vow
in Baptism; and are resolved to do their Duty toward God, and toward their
Neighbor, as they have been taught in their Catechism.

In short, I think none ripe to be Confirmed, but such as are fit and disposed,
immediately after it, to receive the Holy Communion of Christ's Body and Blood.
Our Church seems to signify so much, when in the end of this Office it Ordains,
That none be admitted to to the Holy Communion, until such time as he be
Confirmed, or be ready and desirous to be Confirmed. One of these is plainly
here made, a Preparation for the other: And as none should be admitted to the
Communion till they be Confirmed; so being Confirmed (or ready for it, and
desirous of it) I take it none are to be refused the Communion.

It is of the greatest Concernment therefore, that young People be discreet and
serious before they be brought to be Confirmed. Of the Necessity of which King
James beforementioned, was as sensible, as he was of the Necessity of
Catechetical Instruction. For his Son (who was afterward King Charles the
Martyr) was not Confirmed till the thirteenth year of his Age. Then he was
Confirmed on Easter Monday, 1613. in Whitehall-Chappel, after a long and strict
Examination by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Bath and Wells,
as Dr. George Hackwell, who was an Ear-witness of the Satisfaction he gave,
tells us in a little Tractate he wrote upon that Occasion, concerning
Confirmation.

I conclude this Section with these remarkable Words of a famous Divine of our
Church, Dr. Jackson, in his X Book upon the Creed, Chap. 50. (which I have
mentioned, with a great deal more upon this Subject, in a little Book about
Baptism, near Forty Years ago) Whether the solemn Baptizing of all Infants,
which are the Children of presumed Christian Parents, throughout this Kingdom,
without solemn Astipulation, that they shall at years of Discretion, personally
ratify their Vow in Baptism in Public, in such manner as the Church requires,
be not rather more lawful or tolerable, than expedient, I leave with all
submission, to the consideration of higher Powers. In like manner may I be bold
to put this Question, Whether it be to any purpose to admit those to this
solemn Act of Ratifying and Confirming their Vow in Baptism, who are not
arrived at such Years of Discretion, as understandingly to consent thereunto,
and to remember it all the Days of their Life. For I fear many have been
Confirmed, who have no more Memory of what they then did; than they have of
what was done to them in Baptism.

SECT. IX.
The next Office wherein you are concerned, is the Solemnization of Matrimony.
Which though it be not a Sacrament, yet is such an Holy State, that as there is
the greatest reason it should be solemnized with public Rites and Forms by the
Ministers of Christ; so they ought to take care to perform it in a very solemn
manner.

It may be demonstrated, that no Marriage anciently was ever made among
Christians, which the Church did not allow: and the Benediction of Marriage by
the Priest was a sign of that allowance. Nay among the Jews it is manifest from
the Story of Boaz and Ruth, that Marriage was Celebrated before the Elders. IV
Ruth 11. And Epiphanius was of Opinion, that our Lord was invited to the
Marriage of Cana in Galilee; that, as a Prophet he might bless the Marriage.

And therefore it ought to be lebrated in the Church, in as public a manner as
may be; and with such Gravity and seriousness, as becomes the Place, and the
Priestly Function, and the State it self, which is Holy and Honorable. In
order to this, the People are to be instructed often, with what Advice,
Deliberation and Reveence, such a weighty matter, is to be undertaken. Of which
they are excellently admonished in our Liturgy at the time of Marriage: and
should be admonished beforehand, that they may not lightly or wantonly
enterprise it, but discreetly soberly, and in the fear of God.

For the better security of this, keep strictly to LXII Canon, which requires
you to marry none except the Banns of Matrimony have been first Published in
time of Divine Service, three several Sundays, or Holy Days: Or a License have
been obtained to do it without, according to the Canons C. CI. CII. CIII. Which
most reasonably constitute, that none be Married either with License, or after
Banns Published, under the Age of One and Twenty Years complete, without the
consent of their Parents, or of their Guardians and Governors, if their
Parents be deceased.

Remember also that Marriage is to be celebrated publicly in the Parish Church
or Chapel, where one of the Parties dwells, and in no other place, and that
between the hours of Eight and Twelve in the Forenoon. For which reason care is
taken by the Second Rubric in the Office of Matrimony, that if the Persons
that are to be Married dwell in diverse Parishes, the Banns must be asked in
both Parishes; and the Curate of the One Parish shall not Solemnize Matrimony
betwixt them, without a Certificate of the Banns being thrice asked, from the
Curate of the other Parish.

These Laws are the more Sacredly to be observed, because they are for the
preservation of Human Society. Which made Plato say in the beginning of his
Book de Legibus, that the (...), the Laws for the regulating Marriage, should
be the very first, which a Lawgiver should establish: because the Propagation
of Mankind is the support of Cities and Kingdoms: of which if due care be not
taken, all other Laws are in Vain.

This very consideration, that Marriage is Seminarium generis humani (as
Tertullian calls it Lib. 1. ad Uxorem cap. 2.) was sufficient to make our
Church so very cautious in its Constitutions about this important affair: that
those many mischiefs might be prevented, which have insued, from the neglect of
them in many places. Which have been no less than incestuous Mixtures: together
with the ruin of several Families, great grief of Parents, by the disobedience
of their Children: which has quite alienated their Affections one from
another: not to mention the contempt and reproach it has brought upon those of
the Clergy or others, that have had a hand in these irregular actions.

I question not but all imaginable care will be taken in my Diocese, that no
License be granted, but according to the Canon: and, none of My Clergy I
persuade my self, can be so mean, as to let a little Money prevail with them to
dishonor their Holy Calling, by violating those Wise and Pious Constitutions
of our Church, which they have sworn, as I take it, to observe, in their Oath
of Canonical Obedience.

SECT. X.
The next Office which follows in our Liturgy, is that of Visitation of the
Sick; which ought to be attended very seriously; as much, if not more than any
else. For Men are never so sensible of the everlasting concerns of their Souls,
as they are when they lie on a sick Bed. If they had no thought of God before,
no reflections on their ways; they can scarce avoid them, in that condition.
Pliny tells us, he learnt this by the Sickness of a Friend of his, Optimos nos
esse, dum infirmi sumus, that we are then the best Men, when we are sick, Read
a most pithy Epistle of his, which is wholly upon this Subject. Lib. VII.
Epist. XXVI. Where among other things he tells Maximus (to whom it is directed)
then a Man remembers that there are Gods (that you know is the Pagan Language)
and that he himself is but a Man. Then he envies no Man; admires no Man;
despises no Man; Riches signify nothing to him, nor Honors; Lust is
extinguished, etc. all that he desires is, that he may recover his Health,
purposing then to lead an innocent and happy Life. So that whatsoever
Philosophers endeavor to teach in many words and many Volumes; that I may
teach the e and my self in this short Precept: Ut tales esse sani perseveremur,
quales nos futuros profitemur infirmi, that we continue such when we are well,
as we promise to be when we are sick. So he concludes that Epistle.

By which you cannot but see what an opportunity the Sickness of any of your
Parishoners assords you, to help forward the Salvation of their Souls, by your
Prayers, Instructions, and Exhortations: when they are most disposed to receive
them, and to be tenderly affected with them. Do not stay therefore till notice
be sent you by those about them, of any ones Sickness (for they are too apt to
defer it, till there be no hope of life left) but when you hear of it, repair
to such Persons, and apply your selves to them in such discourses as are proper
to their condition.

Examine them, as the Office directs, about their belief in God, and in Jesus
Christ, and all the rest of the Articles of the Christian Faith. If they have
led a bad Life, contrary to their belief, represent to them how highly it
concerns them to repent, and resolve to become new Men. Bid them consider how
much they have neglected God, and his Divine Service (which is a common Sin)
and also what wrong they have done to any of their Neighbors; that they may
make them what Satisfaction they are able. If they have lived in most things
regularly, but been negligent in some Duties; comfort and support them with
this persuasion, that God has sent this Sickness to perfect what was wanting
in them. As for such as have led truly Pious Lives, void of Offense toward God
and toward Man, they are to be strengthened with all the Consolations that are
in Christ; and raised in their hope of Remission of Sin and Eternal Life, which
will banish all fear of Death. By this means not only the sick Person may
receive great Benefit; but all the Bystanders also, who hear your Discourse:
Which may raise such a sense of things in you, as will much improve your selves.

And here I shall admonish you only of one thing more, leaving you to the
directions in the Office, for the rest: That Absolution of Penitents, is a
thing of great moment; which may alone be sufficient to convince you both of
the Dignity, and the Difficulty of your Holy Function. For what an high Honor
is it to be made a Judge of the state of Men's Immortal Souls, and to pronounce
a Sentence upon them, according as you find them, upon Examination? But how
industriously then ought you to labor to understand the Gospel of Christ,
whereby you are to Judge; that you may not pass a wrong Sentance, through
ignorance of the Conditions of Salvation by Christ? Whose promises are made
plainly to an Holy Life, which if it has not been minded, till a Man come to
die; let him not despair of God's Mercy, but take heed how you absolve him in
his Name: For we can make no certain judgment of Men, by what they resolve in
their Sickness, when they have no Temptation to run on in their former Wicked
course of Life: but must stay to see how they will keep their Resolutions,
which they too often break, when they are well. If they do not live to give a
proof of their Sincerity, God notwithstanding, who knows the Secrets of all
Hearts, if he see them to be sincere, and that they would be steadfast, should
they have recovered their Health, will undoubtedly absolve them, though they
depart the World without our Absolution. In short, this may well (as the
Pythagoraeans were wont to admonish their Scholars) make, you reverence your
selves, so as to live up to this Dignity and high Authority, he has committed
to you: and this very Power, if you use it well, will procure you reverence
from others, who understand any thing of Religion.

At the end of this Office, is annexed the Order of Administering the Communion
to the Sick: which Mr. Calvin himself thinks (though it was not the usage of
Geneva) should not be denied to them, if they desired it, and understood what
they did, and were disposed with solemn Resolutions to renew their Covenant
with Christ. But timely notice ought to be given of this desire, with a
signification how many there are to communicate with the Sick Person, which
must be three or two at the least; unless it be in the time of a Plague; or
other Contagious Disease, when the Minister may Communicate with him alone.

SECT. XI.
Concerning the next thing in our Liturgy, which is The Order for the Burial of
the DEAD, there needs not much to be said. But that commonly Men and Women are
apt to be very serious, when they see their Friends and Neighbors laid in
their Graves: and therefore what you are then ordered to say either, when you
meet the Corpse, or in the Church, or at the Grave, should be pronounced with
great Gravity, Earnestness, and Affection; that the Hearts of those who are
present may be moved with it. If you are desired to come to the House of the
Deceased, and thence to accompany the Corpse to the Grave, you may have an
opportunity to put those in mind who sit near to you, of preparation for Death;
which should never be out of our thoughts, but then especially be sensibly
reflected on, when we have a Spectacle of Mortality before our Eyes. Who was as
strong and healthy perhaps as any there present; and yet on a sudden snatched
away. Such things piously represented, are apt, (for the present at least) to
touch Men's Hearts, and make deep impressions there.

SECT. XII.
Of the Churching of Women, after Childbirth, I shall say only this: that the
First Rabrick directs that the Woman, at the usual time after Delivery, shall
come into the Church decently Apparelled, and there kneel down in some
convenient place, as has been accustomed. Now the accustomed place (it appears
by our Old Common Prayer Book before the Restoration) was nigh to the
Communion Table. To put her in mind I suppose, that she should take the next
opportunity, to receive the Holy Communion: if there be none that day, when the
last Rubric declares, it is convenient she should partake of it. Unto this
therefore you are to Exhort her, that she may perfect her acknowledgments of
Gods goodness; by the highest Thanksgiving the Church can offer; and which is
proper and peculiar to Christian People.

SECT. XIII.
The last Office wherein you are concerned, is the Reading the Commination,
which is to be done but once a Year, on the first day of Lent: though the
Prayers then appointed are to be used at other times, as the Ordinary shall
appoint. This if done solemnly, though it seem a thing of no great labor; yet
might have a great effect. For every one knows (or ought to know) that the Lent
Fast was Instituted, to be a time of Repentance: and to bring Men to it, what
can be more effectual than this Denunciation of Gods Anger and Judgments
against Sinners; with most comfortable assurances of Grace and Mercy to the
Penitent?

I know it is hard, as the World goes, to get a Congregation together, upon
that day; when this is required to be read in the Church. You may therefore
read it on the First Sunday in Lent; and then put the Sense of it into your
Sermon: where it may be proper to press them to weigh every part of it
distinctly. And in order to it, remove that foolish Objection, which I have
heard some have in their Mouths, that they cannot endure to Curse their
Neighbors: by showing them plainly, that they are not the Curses of the
People, but of God himself, which he has denounced against Sinners. To which
when the People are ordered to say AMEN, they only consent to the truth of that
which God says. The very Office teaches this, when it declares the end of
reading those Curses gathered out of the XXVII of Deuteronomy and other places
of Scripture, and the Peoples saying Amen to them; that they may flee from such
vices, for which they affirm with their own mouth the Curse of God to be due.
And represent to them also, that whether they will affirm these Curses to be
due, or no; they will fall upon them, if they be such Sinners as are there
named: and the sooner, because they refuse to say Amen to the Words of God:
that is affirm what he affirms, who is the Faithful and the True.

This Cavil being taken away, it will be easy to make them sensible, how
useful it is for them to join with you in this Commination: which may awaken
drousy Souls, to consider and amend their evil doings; that they may escape
those Judgments that are threatened to them, which are unavoidable, if they go
on still in their Sins.

There was something like this among the ancient Jews, who at certain stated
times, were wont to denounce a general Anathema, against all the Israelites,
who knowingly and willingly, violated such and such Laws. A Form of which Mr.
Seldom has given us out of their Ritual, called Colho, Lib. IV. De Jure Not.
and Gent. cap. 7. This it is likely the Christian Church thought fit to
imitate; not by denouncing a formal Anathema, but only by a solemn recital of
the Threatenings in God's Laws, against impenitent Sinners: And their affirming
the truth, and certainty of them. Which in the Romish Church came at last to
such an Anathema as I now mentioned in the Jewish Ritual: called, The greater
Excommunication: which here in England was denounced by every Bishop twice a
year; and by every Parish Priest four times a year, against certain Persons. A
Form of which great Curse, the same most Learned Person has given us, out of
the Ritual, according to the use of the Church of Sarum, in his first Book De
Synedriis, Cap. X. where he observes that in the room of this our first
Reformers only ordered this Maledictory Commination (as he well styles it) to
be used once a Year.

In the beginning of which Commination there is mention made of a godly
Discipline in the Primitive Church, whereby such Persons as stood Convicted of
notorious sins, were in the beginning of Lent put to open Penance. This
Discipline we there wish might be restored again; but seem to suppose, that for
the present, we can only, instead of it, denounce God's anger and judgments
against sinners, and make them say Amen thereunto; whereby they may stand
Convicted in their own Consciences, that they are under the Curse of God, and
so be brought to Repentance. Had we not need then do this very seriously, if it
be all that we can do of this kind? Yet let it be considered, whether we may
not be able to do something more; if we will attempt it. For may not scandalous
Persons be more frequently presented, than they are? May not private
Admonitions, if not public, be more used? Let us not then think fit to do
nothing, because we cannot do all that we would. The right way to enlarge our
Authority, (of the want of which we complain) is to use that which we have
uprightly and faithfully. That is, if we presented none in the Ecclesiastical
Court, till private Applications had been made to them, with seriousness and
earnestness, unsuccessfully; and if it were done without respect to Persons,
Parties, or Interests, we might bring our Courts into that just esteem and
credit, which they ought to have.

And having mentioned private Admonition, let me, in a few words, remember you,
that at your Ordination, you promised to use both public and private monitions
and exhortations, as well to the sick, as to the whole within your Cures, as
need shall require, and occasion shall be given. And perhaps more good might be
done this way than any other; if it were done at fitting times, with as much
secrecy as may be, and with apparent affection to them. In some Cases perhaps
it may be done most effectually, by Letter: which may be sent, when you cannot
have opportunity to speak to them. And here it may be proper to admonish you,
that Dissenters from our Church are thus to be dealt withal; by some way of
private Conference with them, not by Preaching against them, for they are not
there to hear it. Our own People indeed are by public Discourses, as well as
otherways, to be confirmed and established in our Communion: But there is no
way to reduce them, but by private arguing with them. Which is not to be
omitted; because the present act of Indulgence, does not justify them in their
separation, but only suspends the Punishments to which they were before liable.
Still they are in a state of Schism, out of which you should endeavor to
recover them, by kind Persuasions and Arguments, which may work more upon them
than all the Penalties formerly inflicted, which made them Angry, but did not
Convert them.

For the Conclusion of this part of my Treatise, I should upon the mention of
LENT have said something concerning that Fast, and other days of Fasting or
Abstinence, appointed by the Church, which if Men could be persuaded to
observe, as times of Recollection, and Examination of themselves, and Prayer,
they would find great benefit thereby, to the increase of Christian Piety. I
wrote a little Book about it in the beginning of the late Reign; which had the
Approbation of my Superiors: But I have not room to say more of it here. Nor
of the Festivals which are ordered to be kept, in Commemoration of great
Blessings God has bestowed upon us. Of which you should endeavor to make your
People sensible; whereby they may be induced to observe them with Religious
Joy. Especially the three chief Festivals, in memory of our Savior's Nativity,
Resurrection, and the Coming of the Holy Ghost.

But it is time to proceed to the other part of this Discourse, which I
propounded in the beginning: And I must be the shorter in it, because I have
been longer in this, than I at first intended.

PART II.
HAving laid before you the Duties both private and public, which belong to
your Holy Function; I come now to treat a little of the Spirit wherewith they
ought to be Performed.

SECT. I.
And above all things you must labor to possess your Hearts with a Spirit of
Love to God, whose Servants you are, and who employs you in the most Glorious
Work, in the World. A Spirit, I say, of Love to God the Father, who has sent
his Son to be the Savior of the World, and to God the Son, who loved the
Church and gave himself for it; and to God the Holy Ghost, who has, by a
peculiar Grace, separated you from other Men, to Minister unto Christ in his
Church. Which was a Witness of what was said to you at your Ordination; Receive
the Holy Ghost, for the Office and Work of a Priest in the Church of God. These
were not empty words, nor mere lofty Expressions, without any Power in them:
But an effectual Prayer for the Holy Spirit of Grace, which was then conferred
upon you. And should mightily move you to serve the Church of Christ, in the
love of the Spirit, as St. Paul speaks, XV Romans 30. That is, in the Love, which
the Spirit of God inspires you withal. For, as he says before in that Epistle
V. 5. The love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is
given unto us. So we pray in the Hymn, which is recited at the Ordination of
Priests

Come Holy Ghost, our Souls inspire,
And lighten us with Celestial fire,
Thy blessed Unction from above,
Is comfort, life, and fire of Love.
These are not vain words, if sent up with ardent Affection to God, but procure
for us the power of the Holy Spirit, to enlighten, and enliven, and warm our
Hearts with the Knowledge and Love of God our Savior. Which Love we should
every day endeavor to stir up; by reflecting upon the wonderful Love of God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost unto us. For so St. Chrysostom notes upon those
words of St. Paul, XV Romans 30. He mentions the Love of the Spirit, (...); For
as Christ and the Father has loved the World, so has the Spirit. Upon this
Love we ought to reflect every Morning, and ponder it so long, till we find it
excite in us that Heavenly fire of Love to God; which we prayed for at our
Ordination.

For if we preserve this Flame in our Hearts; it will make us cheerful as well
as diligent, restless and unwearied in the work of the Lord. Nothing can carry
(...) thorough it, like this; and render it so easy and sweet to us: as to
think we are serving our good God, in that which he loves and delights to have
done; and to feel that every thing we do proceed from love to him, and to his
service.

Our Savior teaches us, that this is the Principle by which (...) his
Ministers ought to Act, in that Question which he asks St. Peter, and repeats
it thrice after his Resurrection, Simon Peter love thou me? (XX^ Joh. 15, 16,
17.) And in the command which follows upon his profession that he sincerely
loved Him. Feed my Lambs, and feed my Sheep take care of the Souls of Young and
Old, that they want not their proper Food. For they are so dear to him (as
Theophylact there Notes) that he makes our care of them, to be the mark of our
Affection to him; (...). For it is therefore a certain token of our Love to
him; because it flows from thence as from its Fountain and Spring. If we love
him, we can never neglect them. This will make us studious and industrious to
promote the Salvation of those Souls, whom Christ so dearly loved: It being the
truest Expression of our Love to Christ. So St. Chrysostom upon this place:
Christ repeated this so often, to show us, (...), After what manner we ought
chiefly to love him, by taking care of his flock. Can any Man read this then
and be negligent? No; not if he Love the Lord Jesus in Sincerity: who has bid
him demonstrate his Love, by feeding his Lambs and his Sheep There are several
other things, says that great Father of the Church, which may give us some
Confidence toward God, nay make us Illustrious and Famous: But that which
above all things wins us the favor of Heaven, is, (...), our tender care of
our Neighbors. Which leads to the next thing;

SECT. II.
Which is a sincere Love and Affection to the Souls of Men, which Christ has
redeemed with his precious Blood. If we make an estimate of them by the price
which was paid for them, we cannot set too high a value upon them: And if we
look upon them as invaluable Beings (purchased at so dear a rate) we shall do
all we can to save them; and be exceeding fearful, least any of them should be
lost through our Negligence.

Preserve therefore, and keep alive in your Hearts, a Spirit of love to the
Souls of Men; especially to your Parishioners. And there is no way to do this
like to the Consideration, what it cost to Redeem them; no less than the Blood
of the Son of God: who demonstrated thereby how precious they are in
themselves, and how dear to him. Bestow a few thoughts upon this every day, and
it will beget and continue in you the greatest Kindness, and tenderest
Compassion toward them: And that will move you to lay out your selves with the
utmost Diligence, in all the Offices belonging to your Function. And this, both
for his sake, and for theirs; that, he may see of the travel of his Soul, and
be satisfied (as the Prophet speaks LIII Isa. 11.) and that they may obtain the
Salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with Eternal Glory, 2 Timothy 2. 10.

I shall conclude what I have said of these two things (a Spirit of love to
God, and to the Souls of Men) with a notable Discourse of St. Austin's. Who in
a Letter to Longinianus, a Pagan Philosopher, remembers him of this saying of
one of the Ancients, quibus satis persuasum esset, ut nihil mallent mallet se
esse, quam viros bonos, his reliquam facilem esse doctrinam; unto those who
were persuaded so far, as to desire no thing but to be made good Men, all the
rest of the Instructions, that Philosophers could give them, would be very
easy. This he says he took to be a saying of Socrates, which must be
acknowledged to be excellent. But then he tells him, there is a far more
ancient prophetical saying, which preceded this many Ages; teaching Men briefly
and at once, not only to desire nothing but to be made good men; but also how
they may be made truly good, viz. Love the LORD thy God, with all thy heart,
and with all thy Soul, and with all thy mind; and thy Neighbor as thy self. To
him who can be persuaded to do this, Non ei reliquam facilem, sed eam totam
esse doctrinam duntaxat utilem and salubrem. I do not say as Socrates did, that
all the rest will be easy; but that this is the whole only profitable and
wholesome Doctrine; and there needs no more. Epist. XX.

Keep this therefore perpetually in your Heart, which contains in it all things
else. Love the Lord your God, and love your Neighbor; and you have done all
you need to do: for all is included in this: You will not be wanting in your
Duty to either of them, if you heartily Love them.

SECT. III.
My next Advice shall be in the words of the blessed Apostle St. Paul, (who
has left us a wonderful Example, of most tender affection to men's Souls, read
1 These. 2, 7, 8, 11.) Whatsoever ye do, in word or deed, do all in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, giving thanks unto God and the Father by him. III Coloss. 17.
That is, when you are going to perform any part of your Office, pray him to be
present with you, and assist you. So St. Chrysostom (and out of him
Theophylact) Expounds these words, in the Name of Christ, (...), calling upon
him to be thy Helper, (...); First making thy prayer to him, and so go about
thy business. When you put on your Surplice, for instance, think with your
selves that you are going to offer up the Prayers of the People to God, in the
Name of Jesus Christ: And then with what Solemnity, with what Reverence will
you perform that Sacred Office? Especially when you have besought him to be
with you, and believe that he is nigh to all them that call upon him in Truth.
In like manner when you go up into the Pulpit; consider with your selves, that
you are going to speak in the Name of Christ, unto his People; beseeching him
to assist you, and to carry home the Truths you shall deliver to their Hearts
and Consciences. For dexterius loquentur cum hominibus, qui prius tota mente
cum Deo fuerunt collocuti, as Erasmus excellently speaks, they will speak with
Men more dexterously, who have first of all, with their whole Soul, spoken with
God. The like I might say, of other parts of your Duty, which will then be most
successfully discharged; when you have engaged our Lord by solemn Prayer to
him, to go along with you, and accompany you.

Theodoret has another interpretation, or rather a further improvement of the
sense of these words: which is this, adorn all your words and actions, (...),
with the remembrance of the Lord Christ. That is, having invoked his blessed
presence to be with you, think what he would do, how he would behave himself,
and with what Spirit he would perform such things, as you are going about. For
example, when you are going to compose a Sermon, it would be of great use and
efficacy, if you would think with your selves, what Christ would say to your
People, if he were to speak to them; what he would require of them; with what
Motives he would excite them; and what Compassion he would express to their
Souls. It would be inpossible then, for any Man, if he had Christ in his mind,
to say any thing, but what he has well considered, and will tend to make Men
good. He will not Preach for his own glory, but for the glory of Christ:
pursuing things profitable, rather than plausible; not affecting in his
discourse lenocinia sed remedia, such things as may tickle the ears of idle
People, but such as will cure their Diseases and Distempers. They are the Words
of Salvian in his Preface to his Book de Gubernatione Dei. Which are agreeable
to the old Rule, which Rittershusius there mentions (...). Give me not Spruce
things, but such as the City needs.

They that interpret the words to this sense, be so mindful of Christ, that you
do nothing indecorous, nothing unbeseeming the relation you have to him,
nothing that may dishonor him; differ not much from the former. And therefore
I conclude this Advice as the Apostle does his Admonition: As we ought to begin
every thing with a devout remembrance of Christ, whose blessing upon us, we
ought to implore; so we ought to end all by giving thanks to God through him.
That Is as acceptable to him as our Prayers; nay, is a powerful Prayer for more
of his Grace. For none are so likely to receive more as those who thankfully
acknowledge what they have received already. And therefore let all your doings,
be thus begun and ended, in the Name of Christ. Whereby you will be preserved
in his Love and Favor; and partake still more of his grace.

SECT. IV.
Especially if you do all this in Sincerity of heart. Which is that good Soil,
wherein, if the Seed of the Word be not sown and received, it brings forth no
Fruit to Perfection: and which our Savior more particularly required in his
Apostles, who were to sow that good Seed in Men's hearts. Such Persons, it is
manifest, he sought for, as were plain, simple, and honest hearted: having no
worldly end to serve, but wholly bent to know the way to Eternal Salvation.
Andrew and Peter who were first called to follow him, it is evident, were of
this Spirit; for they left all they had to attend him: and next to them Philip,
who finding Nathaniel, and telling him they had found the MESSIAH Jesus of
Nazareth, to whom he prayed him to go along with him; as soon as our Savior
saw him, he said (to show what kind of Men he delighted in) Behold an Israelite
indeed, in whom is no guile, I John 47. which was a surprising Character of
him, after Nathaniel had made this objection against our Savior, can any good
thing come out of Nazareth? But, as Theophylact well observes, those were not
(...) words of unbelief: but (...) of a mind that accurately weighed things,
and was well studied in the Law: which taught him that Christ was to come out
of Bethleem in Judaea, not out of Nazareth in Galilee. By this our Savior
judged of his Sincerity, which appeared also, in that, notwithstanding this
seeming prejudice, he went along with Philip to be better informed of our
Savior.

This is one great part of that Sincerity, which I am now recommending to you:
to have your minds free from the power of Prejudice and partial Affections;
being desirous only to know the truth, and understand what the will of the Lord
is. So St. Chrysostom upon these words (...). His judgment was incorrupt and
unbyassed, and pronounced nothing either out of Favor and Affection, or out of
dislike and hatred.

Another token of which Sincerity there follows: in that after this high
commendation which our Lord gave him, he was not at all elated by it, nor ran
away with these Encomiums, (as the same Father speaks) (...), etc. but
continues enquiring, and searching more exactly: being desirous of this alone
to be more perfectly satisfied in the Truth. As he was upon his next Question,
and our Savior's Answer to it.

By this is appears that sincerity of heart is the best Disposition to
understand the mind of Christ, and to be employed by him in the Ministry of the
Gospel, as the Apostles were. Who had regard to Nothing in this World; but only
to the Glory of God, and the Salvation of Men: in which also they found the
highest Satisfaction, or rather Rejoicing and Glorying. For so St. Paul says,
2 Corinthians. I. 12. Our rejoicing (or glorying, or boasting) is this, the
Testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity, and Godly sincerity, etc. We
have our Conversation in the World. He served our Lord, that is, with pure
intention: designing nothing but to win Souls to him, by delivering his mind
sincerely to them: and seeking no greater Satisfaction, than to have it
believed and obeyed. (...), etc. as St. Chrysostom glosses on those words,
There was nothing deceitful in him; No Hypocrisy, no Simulation, no Flattery,
no Craft or Fraud, or any thing of that kind: but he acted with all freedom, in
Simplicity, in Truth, in (...) pure, incorrupt Judgment, and clear intention:
having nothing concealed and hidden undernaeth, nothing rotten at the bottom.
Thus he explains himself in the Second Chapter of the First Epistle to the
Thessalonians v. 3, 4, 5. For our Exhortation was not of deceit, nor of
uncleanness, nor of guile: But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust
with the Gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing Men, but God, which tries
our hearts. For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a
cloak of covetousness, God is witness. Nor of men sought we glory, neither of
you, nor yet of others.

This admirable Spirit let us imitate; endeavoring after such a degree of this
Virtue, as to be glad if Men could look into our Hearts, and see our secret
intentions and designs; as we are sure God does. Who as he is witness to them
(as the Apostle speaks) so will judge us according to our uprightness and
integrity in seeking to do him honor, and to promote the Salvation of Souls.

Thus the Fathers of the Church, particularly St. Gregory Nazianzen,
distinguish a Political Christian, from a Spiritual. (...), etc. A Political
Person, or a Man of this Worlds business, is to do and to say all things
whereby he may do himself credit, and be honored by others: designing no
happiness, beyond this present Life. But a Spiritual Man's business, is to take
care of his Salvation: and highly to esteem what contributes unto that, but to
look upon that which does not, as nothing worth. In short, To esteem those
things above all others, (...), etc. By which he himself may be made most
worth; and he may draw others by himself, to the best and most excellent
things. Orat. XIX. p. 300.

SECT. V.
There are some other qualities, that make up the Character of a good Minister
of Jesus Christ: of which I have not room, in this little Treatise,
particularly to discourse. For he ought to serve the Lord with all humility of
mind, XX Acts 19. with Patience also, 2 Timothy II. 24. and with Meekness, 2 Timothy
II. 25. All which St. Paul has commended to us, together with the foregoing
qualities, in that admirable description he makes of himself. 2 Corinthians. VI. 3,
4, 5, 6. etc. which was part of the Epistle, I observed, for the First Sunday
in Lent. Where he first of all says, that they took care, to give no offense
in any thing, that the Ministry might not be blamed. Of which I shall briefly
speak a little, when I have first laid before you what follows. But in all
things approving our selves as the Ministers of God. Not merely showing
themselves, (says Oecumenius on the place) but more than that approving, or
commending themselves: which signifies a demonstration (...) by real Works and
Deeds, to be truly Christ's Ministers. Which demonstration, says he, they gave
first of all (...) in Patience; nay, he adds much Patience (...) generously
bearing all that was said of them; that is, Men's Censures, Reproaches, and
Calumnies: yea, and all the sufferings and miseries, they pleased to heap upon
them: Which he expresses in the next words, in afflictions, in necessities, in
distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings,
in fastings. Upon which I cannot enlarge; nor upon what he says of their
Pureness and Knowledge (i. e. their Divine Wisdom, whereby they approved
themselves God's Ministers, not by Humane Philosophy as the same Oecumenius
expounds it) and all the rest. But only take Notice of what he says, v. 7. by
the armor of righteousness on the Right hand, and on the Left. As if he had
said, would ye know how we come to perform such things (as the same Author
expounds it) give ear then to what follows; it was by being armed on both
sides, on the right, and on the left; which are not so contrary, but the Armor
of Righteousness fitted both. By the right hand, says he, the Apostle
understands (...), prosperous things, such as honor and esteem among Men;
which did not make us swell, nor puff us up with Vain Glory: and therefore were
the Armor or Weapons of Righteousness. On the left hand, were the things
contrary to these, Temptations, Persecutions, Reproaches, and Injuries; by
which we were not dejected nor cast down; as by the other we were not elated.
As if he had said in other words, (...) neither lifted up by good things, nor
disheartened by evil. A proof of which immediately follows, by honor and by
dishonor, by evil report and good report. In which words says that Author, he
recounts the right hand, and the left hand things. And in this Spirit, we ought
to serve the Lord Christ: not minding the vain praise of Men, nor their
dispraise: but only endeavoring to approve our selves to our Blessed Lord and
Master, with an equal mind in all Conditions.

Before I end this, I cannot but a little reflect upon those words, wherewith
the Apostle begins this discourse, giving no offense in any thing, that the
Ministry be not blamed. Which admonishes us cautiously to avoid every thing at
which Men may take just exception, for this very reason: least the Gospel of
Christ should be hindered; and our fault be laid upon our Religion.

There is a remarkable Precept to this purpose, which the Apostle gives both to
Timothy and to Titus. 1 Timothy IV. 12. II Tit. 15. Let no Man despise thee. Which
some may fancy (as Theodoret observes) to be a command belonging to others
rather than to us: who cannot hinder Men's despisals. But that is a mistake, in
the Apostles opinion, who would have Timothy to know, that he who commands and
teaches others may preserve himself from contempt by this means (though he was
a young Man) (...), etc. Be thou a living Law, show in thy self the perfect
work of the Law; lead such a life as will bear witness to thy words. Which life
he describes in the words immediately following, be thou an example of the
Believers, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in
Purity. He that thus makes himself (...) (as Oecumenius expresses it) as it
were a living Image and Rule of a good Life, will preserve himself from
contempt; and not lose but maintain his Authority.

To conclude this; there is nothing the Devil more desires and endeavors than
to alienate the hearts of the People from their Ministers: and therefore they
should take the greatest care to do nothing that may give the least occasion of
it. And here I cannot forbear to mind you of one thing, which has given no
small Scandal: which is, the not keeping your Houses, and that part of the
House of God, which belongs to the care of some Ministers, in good Repair, and
leaving them so to their Successors. This argues a very careless, or covetous,
sordid Spirit; minding nothing but a Man's self, and the present World, and
having no consideration of the future.

I hope I need not exhort you to observe the LXXV Canon of our Church: which
requires you not to resort to any Taverns or Ale houses at any time, other than
for your honest necessities, etc. Which occasions cannot be frequent, nor of
any long continuance. I shall only tell you that Julian the Apostate, in his
famous Letter to Arsacius the High Priest of the Pagan Religion in Galatia,
having commended the Exemplary Charity of Christians, to the imitation of his
Priests, adds (after some other good Admonitions of governing their Families
well) (...), etc. Exhort a Priest, that he neither go into the Theater, nor
drink in a Tavern; nor exercise any base or ignominoius art. Honor those that
obey these Orders, and put the disobedient out of their Office. Fpist. XLIX.
This shows how sensible he was of the necessity of the Apostolical Precept,
that he who ministered to God, should have a good report of them which are
without. i. e. are not of his Religion. 1 Timothy III. 7.

To Conclude, think often what an honor it is to serve the Lord Jesus; and
what Care he took of his Flock: How invaluable the Souls of Men are, which he
purchased with his Blood. What an inestimable Treasure the Gospel of Christ is,
wherewith you are entrusted: in what an high Station God has placed you: and
then you will never submit to so much as any mean Action; but do such things as
may procure you esteem; or at least prevent contempt.

And to keep this Good Spirit in you, which I have described, it would be of
singular Use to read every Lord's day (at least every Ordination Sunday) the
Vows and Promises you made when you were admitted into Holy Orders: Which are
so Solemn, that it is impossible not to be moved by them, if they be not merely
read, but seriously weighed and considered.

These Instructions I have Written in the midst of great variety of Business,
and with many interruptions; which may make them defective in many Particulars,
and less accurate than they might otherwise have been: But what they want in
that, will be made up, I hope, by the sincere desire I have to do good, and by
the Grace of God accompanying all honest endeavors. Unto which Grace I most
heartily commend you; and rest,

Your Affectionate Brother, Sy. Eliens.
March 19. 1697.
Books Written by the R. R. Simon Patrick, D. D. now Lord Bishop of Ely; and
Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE Parable of the Pilgrim, written to a Friend. The 6 Edition. 4to 1681.

-- Mensa Mystica: Or, a Discourse concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper: In which the Ends of its Institution are so manifested, our Addresses
to it so directed, our Behavior there and afterward so composed, that we may
not lose the Profits which are to be received by it. With Prayers and
Thanksgivings inserted. To which is annexed.

-- Aqua Genitalis: A Discourse concerning Baptism: In which is inserted a
Discourse to persuade to a confirmation of the Baptismal Vow. 8vo.

-- Jewish Hypocrisy: A Caveat to the present Generation. Wherein is shown
both the false and the true way to a Nations or Persons complete Happiness;
from the sickness and recovery of the Jewish State. To which is added, A
Discourse upon Micah 6. 8. belonging to the same matter. 8vo.

-- Divine Arithmatick: A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Samuel Jacomb, Minister
of St. Mary-Woolnoth-Church in Lombardstreet, London. With an Account of his
Life. 8vo.

-- A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Mr. Tho. Grigg, Rector of St.
Andrew-Vndersharft, London, 4to.

-- An Exposition of the Ten Commandments. 8vo.

-- Heart's Ease: Or, a Remedy against all Troubles. With a Consolatory
Discourse, particularly directed to those who have lost their Friends and
Relations. To which is added Two Papers, printed in the time of the late
Plague. The sixth Edition corrected. 12mo. 1695.

-- The Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth mentioned by St.
Paul, in 1 Timothy 3. 15. 4to.

-- An Examination of Bellarmin's Second Note of the Church, viz. ANTIQVITY.
4to.

-- An Examination of the Texts which Papists cite out of the Bible to prove
the Supremacy of St. Peter and of the Pope over the whole Church. In Two Parts.
4to.

-- An Answer to a Book spread abroad by the Romish Priests: Entitled [The
Touchstone of the Reformed Gospel] wherein the True Doctrine of the Church of
England, and many Texts of the Holy Scripture are faithfully explained. 8vo.
1692.

-- A private Prayer to be used in difficult times.

-- A Thanksgiving for our late wonderful Deliverance.

-- A Prayer for Charity, Peace and Unity; chiefly to be used in Lent.

-- A Sermon Preached upon St. Peter's Day; printed with Enlargements. 4to.

-- A Sermon Preached in St. James's Chapel, before the Prince of Orange, Jan.
20. 1688. on Isaiah 11. 6.

-- A Second Part of the Sermon before the Prince of Orange, on the same Text.
Preached in Covent Garden.

-- A Sermon Preached before the Queen in March 1688/9. on Colos. 3. 15.

-- A Sermon against Murmuring, Preached at Covent Garden in Lent, 1688/9. on 1
Cor. 10. 10.

-- A Sermon against Censuring, Preached at Covent Garden in Advent, 1688. on 1
Cor. 4. 10.

-- Fast-Sermon before the King and Queen, April 16. 1690. on Proverbs 14. 34.

-- A Thanksgiving-Sermon before the Lords, Nov. 26. 1691. for reducing of
Ireland, and the King's safe Return. On Deuteronomy. 4. 9.

-- A Fast-Sermon before the Queen, April 8. 1692. On Numb. 10. 9.

-- A Sermon before the Lords, Nov. 5. 1696. on Dan. 4. 35.

-- Sermon before the Lord Mayor at St. Brides Church, on Easter-Munday, 1696.
on 2 Timothy 2. 8.

-- A Commentary on the First Book of Moses, called Geneses, 4to. 1695.

-- A Commentary on the Second Book of Moses, called Exodus, 4to. 1697.

-- A Commentary on the Third Book of Moses, called Leviticus. 4to. 1697.

-- Commentary on the Fourth Book of Moses, called Numbers [now in the Press.]

Dr. THOMAS TENISON, now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, his Sermon concerning
Discretion in giving Alms. 1688.

-- Sermon against Self-love, before the House of Commons. 1689.

-- Sermon of doing Good to Posterity, before Their Majesty's. 1689 90.

-- Sermon concerning the Wandering of the Mind in God's Service, before the
Queen: Feb. 15. 1690.

-- Sermon of the Folly of Atheism, before the Queen: Feb. 22. 1690.

-- Sermon Preached at the Anniversary Meeting of the Clergy-mens Sons: December.
3. 1691.

-- Sermon concerning the Celestial Body of a Christian, before the Queen on
Easter Day. 1694. -- Ser-

-- Sermon concerning Holy Resolution, before the King at Kensington: December.
30. 1694. on Psalm. 129. 106.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of Queen Mary, in the Abby-Church, Westminster,
On Eccles. 7. 14.

A Vindication of Their Majesty's Authority to fill the Sees of the deprived
Bishops, in a Letter occasioned by Dr. B -- 's Refusal of the Bishopric of
Bath and Wells. 4to.

A Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a new Separation, on Account of
the Oaths to the present Government. With an Answer to the History of Passive
Obedience, so far as relates to them. 4to.

A Vindication of the said Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a new
Separation, from the Exceptions made against it in a Tract called, [A brief
Answer to the said Discourse, etc.] 4 to.

Rushworth's Historical Collections. The Third Part, in Two Volumes. Containing
the Principal matters which happened from the meeting of the Parliament, Nov.
3. 1640. to the end of the Year 1644. Wherein is a particular Account of the
Rise and Progress of the Civil War, to that period. Fol. 1692. in 2 Vol.

A Discourse of the Pastoral Care. By Gilbert Burnet, D. D. Ld. Bishop of
Sarum. 1692.

Origo Legum: Or, a Treatise of the Origin of Laws, and their Obliging Power;
as also of their great Variety: and why some Laws are immutable, and some not,
but may suffer change, or cease to be suspended, or abrogated. In seven Books.
By George Dawson, Fol. 1694.

Bp. Burnet's Four Discourses delivered to the Clergy of the Diocese of Sarum:
Concerning, I. Truth of the Christian Religion. II. The Divinity and Death of
Christ. III. The Infallibility and Authority of the Church. IV. The Obligations
to continue in the Communion of the Church.

A Brief Discourse concerning the Lawfulness of Worshipping God by the
Common Prayer: in answer to a Book, intituied, A brief Discourse of the
Unlawfulness of the Common-Prayer-Worship.] By John Williams, D. D. 4to. 1694.

A true Representation of the absurd and mischievous Principles of the Sect
commonly known by the Name of the Muggletonians. 4to. 1694.

Memoirs of the most Reverend THOMAS CRANMER, Archbishop of Canterbury: Wherein
the History of the Church, and the Reformation of it, during the Primacy of the
said Archbishop, are greatly illustrated, and many singular Matters relating
thereunto, now first published. In Three Books. Collected chiefly from Records,
Registers, Authentic Letters, and other Original Manuscripts. By John Strype,
M. A. Fol. 1694.

The History of the Troubles and Trial of WILLIAM LAVD L. Archbishop of
Canterbury; wrote by himself during his Imprisonment in the Tower. To which is
prefixed, the Diary of his own Life faithfully and entirely Published from the
Original Copy; and subjoined a Supplement to the preceding History; The
Archbishop's Last Will; His large Answer to the Lord Says Speech concerning
Liturgies; His Annual Accounts of his Province delivered to the King, and some
other things relating to the History. Published by Henry Wharton, Chaplain to
Archbishop Sancroft, Fol.

-- Bishop of Sarum's Sermon at the Funeral of Archbishop Tillotson. 1694.

Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons of Sincerity and Constancy in the Faith and
Profession of the True Religion, being the First Volume. Published from his
Originals by his Chaplain Dr. Barker.

-- 2d. 3d. and 4th. Volumes of Seamons of the said Archbp. Published by Dr.
Barker.

-- A Fifth Volume of the same, now in the Press.

Dr. W. Outram's 20 Sermons. the 2d. Edition. 1697.

Dr. Hezik. Burton's Discourses, in Two Vol. in 8vo. Published by Dr. Tillotson.

Mr. Hen. Wharton's Sermons Preached in Lambeth Chapel. In Two Vol. 8vo. With
an Accout of his Life.


