SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Barbado Seeds, SHOWING Their Admirable Virtue
in Curing Dropsies.

Written by a Physician in the Country to Sir George Ent at London.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1694.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Barbado Seeds, SHOWING Their Admirable Virtue
in Curing Dropsies. In a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
ACcording to your Desire, I have made many Experiments with the Barbado Seeds
you sent me, and I find them wonderful serviceable against Dropsies; they open
the Sluices of Nature, and let the watery Humors run away both by Seige and
Urine, and that in a very plentiful manner, with very little disturbance to
Nature. If you have any more Indian Specificks, I pray send them into the
Country, and I will make Observations upon them, and I hope with as good
Success; for by this Method the Art of Physic is likely to be much improved,
and in time we may be able to Answer the Lord Bacon's Desire, viz. to write a
History of the Cures of Diseases thought to be incurable.

I was lately sent for six Miles from my own House to a Country Farmer, who
was miserably swelled by the Dropsy, not only his Belly, but his Legs and
whole Habit of Body; I had given him many Medicines, but I found that his
stubborn Disease would not give way, and at length trying your Specific in
several forms, I perceived a plentiful Evacuation of Water by Seige and Urine,
he is become very lank, and his Color begins to return, and I hope by the Use
of good Volatile Salts and bitter Medicines to restore the ferments to the
several parts, and prevent the danger of a Relapse.

Another Person who was a Servant, was so exceedingly swelled, that his Friends
had all concluded that he must be tapp'd, but having heard of the former Cure,
came ten Miles to my House, being brought in his Master's Coach; I used the
same Method, and in due time Cured him.

I must needs own, as Mr. Boil says, that the Theories of diverse Diseases are
so hotly disputed amongst many Eminent Physicians, that in many Cases a Man may
discern more probability of the Success of the Remedy, than of the Truth of the
received Notion of the Disease. And as the Controverted Methods are not to this
Day agreed on, nor established in the Schools themselves, so diverse who are not
acquainted with the Schools, do by the help of Experience and good Specificks,
and the Method their mother Wit and other Emergency prompts them to take, do
very great and extraordinary Cures; the Causes of Diseases are much less
certain, and much more disputed than the Uninquisitive imagine: Nor are the
Methods of Curing, which depends upon those Causes, settled as they should be;
and therefore he fears that the generality of Physicians have but an imperfect
Method in the Cure of many Diseases; and therefore he observes that the
Communicating some good Medicines in an unpolished manner, though they may
disparage an Author, yet they may save the Life of a Patient.

These Considerations have encouraged me to communicate my Observations of this
Nature, which may a little gratify the inquisitive part of Mankind, until the
Learned Dr. Sloan, from whom we expect considerable Informations, gives us a
more complete Account of American Rarities, and their Medicinal Opperations.

This I must say, that after universal Evacuations by Purging, Vomitting,
Sweating, which ought to be left to the Prudence of able and experienced
Physicians: I have ever found Specific Allerative Remedies wonderful
Advantageous.

Many Persons of different Ages and Sexes have been Cured of Dropsies by these
Seeds, taking only the Spirit, the Tincture, and the Extract of the same,
sometimes in Broom-Beer, and sometimes in Rhenish-Wine, only observing an
agreeable Diet, and enduring Thirst as much as may be.

FINIS.

