AN ANSWER To a Scandalous Pamphlet, ENTITLED A LETTER TO A DISSENTER
CONCERNING His MAJESTY'S LATE Declaration of Indulgence, etc.
SIR,
I Being a Dissenter, your Letter was delivered to Me, whether by mistake, or
no, I cannot tell, nor shall examine; But this I am sure of, That it concerns
all sorts of Men under that Denomination, to consider, as well the End to which
your Councils tend, as the Motives from whence they Spring.

It is no ways material to them whether Fear, Interest, Resentment, or pure
Politics undertakes to be their Guide, but to what they are driving, and they
ought to be careful of their Conductor, when to miss the right way to Repose,
leads to no less than perpetual Ruin and Misery. You confess you differ in
Opinion from Dissenters, and consequently are within the Pale of Conformity;
wherefore you must not wonder if your Sincerity, Friendship, and Charity be
doubted: You are at present, disarmed of your dangerous Weapons, the Penal and
Sanguinary Laws, therefore your Fury is not now felt; But can you think the
memory of Seven and Twenty years sorrowful Sufferings will not last half a one,
or that they who have had such woeful experience of your Brotherly Love to the
sub-division of Protestants, must not be jealous at least of your Officious
Friendship at present, and what sort of Us your Arguments are necessary to
preserve.

It cannot be such to whom your Party have constantly imputed the Exclusion,
and Rebellion; for the condition of those you confess calls for present Ease:
And now their immediate Cure is prescribed by the only Physician on Earth for
that Distemper, you would persuade them to refuse to take it, for fear their
Enemies should grow Sick with Envy at their Wonderful Recovery. But if they be
Infatuated to that degree as to take your Council, let me beg this Favor for
them in their future Miseries, That they may be removed from the Collum of ill
Men, to that of Mad; for they who possess such Public Spirits as to be
delighted with Eternal Torments, and Miseries for the Preservation of their
only Enemies, ought at least to be relaxed from the Infamy of their Sufferings.

But I have heard strong Proofs offered by Dissenters, to lay both the
Exclusion and Rebellion to the charge of some very Zealous Conformers; And did
not your un-intelligible, as well as much repented Doctrine of Non-resistance
dis-heard all unsucessful Rebels from being Church of England-Men, it would be
hard to distinguish them from the most active Parrators you have.

But passing over all Reflections differing Parties are apt to make on one
another, we will confider the Two parts of your Advice, with this assurance,
That I believe the new Friendship, has no Fondness in it, and is as you say, to
be suspected, and consequently Examined; But whether in your Method, or no,
remains a Question.

We will take for granted, That the common Interest of the Established Church,
and His Majesty's Royal Predecessors in the four last Reigns had so joined them
together, that it had been as well unnatural, as undutiful in the Roman
Catholics to have made Court to any other Party of the Nation, And it had
(perhaps) been as Imprudent in His Majesty not to proffer them the first Fruits
of His Favor and Protection; that being no ways inconsistant with the Kindness
He intended to those of His own Communion, nor the Indulgence He always
designed to His other Peaceable Dissenting Subjects: But how ungratefully He
has been dealt with by the Established Church, for His Generous Condesentions
and Complements, I will not repeat, because as you say, What is unnecessary,
must be tedious; And the truth of this Assertion is so plain, that could it
admit of a Dispute, your Letter would put an end to it, for it is in well
Composed Sentences, and Periods, the Universal Voice of the Party who have much
(against his will) forced the King to discern, that their magnified Loyalty was
merely their Interest, and that they were Disciples of the Crown only for the
Loaves. He must too at last perceive, that the severity of the Laws made
against the very Nature of the Reformation, to force a Conformity to a Fallible
Authority, compelled Protestant Dissenters to seek for Relief from Rebellion,
having Examples of success in that method to their Brethren in Foreign
Countries, as well as their Fatal prevailing thereby at Home: But to the Honor
of them, let this truth be remembered, That their Natural Prince on His Promise
of Liberty of Conscience, was most dear to them all, and made them with
Universal Joy, like true Englishmen, bring Him back with Triumph to His
Dominions, from whence their Swords, and Interest had driven Him: Nor can it be
believed, they would ever have had Recourse to their Swords again for the
Remedy, if they had not found their old Disease, Oppression return.

As to the Alliance betwixt Liberty, and Infallibility which you are pleased to
Redicule, it seems to the Dissenters no such impossible thing as you would
persuade them, when mutual Interest is the Sement of the League: For though it
should be true, that a Church which pretends to Infallibility, cannot in its
own Nature, consent to the Propagation of Error: Yet Experience shows by
Holland and many other places, that the Members of such a Church, can be Good
and Friendly Neighbors with those they think in the wrong; But on the contrary
side, a Church that had its only Beginning, Form, and Foundation in Severe
Sanguinary and Penal Laws for Extirpation of the Religion they found in
Possession, and for preventing any other whatsoever but its own, and yet
pretending to no Infallibility, but its Power: It is hard, I say, to believe
such a Church can willingly part with its only Supporter, Force: And therefore
there is a necessity, where there is a Warrantable Opportunity for all Parties
they would Oppress, to join together to put it out of their Power to do it.

Protestant Dissenters, are by their Lawful Prince put in Possession of
Liberty, and are invited to make that Indulgence lasting to them by Law, on
condition all Men may share in it: You would persuade them, to cast away this
Opportunity, in hopes the time may come, you will be so good natured to
remember the Courtesy, and not be so severe to them as you have been,
Alleging, That the Church of England convinced of its Error in being severe
to them, the Parliament, when ever It meets, issure to be Gentile. The next
Heir Bread in the Country which they have so often Quoted for a Pattern of
Indulgence, a General Agreement of all thinking Men, etc. Makes you say all
things conspire to give them Ease, and Satisfaction, if by too much haste to
anticipate their good Fortune, they do not destroy it: Pretty plausible
Sophistry, to make Men neglect the present Possession of their Desires, in
hopes of a future Possibility of gaining them: This plainly shows you do not
believe you have to do with Thinking Men, for such well enough can see the
difference between Possession and Hopes, especially supported with Untruths:
For all men know the next Heir was Bred in the Strictest Form of your Church
and adheres to all the Ceremonies of it, in a Country where they are not only
more Hated, but more Contemptible, and Ridiculous than those of the Mass, to
which by the multitudes of Papists they are well accustomed; And would you make
the Dissenters believe, That Princess would begin an Indulgence She has been
Educated to think is Criminal; But if the Dissenters once get Possession of it
under Her Royal Father, the strong Argument of Numbers will certainly secure
them against Her recalling the Favor, as well as make it impossible for that
Party, who are as you confess, but as One to Two Hundred, from Oppressing the
common Interest of the Whole.

I am not willing (you see) to carp at your squinting Term of the next Heir:
But this I must assure you in general a more Disloyal and Dangerous Paper, both
to His Majesty and His Children, did not see Day in the hottest Times of
Exclusion; as I could easily Illustrate, but shall avoid to do so, since it
becomes all true Lovers of their Country in some degree to be humble Imitators
of His Sacred Majesty; whose stock of Mercy to His People, seems impossible to
be Exhausted; and whose Healing Temper gives apparently the Lie to all the
Scandals His Enemies ever invented of Him to deprive Him of His Right.

The Dissenters have the Word of this Glorious Prince; That they shall be sure
of their present Ease during His Reign; and that it shall be none of His Fault,
if it be not made Perpetual to them, not only by Recinding the Laws that can
Hurt them, but also to confirm the Right of free enjoyment of Conscience to
every English Man for ever, by a Magna Charta, equal to that by when they hold
their Estates: And this Disinterested Favor of His Majesty's, with the
Infallible Security it may be confirmed to them by: You would have them thrown
away and despise, to rely upon the single Promise of T. W.

But Sir, you must, I believe, be better known before you are so far Trusted:
For though you seem Plenipotentiary for your Church, yet your Credentials may
be Forged; and whilst your Memorial speaks plainly the Sense of your Party in
the Scandalous Reflections it makes on His Majesty's Actions and Alliances; yet
it is in their Power to disown you for one of their Church, when ever it is
necessary for them to Boast Immaculate Loyalty again: So it may happen that T.
W. may be Hanged for a Traitor, the Dissenters undone for taking his Word, and
the Church of England still continue in its Original Innocence: A convenience
(I confess) peculiar to your Party, all others being forced to bear their
Iniquities, and undergo the Reproach of their Brethrens Sins.

But to examine a little closer what you would be at, and what you expect from
the Dissenters: In your Treaty, it appears to be That they should not be so
linked to their New Friends, as to Reject an Indulgence the Parliament may
offer them, without comprehending the Papists.

A very surprising Proposal in the Circumstances of the Times, and seems, as if
you would offer to restore to them that of 42. For I know no other Parliament
can make good your Word, whilst His Majesty lives: But these sort of
Expressions are no Sin in your Circumstances, having Numbers enough to back
them if they would be Laughed out of their Doctrine of Non-Resistance, His
Majesty's best Security (as you would Insinuate) for his Crown. But believe it
Sir, discerning Men know this Boast of yours is but a Copy of your Countenance;
for His Majesty's Indulgence and the Addresses you are so troubled at, leaves
your Church but a Thin Muster, should she Renounce her pretended Principle: And
what you say in other parts of your Paper, proves sufficiently, that That
Doctrine you would formerly have robbed all other Churches of, to Adorn your
own, is from its Ornament, become only an excuse, and will in the end prove a
Thinner Covering for her Nakedness then Fig Leaves were to our Forefathers
shame.

If your self had not known this to be true, you had spared the Pains of your
Ingenious Paper: But truly, I confess, you ought in this Juncture to be
Indulged a little Liberty of Conscience too, for the Propagation of your Faith:
For since you have lost the Power of Pressing men to your side; it is but
reasonable you should be allowed to Bear up for Volunteers. For this Cause I
shall say little more to you, either about the Reflections you make on His
Majesty, or those that Address to Him, but will close up all with these few
Memorandums to your next Labors.

That you take care to show, what King you expect will be so mad to part with
his undoubted Prerogative of Dispensing with Penal Statutes; when he judges it
convenient for the Service of Himself and Kingdom, now it is Recognized to be
His Right by Law.

Next you are to prepare strong Reasons to induce that King to be such a Fello
de se to his Title and Power.

Then you are to show the Use of the Test in matters of Places; for to a
Catholic King it can be no Hindrance to employ Papists, since he can Dispense
with the taking it; and to a Protestant it is needless, since his own Aversion
to that Party, will (it may be supposed) sufficiently Exclude them: Then since
it can be of no Use in a Papist or Protestant Princes Reign; It seems
unreasonably Fractious not to recind it at the Request of a Prince, who is
ready to Grant so many Favors in consequence of such a Repeal, and is against
it, as it is plainly more against Christ's, than his own Prerogative.

As to your suggestion against Repealing the Test in its Legislative use; let
it be but Impartially considered, that the Making of it did, as the Continuance
of it does, strike at the Root, and destroys the very Foundation of English
Liberty; since against the true intent of Magna Charta, it deprives Men of
their Birthright, without any Crime or Trial of their Peers; and may be an
Inlet by Faction to all manner of Slavery. But a Recognition in Parliament,
that it is void in it self; for that cause, will not only restore the Nation to
its true Liberty and Property; but be a Bulwark against the like Law for
Destruction of any other Party, may chance to be out of fashion.

I am, I confess one of those Dissenters, who would be glad His Majesty's
Favor was turned into a Law, since there is no Probability any future conduct
of Catholics could meet with the same Circumstances to cause new Statutes to
be made against them; like those, the doubtful Title of Queen Elizabeth
occasioned; And I hope you do not expect to be accounted a Conjurer, for
finding out the Secret, to tell the other Dissenters, That Papists themselves
do not rely on the Legality of this Power to make it Perpetual; Since it is
plain, that to our Sorrow, as well as the Nations loss, We cannot hope His
Majesty will be Immortal: Though to our Comfort at the same time, few of us
doubt, but he will live long enough to carry his own Glory beyond any of his
Predecessors; and to lay a lasting Foundation for the Felicity of his People.
Which that he may do, will be the Prayers of all his Honest Subjects, as they
are of one, that wishes your Polite Pen better employed, then to the
Disturbance of your King and Country, which is,

Sir, Your Humble Servant. Henry Pain.

London, Printed for N. T. Anno Domini 1687.


