K. CHARLES I.
EIK. ASIL. 27. To the Prince of Wales.
BEware of exasperating any Factions by the Crossness and Asperity of some Men's
Passions, Humors and private Opinions employed by you, grounded only upon
Differences in lesser Matters, which are but the Skirts and Suburbs of Religion.

-- Wherein a charitable Connivance, and Christian Toleration often dissipates
their Strength, whom rougher Opposition fortifies.

THE Conformist's Third Plea FOR THE Nonconformists.

Argued from the King's Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs; Grounded
upon the approved Doctrine, AND Confirmed by the Authorities of many Eminent
Fathers and Writers of the Church of England.

By the Author of the two former PLEAS.

Lord Bishop of Cork's Protestant Peacemaker, Page 128.

To these who ask, What need of more Union? I return, What need of more
Holiness? What need of Godliness, Charity, Justice? Are these Christian Duties?
and is not Union and Peace as much so? -- I am, and must be in the mind, that
the Strength of the Protestant Cause, both here at home, and throughout
Christendom lies in the Union of Protestants; and the Glory, Purity and Four
of Christianity, in this World stands or falls with Protestantism.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXII.

A PREFACE to the Christian and Peaceable Reader, that seeks the things that be
of Christ.
A Zeal for Peace and Union has overcome all Discouragements arising from many
Causes, and inspired me to a Boldness prevailing against much Fear, even to
publish the secret Workings of my Heart. As long as the Church dare show her
Face, my Notions are not afraid of the Light; they can receive no Luster from
my Name: let them go forth in that Light and Power, which the Father of Lights,
and the God of Peace has given, and shall give unto them; and if they may but
give any Light to discover the way of Peace, let me not only ly in Obscurity,
which I love, because fittest for me, but be disgraced by them, who speak all
manner of Evil of me. If I have not forsaken, and betrayed the Truth, I have
not forsaken nor betrayed the Church; and when you come to see the Weapons
which I handle, and the Leaders and Authorities which I follow, in the
following Treatise, as well as the Cause for which I plead, I hope you will be
convinced, that as far as I have pleaded for the Nonconformist Brethren, I have
not run from my Colors. There is common Truth, a large and spacious ground to
take them in, and to build up one and the same Fabric upon it, comfortable to
all true Christians, receptive of all the Family of God, and impregnable
against all their and our Enemies. It is some Relief and Comfort to see many
lift up their Feet, i. e. come and view the Desolations of the Church of Christ
among us; to be affected with them, and some in whom is an excellent Spirit,
are contriving to bring the separate Apartments under one Roof, and within one
Line and Wall. And these do stand upon the Rock of Evangelical Principles, when
not supported by the Arm of Flesh: But no sooner do Arbitrators move for a
Reconciliation, but others do all they can to thrust them from them, without
respect to their Persons, or due Reverence to Truth and Reason. He that
interposeth in this Difference, does at the Peril of Opposition. The R. Rev.
Author of the first Naked Truth, has found this true; though his Quality and
Person were more than guest at, yet the Episcopal Staff could not bear off the
Lashes of several Junior Writers from the Back of Naked Truth. But Truth, be it
never so naked, can bear Blows and Lashes, as it has always born the Violence
of Storms and Times: Truth cannot long be confined within Doors, but will
appear in open view, whatever its Entertainment be, whether Scorns,
Contradictions, Laughter, and Mockery, Abuses, and Scourgings, or Approbation
and Honor. The Appearance of such a Book as that Naked Truth, at such a time,
was like a Comet, it drew the Eyes of all that could to look upon it; it was a
Divine Manifestation of a Primitive Christian-Spirit of Love. And certainly, as
that pious Endeavor has increased his Comforts, so he has not lost all his
Labor; for since that, we have had more Overtures of Peace, than we heard of
in the many Years of Discord and Troubles, from the Learned in the Church of
England. The Nonconformists have born all the Blame, and Scorn, and Sufferings
of our Divisions; and have offered as much toward Peace and Accommodation as
was possible for them to offer. But partly their Writings, and the doleful
State of Religion, have drawn out some Wishes and Concessions from some Men of
Eminency in the Church, toward Peace and Accommodation. And tho these as yet
seem too little, yet there is much to be gathered from them; first, as to their
Propensity to Peace. 2. The Influence which their Concessions may have upon
austerer Tempers. 3. Because they being satisfied in the Point of Conformity,
as to their own Practice, do yet for a greater Good and Peace incline to a
Comprimise. The Learned Dean of St. Paul's has, with submission to Authority,
made some Proposals; and I hope would yield to more, if the Composure were put
into his hand. Even Dr. Sherlock, who is currantly thought to have written the
Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet, Page 103.
does wish with all his Heart, that some Expressions were altered, to prevent
any Scandal to the scrupulous, or to the profane; this he writes only for the
Office of Burial of the Dead, which he calls an excellent Office, supposing the
due Exercise of Church Discipline, to cast all notorious Sinners and
Schismatics out of the Communion of the Church, which the Church supposes to
be done. I am of his Mind, Page 102.
concerning the Excellency of that Office; It is most comfortable to the
Minister, and most Comfort to all true Christians, when we can use it upon good
Evidences concerning the Dead. But as the visiting of the Sick has been too
often to me, the most uncomfortable Office of my Ministry; so it has been a
great Addition of Sorrow, to commit those Bodies to the Earth, concerning whom
I had no hope of their resting in Christ. O what dejecting Stories could I
write of too many! but I forbear. If he be so sensible of the ill use which may
be made of that excellent Office, and do so heartily wish, that some
Expressions were altered to prevent Scandal to the scrupulous and profane;
methinks for the same Reasons he might wish more Alterations might be made, in
other things, and Offices. Most frank and generous are those Expressions of the
Right Reverend and Pious Bishop of Cork; Protestan-Peacemaker, p. 29.
We are ready to sacrifice all we can otherwise ( i.e. without Schism) to the
public Peace and Safety; what most of the Dissenters would be at (no Liturgy,
no Episcopacy, no Uniformity) may not be, cannot be without Schism, p. 32. The
only Steps by which we can mutually move to Peace, I with all submission
conceive to be these: 1. That we all would seriously study Self-denial, and
that with a peculiar Eye and regard to Accommodation; one perhaps of
Popularity, another of a particular Humor, another of somewhat else. All of
whatsoever good Conscience tells us is less valuable than common Union; p. 33.
-- But notwithstanding, what I have said of the Excellency, both of the
Common Prayers, and of Cathedral Performances, I do conceive the Alteration of
an Expression, or here and there of a whole Prayer or two by Law, or dispensing
with some Ceremonies in loco --. I do not conceive such Relaxation as this
would break the Harmony and Beauty of our Worship, or disturb the Union and
Peace of our Church. There are some Collects, and perhaps some Rubricks too,
which with all duty and submission I humbly conceive might be altered for the
better. page 118, 119. This honorable Ambassador of Peace speaks home, and
from his heart, and shall for ever sit high in the esteem of all the Sons of
Peace. Here are Proposals (conditional indeed, with the consent of Authority,
as they should be) that will certainly be embraced by Dissenters. But now, if
the Church should condescend, (if I may call that a Condescension which is done
for Christ?) as far as it can without Schism; and the Dissenters as far as they
can with a good Conscience: What shall be done if they cannot come up to a full
and perfect closure? Shall the Dissenter have no benefit by his Consent to the
great things? and the greatest number of things (in which they agree already)
shall he be not only excluded, but punished, although he continue peaceable in his
Dissent? In such a case, here is an apparent Necessity of mutual Forbearance in
Love, and of the Bond of Peace, to keep in the Unity of the Spirit. And here I
cannot without a great respect to another Conformist of Worth and Quality, (as
I am informed) repeat the Words, which are like a healing Plaster to a heart
bruised between our grating Differences. The way to make National Religion most
National, is by comprehending all the Differences that can be reconciled with
true Religion; while they that dissent in some things, receive one another,
with a good, peaceable, holy and public Temper of Mind; as the great Argument
and Inducement of which, we should all pray for the Acceptance of the holy
Service of all that call on the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ (as the Apostle
distinguishes Christians, but immediately unites them again) both theirs and
ours; they and we, whatever smaller Distinctions make the [They] and the [We]
are both one in our Lord Jesus Christ: We ought to pray for the common Benefit
of all so united, though not bound up in the same common Form with us, for a
gracious Audience and Reception of their and our Worship of God, that so the
Spirit of Love and Union in the main, may convey all our Services into one
before God, where indeed (if they are as he requires) they meet stripped of all
their outward Circumstances, Form and Ceremony: Faith and Obedience being alone
able to mount thither with them. And Services so raised, can by no means be
spared for small Differences in a National Religious Interest; for the Angels
of all such, behold the Face of our Father in Heaven. Thus that excellent
Person, The whole Duty of Nations, p. 61.
who writes himself a Minister of the Catholic Church as it is National in
England.

The same Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation breaths forth in peaceable Discourses
of true Protestant Christian Gentlemen of excellent Learning, and hearty
Concernment for their and our Religion, taking several ways. The Learned Sir
Thomas Overbury has proposed many Questions of great Weight, and discoursed
upon them piously and smartly. Sir John Mallet has drawn up the Contents that
might be Heads of useful and necessary Discourses for Gentleness toward
Protestant Dissenters, tho he himself and Family come duly to Church Service
and Sacraments, Letter to the Author of the Guide to the English Juries,
printed after it.
and use some of the Common Prayers in his Family. The Author of the Appendix
to Mr. Hunt's Argument, has discovered a good Will to Peace and Accommodation:
But most fully and of set-purpose a very learned and true Christian Gentleman,
that holds constant Communion with the Church of England, has turned aside,
answering the Title of his Book, like a good Samaritan, to help up a bleeding
Church, and power a Composition of choice Preparations, to heal her Wounds. But
alas! have not, and do not our Sins separate between us and our God? Oh! how
are they increased, that make that Separation! O! how hot are they against a
Separation that is both curable and tolerable in comparison of theirs! If their
Assemblies, if their Exercises were called seditious, and Twenty Pounds upon
the Houses of their Assemblies, and but 5 s. upon every one that communicates
in their Sins, it would be more pleasing to God, and more for the Establishment
and Prosperity of the Kingdom, than their Prosecutions of Dissenters in point
of Ceremony: many of these consult, keep their Meetings sedulously, concur
unanimously, and lay Spies in wait to apprehend the Preachers of the Word of
Salvation. These breath out Threatenings, and what they will do! But if this
chanee to fall into any of their Hands, I will present one warning more, and a
notable Example to them, William Lantgrave of Hasse, Casp. Peucer, Historia
Carcerum, Part 2. page 773.
made Intercession with Augustus the Elector of Saxony, for Dr. Peucer,
Prisoner a long time, for his dissent in the Vbiquitarian Controversy. The
Elector promised his release, if Anne his Duchess would be willing, and desired
him to try her first: she replied according to her Obstinacy, If she lived, he
should not be released. Which Answer of hers, the Lantgrave, and other wise
Men, did thus interpret, That the Duchess should shortly die, that Peucer by
her Death might be released; and so it proved, according to their
Interpretation, she died, says Dr. Peucer, in that very moment, in which I
dreamed in my Sleep, of a great and noble Funeral, and a Bell ringing, and as
the Bell-rope brake, that Verse of the Psalm came into my Mind, Our Soul is
escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler; the Snare is broken, and we
are escaped. And among what Prodigies, she died, is known to all.

I am confident, if the Persecutors of our peaceable and religious
Nonconformists were studious to prepare for Death, they would forbear this
Work; and as it is dreadful for any of them to die in their Sins, unrepented of,
and to die in this Sin, so let them take heed, that some of the greatest of them
do not fall by an apparent Hand of God. I do profess if I had any Friend
engaged in this horrid Work, I would persuade him, if possible, to forbear, if
he had any regard to his Soul, to his Life, to his Family and Posterity; if any
true Loyalty to his Sovereign, if kindness to the Church and Country; for this
is a fighting against God, a walking contrary to him; and what can they expect
but that God should walk contrary to them? Well, we read, Blessed are they that
are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for any part of Righteousness and
Religion, but there is none for them that persecute. Blessed are they who lay to
heart the doleful State of the Protestant Religion, that consult her Peace, and
that appear for her Peace in this day of her Fear and Trouble. When other are
pronouncing Woe to themselves, and Woe to others; these will find Peace in their
own Souls, who have studied the Peace of the Church, by healing her Breaches.
If any should say to the first movers of this Work now in hand, as Olivarius
the Chancellor of France, when in great Terrors, said to the Cardinal of
Lorrain: Ah, ah, Cardinalis, Pavel. Mellif. Hist. Part 3. p. 343. Edit. 4. Anno
1631.
tu nos omnes in aeternum exitium trahis: it will be no allay of Horrors, nor
relief to Conscience, if any Divine or Confessor shall say, as the Cardinal did
to him; You are tempted of the unclean Spirit, persist in the Faith. To this
fearful Story, I will add the words of that Historian, Haec est merces Judicum
quibus Aulicae Gratiae fumus, sua Conscientia potior est: He might have added,
and omnium, and of all that prefer Court-Favour, which is but Smoke, to the
Light and Peace of their own Consciences. The Sufferers are much to be pitied;
the divided Body of Christ is more to be pitied, but they who stretch out their
Hands to vex the religious and truly pious Sufferers, are both to be feared and
pitied; because it is a more fearful thing for them to fall into the Hands of
the living God, than for them, who religiously fear God, to fall into their
Hands. To put an end to the Sufferings of true Protestants in a Protestant
Kingdom, and to prevent an apprehended and feared Desolation, good Men's
Thoughts are at work, and several Proposals for Accommodation are made public.
And I wonder at the Providence of God, that when too many are extreme busy with
Hands and Tongues to tear us into more and new Distractions, others, and they
Members of the Church Communion, appear as strongly prepared to receive the
Ejected. What this Providence may speak, I will not be so bold as to interpret,
but it raises up some hopes, when we are dejected under the dejecting
Apprehensions of considering Men. It is manifest, that most that are engaged in
suppressing the Nonconformists, read little, consider as little, it is but vain
to write for their sakes; and those that read a little of much that is said,
are strongly pre-engaged, or are afraid, or covetous to save themselves, or
carried by some other Affection and Temptation, and thatwhich is most fearful
of all, are under a strong Delusion. If we were not under some degrees of a
Delusion, it were impossible that Men should be so impolitick, and irreligious.
I am grieved, and ashamed to read how Gundamor did delude a great, wise, and
Protestant Kingdom (in his Account of his Embassy to the Council in Spain) in
two great Instances of his Craft, pernicious to our Church and State. 1. A
Parliament, said Gundamor! Out of a M. S. that lay in the Study of a Loyal
Divine, related to the Eail of Stratford, printed by Mr. Rich. Dugdalt, 1679,
and by T. S. (Mr. Scot, in his Vex Populi,) printed An. 1624.
nay, therein lies one of the principal Services I have done, in working such a
dislike between the King and the lower House, by the Endeavor of that
honorable and admirable Engine, a sure Servant to us -- as the King will never
endure a Parliament again. 2. For Religion, as Bancroft, who maintained a
dangerous Schism between our Seculars and the Jesuits --; this taught me, as
it did Barnevel in the low Countries, to work secretly and insensibly between
the Conformist and the Nonconformist --. He bragged he had the Head of Sir W.
Raleigh at command; got Dr. Everard of St. Martin's silenced, and Dr. Whiting,
and Mr. Clayton, for preaching against them; and that Mr. Ward of Ipswich did
not escape, for his Picture of 88. He advised the Jesuits, who consulted in
Fetter-Lane, (and had a Printing-Press at a Goldsmith's House) to sow
Dissension between the Prince and People. How warmly do some accomplish the
Advice of Contzen the Jesuit, to bring in Popery? Rule 3. The Doctors and
leading Pastors must be put out, if it may be, all at once, if not, by degrees.
R. 8. Let the People be told, the Ministers are heady, obstinate Men; that they
are faulty, and have deserved to be put out. R. 6. To bring in Popery, is to
make use of the Protestant Contentions. R. 7. To forbid the Protestants
privately or publicly to assemble together. 8. To proceed to the Severity of
Laws and Punishments --. But now many are so imposed upon, as tho they did not
believe what they cannot but believe, and as if they believed what they have no
reason to suspect. O that many both of our Preachers and Prosecutors would
diligently read and consider, that excellent Sermon of our renowned Father
Bishop Jewel, on Mat. 9. Pray the Lord of the Harvest that he would send
Laborers into his Harvest. Take a few Gleaning of it: O lift up your Eyes and
consider how the Hearts of your Brethren ly waste without Instruction, without
Knowledge, without the Food of Life, without the Comfort of God's Word! such a
Misery as was never seen among Heathens. The Turks have Preachers sufficient
for their People --, the Jews have their Teachers, etc. The Christians when
they lived under Tyrants --, never lacked Ministers to instruct them. It is
therefore most lamentable, that Christians living under a Christian Prince, in
the Peace and Liberty of the Gospel, should lack learned Ministers to teach
them: This is the greatest Plague that God sends upon a People: contrary-wise,
the greatest Blessing any People can receive at God's Hands, is to have
Prophets and Preachers --. But when God takes away his Ministers which should
preach Peace and open to the People the Will of God, and make known his
Judgments, it is a Token that God is highly displeased with his People, etc. I
may be blamed for this Quotation, as if it were scandalous to the Government, a
popular delusion of People to Discontent: Yes, I know what may be said; but let
the doleful, dark, famishing Condition of multitudes of Places in this Kingdom
be viewed; and it is true, that People perish for want of Knowledge. I have
known where one pitiful Curat (Journy-man indeed) that could make but a poor
shift to saw the Liturgy and Psalms between him and the Clerk, has been all
that three great Congregations had had, unless a Stranger had preached to two
of them in one day. The want of Maintenance is very great in all Parts of the
Kingdom; but the want of Ministers, of sound, convincing, plain, edifying,
faithful Ministers, is exceeding great, and far greater. I cannot but pity, and
speak of what I know, by good report, such has been the hunger and want of
Spiritual Bread in large Places, that poor Souls that go constantly to
Common Prayer, have crowded into the Prayers, and charitable Preaching, or
Exhortations of a Nonconformist. O how painfully have I seen poor Souls travel
on foot several Miles to hear a profitable Sermon from some Conformist!
Nonconformity and Conformity is a Mystery to poor Souls; they can wave the
Distinction, for their Profit and Edification. Good Preaching is as scarce as
Gold in many poor Countries, and more precious: Poor Souls are never the better
for some Ministers, and a great deal the worse for others; some have not, and
care not for the Study of the great Gift of Preaching to Gonversion and
Salvation; some may do better than they do, but will not, tho they may; and
many others that can and would, may not. O what is the State of millions of
precious Souls in the mean time! I know London, and other great Places, have
plenty of that, as of other Rarities: but if the Scarcity of Countries were but
known, and laid to heart, methinks we should not stand so strictly upon Terms,
and I am certain, should send out all we can find into the Harvest, rather than
silence, and keep out one, or what is much worse, than send the Servants of
God, his Stewards, to dig and beg, to set the veriest Catch-Poles upon Earth,
the Lions, the absurd and unreasonable Men, that have not so much Faith as
Devils have, to watch for them to arrest them; first, leisurely to undo them,
and afterward to apprehend them, and cast them into Prison: To stop the Mouths
of able and faithful Preachers, and to imprison them for their Labors, is to
let Hell loose in a Nation; and to stop the way to Heaven against many Souls. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem! O England, England --! Behold, I send you Prophets and
wise Men, and Scribes: some of them you shall persecute from City to City --. A
Breach in a human mutable Conformity, will be found more tolerable, than a
Breach upon a Protestant Church, upon a Kingdom's Peace and Prosperity --.
Latimer followed Ridley to the Stake; but now if Latimer go first, it shall not
be long before Ridley follow. To prevent the apprchendea Desolation, and
Land-Flood, where the Channel is too strait and narrow; let all that have the
Royalty of the River open the Channel wider, that the Ship may have room to
turn her in, and the Violence of the Stream abate, by enlarging the Banks; and
let there be an Harbor and a Fort built for the shattered Ships: And let me be
excused for my good Will, if not thanked for my Invention: I see other wise
Contrivances laid by, and some amended, let mine be so too. I do humbly
conceive that the Reverend Mr. Baxter has given great Evidences of a vare Head
and Spirit, in the second Part of the Way of Concord, and deserves great
Thanks; Mr. Corbet has written like a wise and excellent Man; Reverend Mr.
Humphrey's Peaceable Design, is much observed and respected, and his Defects
supplied, by the most worthy Gentleman, the Samaritan, and Exceptions made
against him with Amendments, but with great respect by the Excellent and Good
Bishop of Cork: In comparison of these Men, I am but as a poor Fellow that
plies his Bucket to quench the Fire, while the more skilful ply their invented
Engines; or as one that brings Earth in a Basket, or a Barrow, while others
draw the Lines, and lay the Platform. Here I conceive two things must come
into Consideration.

1. What Is to be done. 2. What are the Terms of Admittance, and Continuance in
the holy Ministry, to be allowed and established by Law.
1. In the first, there are two things comprehended, 1. Substance and Worship;
2. Ceremony and Form.

The Debates are principally for and against Forms and Ceremonies. For both, I
make bold to say;

1. There is great Reason why a singular regard ought to be bad, and given to
the King's Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs, for the Wisdom,
Moderation, and Comprehensiveness of it; and because, if ever such a thing may
come to be offered, we may hope for the Royal Approbation of what may be
offered out of it, of which he seemed so fond, when he promised it.

2. It is clear, that Cathedrals must not be touched, neither Revenues, nor
Ceremonies, let them enjoy both, and allow unto others a Liberty in another
kind, while they may enjoy theirs, without mutual and uncharitable Censures and
Contentions.

3. It is clear, there must be a Liturgy; and very many, even to Dr. Sherlock,
mention some Alterations in the several Parts of it, as desirable and
advisable, without any positive Arrogance in a Matter of this Nature. I do
offer my Observation, Some that expect much Profit by Preaching, do think first
and second Service too long, and tiresome: Others that care less for Preaching,
are very busy in the Interlocutory Parts of the Service, grow careless, and too
often prate (and stare about and whisper) in the Lessons, and sleep under our
Sermons; both are too long for them also. And in some Congregations, there are,
I believe, as many, if not more, Service-Books, than Bibles, which, under
Correction, is too little honor for the Bible. All that I will suggest in this
last Case is, 1. That the second Service, or Communion-Service, may be then
only read, when there is a Communion, or when there is no Sermon. Except the
reading the Commandments be frequently enjoined; or, that it may be left at
liberty to read either first, or second, or what parts of both may best suit
with particular Occasions and Assemblies. 2. That only one of the three Creeds
be used at one time, in the same Scrvice. 3. The so oftenrepetition of the
Lord's Prayer in the same Service may he limited. All cannot, most do not keep
Curats; the work of Reading the ordinary first and second Service, besides
incidental Offices, as Baptisms, Churchings, etc. make it very expensive to
most Men's strength and spirits, and wearisom to the People: and the constant
necessary work of Preaching and Catechizing is hardly endured by the young and
healthful, but impossible to be performed by the infirm and aged. It is true
indeed, if a Man's Conscience will bear it, and the People have no more need, a
Minister may be both short, and seldom in the Pulpit; but then it is with two
great Hazzards: First, of losing his Auditory, or of his Auditories great loss
to their Souls. If we did consider the Copiousness of our Work, the frequent
Repetitions, Ingeminations, and Enforcements of many great and necessary
Arguments, the Succession and Growth of young Ones, and all these of several
Capacities, if Preaching be at all necessary to the Instruction, Conversion,
Correction, Direction, Consolation, and Salvation of precious Souls, it may not
be intermitted without far greater loss than a Masters Absence from his School,
or a careful Father, Mother, or Steward, from the Household. This humble
Proposal for omitting the second Service, has a fair Countenance from the
Rubricks. There is a Supposition, that the Communion is celebrated every Lord's
day (but it is not, except in some few Cathedrals) as appears by some Rubricks;
Rubr. the last, immediately before the Lord's Prayer, is this; The Table at the
Communion-time, having a fair white Linen Cloth upon it, shall stand in the
Body of the Church, or in the Chancel, where Morning and Evening Prayer are
appointed to be said: and the Priest standing at the North-side of the Table,
shall say the Lord's-Prayer, with the Collect following, the People kneeling.
Now I query, Whether the Priest be bound to read that Service, but standing at
the North-side of the Table, so placed, so covered, to answer the Title of the
Service, which is, The Order for the Administration of the Lord's Supper, or
Holy Communion: And the Rubricks that follow speak altogether in relation to
the Communion; the Rubric after the Commandments is, Then shall follow one of
these two Collects for the King, the Priest standing as before, and saying, Let
us pray --. The Rubric, after the Nicene Creed, does suppose the Communion to
be celebrated every Lord's Day; or else we omit to declare Holydays, Bans, etc.
There is a great Inconsistency in that Clause of that Rubric, and then if
occasion be, shall notice be given of the Communion: when the former Rubricks
suppose there is one then. The Rubric before the Prayer for the whole State of
Christ's Church is, And when there is a Communion, the Priest shall then place
upon the Table so much Bread and Wine, as he shall think sufficient: After
which done, the Priest shall say, Let us pray for the whole State of Christ's
Church. I know there is a Rubric after the Communion Service, that appoints
what shall be read, when there is no Communion: which makes a
Communion-Service, without a Communion.

Thus much in general for the Things to be done.

The second Thing is the Terms of Admission to the Administration. For this one
plain Rule may be sufficient, taken out of the Form of Ordination: That which
is a sufficient Condition, or requisite for Ordination and Admission to the
Office, is sufficient for the Administration. Or that which is sufficient to
make a Man a Minister, is enough to entitle him to the Exercise of his
Ministry, except he apostatize, and lose what he seemed to have. The Person to
be ordained or admitted is first to be tried and examined. The Qualifications
to be tried are his Calling, and his Qualifications, or sitness for the Office,
by the Holy Ghost.

The Qualifications for Learning, are (low enough, and were high enough, Rubr.
for a Deacon.
if not too high, for the greatest Number at our first Reformation) learned in
the Latin Tongue, and sufficiently instructed in the holy Scripture. The Bishop
does admonish him, that presents any One to the Office, to present such as be
apt and meet for their Learning and Godly Conversation: and if there be no
impediment or not able Crime objected by the Congregation, he is admitted, upon
his taking the Oath of Supremacy, and answering to the Questions; I. That he
does trust that he is inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take his Office. II.
Truly called according to the Will of Christ. III. That he does unfeignedly
believe all the Canonical Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. IV. That he
will diligently read the same unto the People, where he shall be appointed to
serve. V. That he will apply all his Diligence to fashion his Life according to
the Doctrine of Christ. VI. Reverently to obey his Ordinary. Over and above
these Answers, he that is to be ordained Priest, declares VIIly, that he is
persuaded, that the holy Scriptures contain sufficiently all Doctrines required
of necessity for eternal Salvation through Faith in Jesus Christ, and has so
determined by God's Grace out of the said Scriptures, to instruct the People
committed to his Charge, and to teach nothing as necessary to Salvation, but
what may be concluded and proved by the Scriptures. VIII. That he will give
faithful Diligence always to minister the Doctrine, Sacraments, and Discipline
of Christ, as the Lord commanded. IX. That he will banish all erroneous and
strange Doctrines; use public and private Monitions, to the Sick and Whole. X.
That he will be diligent in reading the Scriptures, and in Studies, laying
aside the Study of the World and Flesh. XI. Frame his Life, and the Life of his
Family, according to the Doctrine of Christ, and be Examples to the Flock. XII.
That he will maintain and promote Quietness, Peace and Love among all Christian
People, especially his charge. XIII. That he will obey his Ordinary, and chief
Ministers, to whom is committed the Charge and Government over them.

Now I do suppose that Subscriptions will be required of all Admitted; See Mr.
Humphr. Matter for Union. And the Samaritan.
and the last Promise will be most scrupled. Of this some Non-Conformists
declare their Readiness to obey the Bishops, as Officers under the King, as
supreme Governor; and is also proposed by others. Matter of Subscription.
For the Subscription, (which is but some kind of Security, especially in
doubtful and controverted Things) Query, If for Peace sake it may not be
sufficient, if, after due Examination of their Qualifications, and Calling by
the Holy Ghost, that they declare and subscribe their unfeigned Belief of all
the Canonical Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; that they contain all
Doctrine required of necessity for eternal Salvation, and that they will
instruct the People, committed to their Charge, (or any other, to whom they may
occasionally preach) and teach nothing, as required of necessity to eternal
Salvation, but that which they may be persuaded may be concluded and proved by
the holy Scripture; and that they will diligently and faithfully perform all
Parts of their Office, and order their own Conversations, and of their
Families, (if they have any, or when they shall have) according to the Doctrine
of Christ?

We see upon what Terms Ministers are ordained; What more should be required of
them, as Ministers, but a Discharge of their Ministry, according to their
Trust, with Knowledge, Diligence and Fidelity? If a Magistrate, or any other
Officer, be made, he may execute his Office, without any After-Restrictions.

If Subscription to the Articles be still required, for Satisfaction of
foreign Churches concerning our Doctrine and Faith, ut certius inde constet
omnium Ecclesiarum concentus, as Calvin wrote to the Protector: and as a
boundary to our selves, for Peace sake, as some would have our Articles to be;
the Number of them are lessened in some Proposals, and expedients thought upon,
for the Relief of such, as scruple to subscribe, without a fair Exposition,
agreeable to the Articles, and Analogy of Faith, as in the Bill of
Comprehension.

The Ceremonies being either abolished, or left at liberty, according to the
King's Declaration, the Subscription, now required by the Canon, cease; and
such as this above mentioned may take place, which is taken out of the Book of
Ordination. If it be objected, That this large Subscription is too lax,
Socinians and Heretics may creep in, notwithstanding this. Answ. So they will,
and so they may, and so they have, notwithstanding the present Subscription, or
any other, in what term almost soever. But their Orthodoxy may be tried upon
Examination, and certified by such as know them personally, and that Evil may
be prevented, or remedied when it is divulged: Why shall others be pressed
beyond what they can clearly consent unto, for the sake of them that will
subscribe to any thing?

By binding them to other, and much scrupled Subscriptions, according to the
Canons and new Declarations (except that against Transubstantiation, which is a
point of Faith, and not to be omitted) we see many are un-made in effect, who
had been made Ministers before. This that is said, is not to the Prejudice of
their orderly legal Entrance into Cures, by Officers appointed, nor all that
may be said.

This, and whatever else, I have thought of, is from a holy Desire of
reconciling Differences, of universal Union, if possible (but that being
morally impossible) then of a brotherly peaceable Forbearance, which is a great
Duty of the Gospel; and for a Cessation of the great Troubles of our Brethren,
which is of pernicious Operation, and will reach further than themselves. And
if it might be considered, that Union and Forbearance are of greater Moment,
and more clearly revealed and enjoined, than the things that disunite us, it
might abate our Rigors, and heal our Divisions. It is true, Obedience to
Magistrates is a clear and necessary Duty, but it is restrained to things
antecedently lawful, and practicable: But when the Lawfulness of the things are
debated, the refusal of Obedience, contains no Guilt of Rebellion; the
Magistrates Power, to require Obedience in lawful things is not gainsaid, but
the things required are rationally doubted of. And when things are urged
principally upon the reason of Authority, it is clear there is little or
nothing in the things themselves to commend them to our Observation. And the
Magistrate saves his Authority, and is as much obeyed as need be, by making a
new Law, that takes off the Obligation of the old, or leaves things
indifferent, in their Indifferency, as much as by an Obedience to the old.

But against all that is or can be said, it is objected, That the
Nonconformists have brought all this Mischief upon themselves, and danger to
the Church, and Protestant Interest; for time was (meaning the Savoy
Conference, 1661.) when the Bishops might have been persuaded to yield to many
Mittigations; but some of them, now Dissenters, answered to the Question, What
would you have? All or none. And so they have one part of their Choice.

But as this tends to aggravate their Sufferings; so good Nature and Grace
incline us to relieve them, whose Wilfulness has brought them to a necessity
of relief, or suffering. But what if neither some, nor all of them, were guilty
of the Stifness and Rashness imputed to them? then God calls aloud upon those
Instruments that are yet alive, by the many Sufferings of good Ministers and
People, and by apparent Dangers of the Protestant Religion, both to humble
themselves before God, and to make Supplication to him, and Intercession for
them, with the Supreme Power: For if great detriment come to the Gospel, and to
many Souls, by destroying the Shepherds, and scattering the Flock, it is
doubtful whether that Allegation will pass for an Excuse, or Plea, that they
are Non-Conformists and Dissenters; except they could produce a Warrant from
Jesus Christ, deputing them to make such, Conditions. I would not for all the
Preferments in the Church, charge any falsely, as being Authors of these many
Years Troubles, and would sooner beg Forgiveness and repent, than persist in an
Error, or do wrong to the Innocent. I have rather acquitted the
Non-Conformists from the Blame of drawing these Evils upon themselves, than
some of the other side. And, I think, I have as good Warrant for it, as can be
desired by one that was not present at the whole Transaction. I am not singular
in my Opinion; I find an ingenuous Gentleman lay the Fault of our Discomposures
upon some old peevish Divines, Appendix to Mr. Hunt's Argument.
as he calls them. I have been long possessed with an Opinion also, by the
Words of the Presbyterian Commissioners, in the Conclusion of their Account of
those Proceedings, in their last Reply. For all the rest we thank you --. And
we must say in the Conclusion, that, if these be all the Abatements and
Amendments you will admit, you sell your Innocence and the Churches Peace for
nothing. If the Pride, Faction, or Rashness of any one, or more, of the
Commissioners, who desired a Reformation, had precipitated him into
Disputation, and Contention, or a Refusal of reasonable Mitigations; why should
others suffer for the Indiscretion of one? and why had not the other Side, who
were potent in Friends, and highest in Favor, and either advanced, or near an
Advancement into the highest Watchtower, condescended to some Things, that
might be grateful to all moderate Men, and no just Offense to many others, and
taken the Way for a lasting Peace, and so comprehensive a Settlement, that true
Laborers might have been their Fellow Laborers. I shall not in haste forget
the sorrowful Complaint of a very wise and learned Conforming Divine, that
could say as much to all Points of Conformity, as most, if not any of them all.
The Way of Peace we have not known. I hear his Fears multiply with his Years,
and grow heavy upon him with his great Age. But upon whomsoever the Blame of
our Breaches may fall, (as may appear, when a faithful History of that
Conference may see the Light, which I hope to see in convenient Time.) A great
Duty lies upon all true Protestants, by Prayers, Counsels, and all kind of
Endeavors, to heal our Breaches, to procure Liberty to the sound and able
Preachers of the Word of Life, and that neither they, nor any that fear God,
and worship him in Truth, may become a Prey to them that commonly profane God's
great Name, seldom worship him in Public, and never took Joshua's Resolution
for himself and his House, that can be seen by their Practice: and this every
Man will do, whose Heart is ruled by the Peace of God.

I cannot end, but must take the Freedom to speak a few Words more, especially
to my Conformable Brethren in the Ministry, and Justices of the Peace.

I have labored (reverend Brethren) to raise a Building (if you will vouchsafe
to look into it) capacious to hold all or most of our dissenting Brethren, who
now ly out of Doors, and strong to endure all the Batteries of our Adversaries,
upon the Doctrines of our famous Bishops and Doctors, as upon a Foundation. I
am certain I have misquoted none of them, nor forced them from their Native
Sense and Coherence: If I have failed in my arguings, and kept not to the Line
of Reason, that must be discovered by sharper Lights than mine is, and by thus
doing, a Conformist may plead for the Non-Conformists, and not forsake the
Church. I have also thought that if the same Methods and Mediums were used for
healing our Divisions, which were proposed to reconcile, or at least to cool
the far greater Controversies between the Lutherans and Calvinists, by our
famous and reverend Bishops, Morton, Hall, Davenant, etc. we had seen the
Kingdom of Christ gone up apace, as the Temple did, without the Noice of Axes
and Hammers.

I am persuaded the Divisions of the Church ly near the Hearts of some of you:
and it cannot but be grievous to see into what Hands our Brethren are fallen,
as given to the Spoil, and I know the Christian Saying, as I received it from
credible Testimony, that my Lord of L. and C. answered a busy Extinguisher of
Light, who told him, Dr. G. was preaching. He is about his Master's Work, let
him alone: and again, Preaching and praying are good Works: Where there is an
Antipathy against Popery, there is Moderation to Protestant Dissenters.

I humbly beseech you, Christian Gentlemen (Justices of the Peace) bear with me
a Word or two. Do you think if peaceable Nonconformity be not fit to be
indulged, nor spared, will Nonconformity and Heresy, meeting in the same
Person, be endured, if it be possible to root it up? All the Disputations
against Nonconformity now, may be strong Arguments against the Toleration of
Heresy, (as our Religion is called by the Papists) and they who stretch their
Power against Protestants for Nonconformity, do justify the Roman Cruelties,
and prove their Proceedings to be more rational, and you, that strive with the
Flat or Back of the Sword, may be smitten with the Edge, if you can endure; and
you must take it patiently, or be self-condemned.

I beseech you, Gentlemen, consider who they are that run and ride up and down
upon this Work, that would take Ministers and Hearers, but such whose
Sacraments are Healths, filled with Wine void of the Spirit, whose Devotions
are Wounds and Dam-mees: Will these ever reform a Church, that make the World
the worse? Must not that Execution of Law be thought unhappy, which is
effectually the putting one of Contzen the Jesuite's Rules into Execution, (as
above said) for changing of Religion, and bringing in Popery, viz. to Proceed
to the Severity of Laws and Punishments against Protestants?

POSTSCRIPT.
I Am forced to break off abruptly in the Close of these Sheets about Union,
and must leave what is behind to another Part. In the mean Time, that the Union
I press for, may be more easily effected, I humbly beseech my Brethren in the
Ministry, and all others, to revive the almost lost Virtue of Moderation.
Consider what the excellent Dean of Canterbury says in his Preface to Bishop
Wilkin's 15 Sermons, lately published; where, in Vindication of that rarely
accomplished Bishop, (whose great Name, and excellent Spirit it seems could not
escape a smutting from some of our Firebrarnds) He thus defends both the Virtue
of Moderation, and that great Example of it, to wit: And I purposely (says the
Dean) mention his Moderation, and likewise adventure to commend him for it;
notwithstanding that this Virtue, so much esteemed and magnified by wise Men in
all Ages, has of late been declamed against with so much Zeal and Fierceness,
and yet with that good Grace and Confidence, as if it were not only no Virtue,
but even the Sum and Abridgment of all Vices: I say, notwithstanding all this,
I am still of the old Opinion, that Moderation is a Virtue, and one of the
peculiar Ornaments and Advantages of the excellent Constitution of our Church,
and must at last be the Temper of her Members, especially the Clergy, if ever
we seriously intend the firm Establishment of this Church, and do not
industriously design, by cherishing Heats and Divisions among our selves, to
let in Popery at these Breaches. But more especially consider our blessed
Savior teaches us Moderation by his Laws concerning these Matters in
Difference, by his Apostles, by his easy Yoke, his Blessings and his Judgments;
and by a visible Providence over our chief City London, which should be an
Example to Norwich, Bristol, Coventry, and a Warning to them. There was nothing
to be done in the Year of the dreadful Plague: The Magistrate found other Work
the next Year after the dreadful Fire: two Years after, the Government fell
into the Hands of Sr. W. Turner, whose unsuspected Affection to the Church,
made his Wisdom and Moderation the more remarkable, and the Blessing of Peace
and Contentment of Mind attended. And how much happier was his Year, and of the
Successors of Sir S. Sterling, than that troublesome Year to the
Nonconformists, and certainly as little comfortable as it was honorable to
himself. Sir Richard Ford was feared, but his eminent Prudence procured him
Honor and Estimation; And what Conspiracies or Seditions were moved as much as
to make him thoughtful about them? What Cause of Suspicion or Fear did the
Dissenters give his honorable Successors, till the breaking out of the
dreadful Plot? and did not the Lord Mayors since that, rest confident in the
Loyalty and Fidelity of the Dissenters? and did not two of them concur in the
Vote, against the Prosecution of them? And since the Presbyterian Sham-plots
have made even Hardiness and Impudence, to blush at their Confidence, what
Suspicions have they moved to give any Color for them? How dear was Sir
Patience Ward to all good Men, as appeared in their public and private Prayers
for him in his dangerous Sickness? and did not he leave his Government in a
peaceable, safe State? After several Years Indulgence of the Non-Conformists,
did they grow trouble some by their Numbers, or factious by their Ease? And I
do heartily wish the R. H. Sir John More, now L. Mayor, may leave it as he
found it; and carry a Peace in his Bosom, answerable to the Piety and
Moderation of his Speech at his Election, (for which I know many Prayers were
made for him, by some that never saw him) that his Piety may not be outdar'd by
some of an imperious Humor, to impose upon others an impious notion, I do
humbly recommend to you Mr. Bold's Sermon against Persecution: to which I set
my Seal.
That Men cannot be Conscientious, but they must be Factious, and take
Pleasure, or Pride, or something else, in representing. peaceable Religion as a
Torch of Rebellion. What tender Heart will be able to bear the Stings of
Conscience, for touching such as fear God, with but the Point of the Sword, for
professing that same substantial Piety, by which they hope to be saved
themselves. Duresce, duresce. Peace upon Israel.

The Conformist's fourth Plea for the Non-Conformists; containing (chiesly)
Relations of the Sufferings of many Non-Conformists in several Parts of
England, will be shortly published.

The Case and Cure of Persons excommunicated according to the present Law of
England. With some friendly Advice to persons pursued in inferior
Ecclesiastical Courts, by malicious promoters; both in order to their avoiding
Excommunication, or delivering themselves from prisons, if imprisoned, because
they have stood excommunicated four by Days.

Mr. Jekyl's Sermon, entitled, Religion makes the best Loyalty, which was
prepared for that great Assembly of Protestant Lords, Gentlemen, and Citizens,
that was to meet at St. Michael's Cornhill on 21 April last, to give God
thanks for the Preservation of his Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion,
and Protestant Subjects from the Popish Plot, and many Sham-plots, etc. is now
published.

Sold by Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.

THE Conformist's Third Plea FOR THE NON-CONFORMISTS.
WE may think a Suspension of Severity, and a powerful Interposition between
the Threatening and the Execution, would be proper and seasonable, of great
Service and Advantage; but the infinitely wise God, Savior, and King of his
Church, whose Thoughts are deep and unsearchable, may think it sufficient, that
they that love him have his Promise, that all things shall work together for
good to them. Let them that are instructed to know his Will, do it, and that
know his Promises, believe him, and that have renounced the World, freely part
with their small share in it. But to me the state of things appears dark,
confused, and disconsolate; and being engaged further than I thought at first,
the same Motives that prevailed with me before, prevailed with me to go on, not
from a private or factious Discontent, but to prevent, as much as I can, the
horrid Sins of some, and the grievous Sufferings of others, and to discharge
mine own Duty, which will bring the greatest Peace, to my now grieved, broken,
and afflicted Spirit.

But to come to some special matter; give me favor to run over these four
things.

I. To represent the State of our Times. II. The Sufferings of the Protestant
Dissenters. III. For what. IV. By whom they suffer.
I. We are a most sinful, and sinfully divided Generation, so broken, that none
but God can keep us from falling to pieces, like a Pot-sheard broken, like a
broken earthen Vessel, in which there is no pleasure. Our Reason cannot
propose, nor consult Expedients to make us whole and happy, because Interests,
worldly Policy, and a contemptible Art, or private Cunning to get, or save, the
things that perish in their use, and by their Abuse undo and ruin the Owners,
does stir up Sedition in our Passions against our Reasons. The Gospel has been
so generally despised, that it has not begotten in us a Faith and Love that
unites to Christ, and to one another: We have not Faith enough to purify our
Hearts, to overcome the World, to act as for a Crown of Glory, and a Kingdom
that cannot be moved. If we believed a World to come, how little should we
strive for this! If we had Love enough to cover a multitude of Sins, to forgive
one another, to love as Brethren, and our Neighbor as our selves, we should
not be so jealous and suspicious, nor contentious, nor selfish, as we are. One
great thing is wanting, which is the Wisdom from above, described by St. James,
Chap. 3.17. Which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated,
full of Mercy and good Fruits, without Partiality, without Hypocrisy.

There is a great Reproach cast upon the Church, and the greatest of all cast
upon the Dissenters, as Dividers; but it is an ignorant or malicious Reproach,
for there is nothing whole but the Church and Body of Christ: They are united
to Christ, the Prince of Peace, by one Spirit, Faith and Love, and to one
another by the same Bonds and Principle; Schism and Faction are from the Flesh
and Devil. No sooner do Joseph and his Brethren know one another to be
Brethren, but they fall upon one another Necks, and kiss, and weep, and repent
of all their Unkindnesses, and express the dearest Love. Paul and Barnabas
dissent and part, but both agree to promote the Kingdom of Christ. They that
are not, and will not be reconciled to God, are the great Dividers and Breakers
of the Peace; they are made up of Lusts of the Flesh, which divide and draw
several ways for their Satisfaction: Whence come Wars and Fightings? come they
not hence, even of your Lusts, which war in your Members? There is Dissension
in the Mind, and in the Passions, between the Law in the Mind and Heart, and
the Lusts of the Mind and Flesh, till the Conscience comes to be past feeling,
and the Sinner falls under a reprobate Mind, and then what Confusion follows?
when they call Good Evil, and Evil Good? put Darkness for Light, and Light for
Darkness? what open Defiance is bid to God and Christ! what dissenting from,
and Nonconformity to the sacred Baptismal Covenant? the holy Rules of a
Gospel-Conversation? There is a Law of Faith, of Love, of Repentance, and the
Penalty is heavy upon them that do not obey it; there is a Law of
Righteousness, of following Peace and Holiness, without which no Man can see
the Lord: Who transgress these Laws, and multitudes more? Yea, who is the Man
that is guilty of all? And, what Sin so great now a days, and in all times, as
Nonconformity? Who rob by the Highways, who kill and steal, who curse and
damn? who have Woe? who have Sorrow? who have Contentions? who have Bablings?
who have Wounds without cause? Who have Redness of Eyes? Nonconformists. Who
make the greatest Trouble to Justices and Magistrates? Nonconformists. Who fill
Prisons and break them? Who take leave of the World at Tyburn, and other
Places? Nonconformists. Who draw Swords, send Challenges, fight Duels, and
murder one another first with Wine and Drink, and then kill their dear
Companions? Nonconformists and Dissenters. But now, there is a Distinction to
be made, some Dissenters are tolerable, and some intolerable; the drunken
Nonconformist is tolerable, he has not only taken the Oaths, but swears: the
other is a sober Nonconformist, and taking the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, will not acquit him, and he is intolerable. The Nonconformists that
assemble to worship God are intolerable; and thousands that worship him not at
all, are too commonly let alone. But are not Malefactors punished? yes, they
are, but their Crimes are against Civil Peace, or Righteousness, and not
immediately for Irreligion. But the Nonconformist Dissenters from arbitrary and
variable Impositions, are punished heavily and smartly, for religious
assembling, and no other Cause, as is proved in the second Plea, and is cleared
hereafter.

And upon this, the Kingdom is extremely divided and troubled. There is a
mighty Party in the Land, that build upon another, and a new Foundation, though
by them called old. But Protestants agree in the same Foundations of Religion,
obey the same Civil Government in the same Person, and same Fundamental, and
Civil Laws; and yet some are separated for Sacrifice; the Lot is cast upon
them, and great Rewards allowed to any that will do the Work. Our Parliaments
from 1673, to the last, would have prevented this Ruin; but for their sakes
and their own, Parliament is here taken Synecdochically.
they are now like to suffer. Our last Parliaments were chosen with less
Expense, Debauchery, Tumult, or Faction, than any we have known in our days:
Some had not been long in the House, but they were driven out of their former
Prejudices and Prepossessions, by the clear and convincing Reasons and Debates
of the House. They were generally Men of the noblest Estates in their several
Counties, but acting as if they had nothing private or domestic, and applying
themselves to the Preservation of the King's Sacred Person, and of the Reformed
Protestant Religion, to which they are obliged by Obligations of an even
lasting Effect. Since their Dissolutions, they cannot but be sensible how their
Proceedings are confured and exposed, and many, either of them or of such as
approved of them, are put out of Commission, and many that are most disaffected
to them are either continued, or fill up the Vacancies; and these proceed upon
contrary Reasons, and Motives, and run into contrary Methods: What they would
have composed and healed, these do (taking the opportunity of a long Vacancy of
Parliament) discompose, with a greater Severity than at any time before. And
the Sufferings of the Nonconformists do clear the Members of Parliament from
being Nonconformists, or Fanatics; for if they were, they should meet with the
like Treatment and Usage, and so the Sufferings of the Nonconformists serve as
a Vindication of the Parliament from the censure of being such themselves. All
those noble and worthy Patriots are now the unsatisfied Spectators of an
excessive Trouble and Charge; if not irrecoverable Ruin of thousands of
peaceable Subjects, by which the King will never be enriched, nor the Church
united. The inferior Rank are affected according to their differing measures of
Reason, and Sense of Religion, and the public Good. The more Understanding and
discerning, enquire into the Cause of this Mischief, which is the dissent of
the Nonconformist's Judgment from some unnecessary and variable Impositions,
etc. when ever the Government plenseth may be taken away without derogation of
Power, or loss of any Fundamental in Religion, either of Belief or Practice, or
danger to the Government or Peace: They cannot but say, these matters of
Dissension need not be. They believe their own Senses, they have neither seen,
nor heard of any Sedition, or Tumult, or Plot contrived among the Protestant
Dissenters. They know them to be Men of Abilities, Piety, Righteousness and
Peace, and have waded through the deep Waters of many Afflictions, without
sinking or drowning, or overthrowing the Ship in which too many drive a
Merchandise, bring in Wealth, and others fish for Men, to save them from the
bottomless Pit. If they are unacquainted with the Nonconformist Preachers, they
are acquainted with their Hearers, and know their Principles, and Conversation,
and if they are not better, they are no worse than other Men, and cannot but be
grieved, that they lie at the Mercy of many that have no Virtue to commend
them. They that love Godliness and Righteousness in any, in whom they believe
or hope it is, that are glad for the increase of Knowledge or Godliness, by what
Instrument soever, and endeavor to be merciful, as their heavenly Father is
merciful, are not, and cannot be pleased with those Proceedings, of ruining Men
for Conscience: These are not so subtle as to lay any great Weight upon the
Distinctions which some Men invent to excuse the Severity. The more unknowing
and unconcerned are in a maze, wondering what kind of People these
Nonconformists are; what kind of thing this Nonconformity is; but they know, or
hear that the Men are given to pray, hear Sermons, sing Psalms, and other pious
Exercises, and live, if not better, yet no worse than many that go to Church:
And of these many have so much Sense, that they think and say surely, it is
hard to drive honest Men's Cattle, seize their Goods, break open Houses, for
doing well. And as many as love Ease and the World, take their Ease, and follow
that Religion, which is encouraged with Preferment, and a Freedom from Charge
and Molestation.

Some Zealots against Nonconformists are incensed against them, as against
Pharisees, that pray to devour all; as against seditious Persons, and secret
Traitors, that want nothing but Opportunity, as against the Authors of all our
Unsettlements and Miseries. These are for the King, and who is against him?
These are for the Law, as now established, and no alteration? which is to tie
up the Power of the King, as much as the Parliament, for it is as much his
Prerogative to abrogate old Laws when necessary, as to make new. These are for
the Church of England, and against all that are against it; and what is that?
for the Bishops; and the Nonconformists never did as much as petition to take
them down, or diminish their Revenues: they are for preaching in Churches, and
so are Nonconformists if they might; for Allegiance to the King, so are the
Nonconformists; for the King's Supremacy, so are the Nonconformists; for
Ceremonies and Orders of the Church: here they begin to disagree: And for these
things can you persecute your Brethren? These Zealots are as erroneous for
these things, as any others are against them. The most of our
Conforming-Protestant Laics are bound to bear Offices, higher or lower, in
Cities, Towns, Hundreds, Parishes. The superior Magistrates may forbear to
break open Meetings for Religious Exercises, or set others on, much more to
animate the Rabble to pluck down their Meeting Houses; there is no Law for it,
that we, the unskilful in the Laws, know, or hear of: The inferior are under
Command, but these are meant of only lawful Commands, and legal Warrants. And
here is now a very displeasing Tragedy to be seen. Here are Informers, very
Strangers in the Countries, which they plague and molest, that swear against
some Persons by hearsay, whom they do not know; and these are the great
Ministers of Justice, they do little less, nay sometimes no less than expect
the Justices should take their Information without Examination of them, at
their time, at the very nick, when they please, and not when the Justice
pleases: These are the Masters of the Justices themselves, who must serve
them, or forfeit 50 l. to them, and 50 l. more to him that can get it. Some
Justices are forward and officious in carrying on this Work of Reformation and
Union, they issue forth Warrants upon them that meet, upon the Parish Officers
that are slack; some give out Warrants to break open Houses for distress, some
are cautious how they go so far. The dissenting Subject keeps up close, and
upon his Market Day keeps his Shop shut, as if he were broken, or hid his head
from Sergeants, yea, from worse Men than common Bailisss: The Informer keeps
the Street, and has whom he pleases at his command. The Parish Officer is in
a threefold Difficulty or Strait: 1. The Justice of Peace fines him, and
threatens worse to him, if he does not make distress. 2. It goes against his
Nature and his Love to his Neighbor, Friend, Kinsman; it goes against his
Conscience to distrain the Goods, and spoil the Trade, and beggar innocent
Children, he cannot do it; but if he do not, he shall rue it himself; he is
sined, and he is further threatened. The Informer is now pro tempore, his
superior Officer, he must execute his Warrants. 3. He is in another Difficulty:
If he break into his Neighbor's House, he is told he cannot justify it by Law,
by some sage Counselors; the owner of the House and Goods may sue him for
breaking into his House: He is told he has but one Remedy, when he is sued,
the Justice will stand by him, and the Favor of the Court, and Partiality of a
Jury, will be his Defender: But really, is not this an hard case, that a Man
must ruin others, or be ruined? and do these Actions look as if they did
really rejoice that they are ruled by Law? when without Law, or against Law, he
proceeds in hopes of Favor: And what is all this for, but to get Money for the
chief Ruler, the noble Informer! the Shame and Scourge of his Country.
Gentlemen and Magistrates that have Wisdom to foresee, and sense of what they
see, are disquieted in their Minds; the Envious, in hope of increasing their
own Trade, are more modest than to approve it, and they who are Scorners of
Religion, make merry at it. And this is a true, but imperfect face of the
times; and I divulge no Secrets.

II. The Sufferings of the Nonconformists have been coursely and darkly opened
in the two former Pleas, and will be more particularly set forth in what
follows. Their former Sufferings come upon them again, and that with the
Addition of more Weight and Violence, many have by an indecent Art done what
they can, to shut up both his Majesty's Eyes and Heart. I call it indecent,
because we owe a greater Reverence to the King, they have thanked him for his
ruling by Law, and declared their Adherence to the Church of England as
established by Law: As soon as they have done this, they crave leave to execute
the Laws upon Dissenters, as if they would take the King at his Word, and while
the Gracious Declaration was fresh, that there might be no room for wonted
Mercy and Indulgence, except he should recede from his Royal Word, almost as
soon as sent abroad; They seem to oblige the Bishops and the Church, by
declaring for it as established, and thereby tied their Tongues and Pens from
supplicating for their Protestant Brethren; for if they do, they will be
interpreted to act contrary to themselves, and their own Establishment: and no
doubt but many a fair Story is told them, of I know not what invisible
Machinations against them: They must look on while a Course is taken, which
will reflect upon them and their Government, as much, if not more, than a
tolerated Nonconformity. The more discreet, and moderate sort of Magistrates
are looked upon as savouring of Parliamentary Notions, either are left out of
the Commissions of Lieuetenancy and Peace, or act not at all, or act by way of
Mitigation of Rigor; the most declaredly opposite to the Parliaments, to
Protestant Dissenters seem to act alone; therefore the Law falls with
multiplied Aggravations upon Preachers and People. What was argued by way of
Consequence in the second Plea, proves now to be true, as if it had been a
Prophecy. The Dissenters are fined for so many Meetings past: That there are
Fines upon the Officers of one little Market Town, for neglecting to break
their Neighbors, amounting to 200 l. and the Fines upon one Preacher and his
Hearers come to about 1000 l. if they may be exactly levied. What is the Case
of Populous Places! They suffer spiritually, bodily, really, and relatively: A
Man cannot marry his Daughter to a Dissenting Protestant, but he is like one
that throws away her Portion; a Man cannot put a Child apprentice to a
Dissenting Protestant, but he is in danger of losing his Money, and his Son of
losing his Trade, by his Master's not being able to follow it, nor to hold;
many of them are in as bad a case as the Papists, if the Laws were fully
executed upon them: for some Protestants are returned into the Exchequer, and
their Estates under Composition, and the Parts that are left to them are liable
to other Laws against them. But if the Executioners of the Laws stop at the
Composition, there would be something left certain to them: But the remaning
two Parts are subject to these Laws, the Oxford and five Mile Act, and this
against Conventicles, and to the Ecclesiastical Courts besides; they are
obnoxious to Excommunications, Significavits, Writs de Excommunicatio capiendo,
to Banishment and Abjuration, and Felony if they abjure not: Some question
whether that Act of Q. E. 35. be in force, but several are brought in danger of
it as if it were, besides to all manner of Taxes and Payments. They are more
hardly used than Papists: Some have paid 20 l. and 5 s. over and over: But now
their whole Estates will not satisfy the Demands of Informers and Warrants. The
only way that Men of Estates have, is to become Tenants and Servants to secure
them, by making them over in Trust. The Miseries of their Souls are not yet
reckoned by me, to prevent which, they have ventured long by hearing such
Ministers as they conceived most profitable: But now for endeavoring to flee
from the Wrath to come, they are fallen under the Vengeance of cruel and
merciless Informers, and to save their Souls, have brought Ruin upon their
Estates.

III. And what is all this for? It is for Nonconformity; which may be
considered two ways.

1. Privatively, not conforming.

2. Positively, being Nonconformists to the Laws of Uniformity, preaching, and
holding Religious Exercises, this is the Preachers Crime; the Crime of the
People is hearing, or joining with them in such Exercises of Religion, as are
without controversy necessary and profitable. This, and only this, is the cause
of all those many, and great Sufferings of every kind which they have endured,
and under which no man can comfortably stand without Faith, Self-denial,
Contentment, and the Conscience of well-doing, and the hope of Eternal Life,
the great Recompense of Reward! And this being the Cause, and the sole Cause of
their Sufferings, it is such as calls for Pity and great Tenderness, and is no
just Cause of their many Molestations, and bitter Sufferings, as I intend to
show in my following Discourse, as God shall help me.

IV. By whom, and from whom, and through whose means they are now again exposed
to Sufferings. I cannot show the Spring of the Motion, but any Man may see the
Hands that strike, and tell us what time of day it is: I do very much doubt
whether the most engaged Instruments do know whose Work they carry on, this is
my Charity; but if they do, I dare say, what they cannot hear without either
great displeasure, horror or repentance. But they are,

1. Such as cannot take it ill to be called Addressers and Abhorrers, but they
(as far as I can look about me and see) particularly that have thanked the King
for declaring his Resolutions of ruling by Law, which if any of the
Nonconformists had expressed a doubt or fear of, had been a far greater Offense
than their Nonconformity. They have declared for the Protestant Religion as
established by Law, and yet punish them that profess the same, and no other.

2. And by Consequence, they are such as have declared a dislike of the
Proceedings of our late Parliaments, and in that particular of endeavoring the
uniting of Protestant Dissenters, in which alone I am concerned to take notice
of them, and act directly contrary to the Vote of the House of Commons, which
resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, Lunae 10 die Jan. 1680.
that the Prosecution of Protestant Dissenters upon the penal Laws, is at this
time grievous to the Subject, a weakening to the Protestant Interest, an
Encouragement of Popery, and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom; And by the
Rule of Opposition, they must in their Opinions turn this Vote backward, as if
they thought that the Prosecution of Protestant Dissenters upon the present
Laws, is not grievous to the Subject, is not a weakening of the Protestant
Interest, is not an encouragement of Popery, nor dangerous to the Peace of the
Kingdom: Certainly they must be supposed to hold this, as contrary to the
general and unanimous Judgment of the far greater Number: for, as Nemine
Contradicente, does not contain every particular Man's Vote; so it does no less
than imply a Consent, or that to declare a Dissent is to no purpose; there is
no Division of the House upon it; only if they do not hold this, contrary to
the House, they must act both irrationally and desperately in this sense. Although
the House of Commons declared their Opinion to be so; yet I a Justice, or I an
inferior Officer, will prosecute the Protestant Dissenters, or execute the
Penal Laws upon them, tho it be a weakening of the Protestant Interest, although
it be an Encouragement to Popery, and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom. Or
if this Consequence from these Proceedings be too harsh, and censorious, I will
mollify it as much as it is capable of a mollified Construction: Let this be
the Opinion of the Prosecutors now. The Execution of the Penal Laws, is not
grievous to the Subject; that is, it is grievous but to some, and not to all:
it is not grievous to the Subject, because it is not grievous to them, and then
we shall have a Discrimination of Subjects; to this sense. They only, who
execute the Laws, or approve of it, are the only Subjects of the King; or that
the Dissenters can suffer Punishments, and the Punishments not be grievous to
them. Or, that the Dissenters are not Subjects, but Rebels (a sort of quiet
Rebels certainly) may we never see any other than such unarmed quiet Rebels!
Again, they must think, that the Execution of the Laws upon them, is no
weakening of the Protestant Interest; that is to say, they are no Protestants.
And now the meaning is plain, that there are no Protestants amongst us, but
those that are of the Church Government established by Law, and are of it, or
submit to it; or that read, or join in the Liturgy, or do all that the Law
requires; that is, the Act of Uniformity, and then a Question will arise, Where
was the Protestant Religion before 1662, or before the last Long-Parliament?
Or, where is it like to be, when these Protestants no-Protestant-Dissenters are
cut off? where it was before Luther. If only the Conformists are the
Protestants, then what sort of them? If only one sort of them, then the
Catholic Church of England may be not much bigger than some great Conventicle,
or great Parish. They who make this Separation of Protestants, are Separatists
and Disciples, the National Tutors and Instructors, in such wholesome and
profitable Doctrine, both in Divinity, and Politics. If Confirmity, tota in
toto, etc. makes the Protestant, and be convertible with him, it makes as good
a Definition of a Protestant, as of a Man by Accidents. A Man is a rational
Creature, that wears curled Locks, long Hair, Hose and Shoos, etc. or of a
Philosopher, he is a Scholar that wears a Beard, etc.

But to go on, they may be thought to be of Opinion, that to punish Dissenters,
is no Encouragement to Popery; for when they have rooted them up, then they
will root up Popery, as if they could not come at those great Oaks, before they
have cut up the Brush-wood. Or lastly, they do not think it dangerous to the
Peace of the Kingdom, to suppress Dissenters. 1. Because they know that the
Dissenters, when undone, will not molest or disturb the Peace of the Kingdom.
Or else, 2. Because they intend to make them so poor, that they shall not be
able to disturb the Peace. Or, 3. Because it is the only way of Peace.

But here again, a Questionist sets upon me as I go peaceably on in my
Discourse. If the Dissenters are not dangerous to the Peace of Kingdom, why are
they disturbed, and their Meetings broken up as seditious Meetings?

2. If they are dangerous, and their Meetings feditious, then whether are they
more dangerous, when they are pleased, quiet, and in Peace, or when they are
provoked? When they enjoy Trades, Liberty, and Estates, or when they are
imprisoned and undone?

To conclude this Head: If our zealous Prosecutors think, as the House of
Commons did, in their foresaid Vote; then why will they act contrary to that
general Opinion? or if they are of a contrary Opinion, as I have said: then
follows,

3. A third Branch of the Description of the Prosecutors. They are such as do
not, yea cannot understand the State of the Kingdom, and Religion so well as
the House of Commons did.

1. No one Man of them can understand the true State of the Kingdom, as a Grand
Assembly of our Representatives did.

2. Nor all of them: for when the Representatives of the Kingdom met, they had
such Informations given in, and brought before them, and saw what was invisible
to others; there was a Collection of Observations, and the Eyes of most of the
Kingdom moved in that great Body, and their Debates and Reasonings were mature,
and full. And tho a Vote have not the Formality and Force of an Act, yet it is
the first Matter and Original of an Act, out of which an Act does arise.

3. This Vote was not of private Concernment, in which, Interest makes Men
partial, but it was of Concernment to the Church and Kingdom. But many of the
first movers in the Prosecution, and of the Instruments in it, act from a
private Spirit, and a particular Interest, and find neither Concurrence from
any, that are at liberty, and act as Freemen, nor Approbation from the
Standers-by; except the few that know not what they do, and care not what
others do, any more than Gallio.

Lastly, the inferior sort, are Informers and Inferior Officers, Constables,
and Churchwardens, etc. of these, there is not one of many, but what abide
severe Threatenings, and heavy Fines, considering their Estates, before they
distrain. This way is contrary to the very common Sense of Christians, and
ordinary Men. But the Informers are a select Company, whom the long Suffering
of God permits for a time, of whom I will say but little in this place: They
are of no good Reputation; for their Knowledge in the Country, they do not know
the Names, or Persons of some of them that are molested by them; they go by
report of their under-Servants or Accomplices; they are unknown to them that
suffer by them, until they suffer: They come two or three Counties off, to set
up this new Trade; whether they are Papists or (nominal) Protestants, who can
tell? They never come to Church, not to their own Parish-Churches, but lie in
wait and ambush. Their Estate is invisible, their Country unknown to many;
their Morals are as bad as the very Dregs of the Age. These are they that
direct and rule many of the Magistrates, and live upon the spoil of better
Christians and Subjects than themselves; And who go away with honest Men's
Goods, honestly gotten, but they? To whom I have a great deal to say in the
latter Part, if I can hold my Pen without trembling, while I write of them.

The Substance of what I intend to discourse upon, is contained in these three
Heads.

I. I will show the Cause of the Sufferings of the Nonconformists. II. Argue
for a Cessation of this forcible Course against them. III. Apply the whole to
the Instruments of their Sufferings, whether they be Magistrates, Ministers,
Informers, or others.
I. The only Cause of their Sufferings, is their Nonconformity. Of this I have
spoken as fully as I thought needful at that time, both in the First Plea;
opening the hardness of their Case, in the Second Plea. First Plea, from p. 14,
etc. Second Plea, p. 10, 11.
I must reassume this Head anew, for a further Information of the World, and
Amplification of the thing, in reference to their Suflerings; and lay both
before the Conscience of the Christian Reader, who may propose this Case of
Conscience, as rising from it, Whether the Nonconforming Christians and
Protestants ought to suffer as they do, and what they do, merely for
Nonconformity.

For the opening of this Point once again, I will consider Nonconformity as
abovesaid.

1. Privatively, and passively, as not doing what the Law requires. 2.
Positively and actively, as doing what the Law forbids.
1. Take Nonconformity in the first Sense, and what is it but not subscribing,
or refuting to subscribe to what is required, and not declaring what is
required to be declared in the Act of Uniformity? and by consequence, not doing
as is required in the Act, or the Common Prayer; here lies their Nonconformity;
and hence the Name is taken.

2. They do not refuse all and every Condition therein required of them. It is
not possible that I should particularly relate what Particular-Men do scruple,
and stick at; some can do more than others can; but they who can do most,
cannot do all required.

They are by some counted worse than Papists; looked upon as a fort of
ignorant, erroneous, obstinate, unreasonable Men, seditious, and schismatical,
that obey neither King, nor Bishops, nor Church; and are ignorantly, and
scornfully called These Men, and these kind of People, as if they were a
strange odd sort of People, wilfully bent upon their own Way, Delusions, and
Fancies, as if they carried the Sparks of Rebellion, and the Seeds of Heresies,
and false Doctrine in their Hearts, and kindled them in their Conventicles.

But know that they are as obedient, regular Subjects as any in the King's
Dominions, save in one Defect, or Omission, which is Subscribing, Swearing,
Declaring according to a particular late Act of Uniformity, and Corporation.
And to them that wonder at them, that censure, condemn, and afflict them, I
give this short Distinction, and Account of them.

1. The Preachers and Teachers, are Men brought up in Learning, in Schools and
Universities, or in University Learning, if not in the Universities. The older
sort have for the most part, taken Degrees in the Universities, were in former
times ordained by Bishops, and had conformed to all, or the principal things
required by the old Act of Uniformity. The middle-aged among them have had the
like Learned Education, and are Ministers, either ordained by Bishops, or by
Presbyters, or elected and chosen by particular Congregations, and set apart
for that Work by Fasting and Prayer, if not also, by Imposition of Hands. The
younger sort, have Education in Learning, in Schools, Tongues, Arts and
Sciences, the same that are taught in our Universities, though they are taught
out of the Universities, in a more private way, and have not the Titles of
Graduates in Arts and Divinity. In a word, they are (tho in different Degrees
and Proportion, some more, and some less) learned, pious, painful,
self-denying, able, and successful Ministers, and orderly, and peaceable
Subjects according to all other Laws, as any of us are: Their Hearers are like
other Men, bred up in Trades, and Callings, as other Men are, as is commonly
and universally known.

In short, let them that think strangely of them, as these Men, and these kind
of Men, receive this impartial Character of them:
The Nonconformists are Christians, believing all the Articles of the Christian
Faith; that observe whatsoever Christ commanded his Apostles to observe, and
teach; that observe all the Ordinances of the Gospel, according to the general
Rules of the Gospel Worship, Government and Discipline (according to the best
of their Understandings, and Prudence); that obey every Ordinance of Man for
the Lord's sake; that are subject to Principalities and Powers; that obey
Magistrates, that live by the Law of Love, and Rightcousness; that have their
Conversation according to the Gospel, as other Christians, or as the best of
other Christians do, and that submit, observe, and obey all Laws of the
Kingdom, as other Subjects do; save the aforesaid Act of Uniformity, and
Subscriptions and Oaths of late Years imposed, and never before.

And this Character of them, contains matter of Answer to the many Questions,
Accusations and Censures raised upon them. They are reported to be factious,
fanatical, unlearned, unordained, rebellious, and unreasonable Men, disloyal,
disobedient, against the King and all Government, Decency and Order, as if they
were for all Sects and sorts of Religion, allowing all Men to do what seems
good to them: But in this short Description of them, you may find an Answer to
vulgar and popular Objections against them, and more fully spoken of in the two
former Pleas.

In the Second Plea, p. 10, 11, 12. I have said, that the Difference between
the Nonconformist, (commonly, but unduly and unsitly called Presbyterian) and
the Conformist, is to be seen and gathered from the King's own Declaration
about Ecclesiastical Affairs, which they would have submitted to, if it had
been turned into an Act of Parliament, and the Act of Uniformity.

I shall now further enlarge upon that Notion, and show you what the King
declared, and what they would have accepted; because many that think and speak
hardly of them, do not know how things stood at that time, and what that
Declaration is.

In the Year 1660, after that General Monk, (made Duke of Albemarle afterward
by the King) declared himself for a Free-Parliament, and by the Counsel and
Assistance of the City of London, restored the Members of the old Parliament,
that were shut out by some of the Army, before ever they could bring about
their Designs against the King's Life; and there was a wise and good Council of
State chosen: many of the Royal Nobility, and Gentry, and some Divines, put out
a Declaration, in which are these words.

And we do further declare, that we intend by our quiet and peaceable
Behavior, to testify our Submission to the present Power, as it now resides in
the Council of State, in Expectation of the future Parliament, upon whose
Wisdom and Determinations, we trust God will give such a Blessing as may
produce a perfect Settlement both in Church and State. This was subscribed by
the Marquess of Dorchester, and twenty Earls and Lords, several Noblemen,
about thirty two Baronets and Knights, and between eighty and an hundred
Gentlemen, among whom is Mr. Roger L'Estrange (then a Christian, professing
Reconciliation, promising with the rest, To speak one Language, to be of one
Name (not Whig and Tory) that all mention of Factions and Parties, and all
Rancor may be thrown in and buried like Rubbish under the Foundation: These are
the words of it; but as Dr. Collings of Cambridg said once, Then was then, and
now is now; one Irish Bishop subscribed it, and four Doctors of Divinity, and
the first of them was Dr. Morley, the yet-living Lord Bishop of Winchester. How
gladly did all honest Men receive this Declaration, as tending to a firm
Reconciliation, and afterward to a lasting Union, and universal Peace, not so
much as a name of Faction or Difference to be kept in memory! neither did any
suspect the meaning of burying all Factions and Animosities, like Rubbish under
the Foundation, to be, as now some Men's Actions and Writings explain it, that
Factions and Animosities do lie under the Foundation, which is at this day
shaken, being so underlaid; Faction and Animosity will not lie buried, but rise
and walk.

In April 1660, That hoped-for Parliament met; and to the Speakers of both
Houses, His Majesty's Letter from Breda, April, 14. 1660, page 6.
His Majesty sent his Letter, and Declaration from his Court at Breda; in his
Letter, I read these Words, relating to Religion. -- And nothing can be
proposed to show our Zeal and Affection for it, to which we will not readily
consent; and we hope in due time, our Self to propose somewhat to you, for the
Propagation of it.

In his Declaration sent therewith, are these words.

-- We do declare a Liberty to tender Consciences, and that no Man shall be
disquieted, or called in question for differences of Opinion in matter of
Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom. -- In October 25 1660,
His Majesty was pleased to send out his Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs, in which he was pleased to remember and repeat the (forecited) words
of his Letter, whereby it is clear, that that which he had long in his Mind, to
propose for the Propagation of Religion, was the Contents of this Declaration,
-- Adding in the next Sentence, Page 4. And the truth is, We do think our Self
the more competent to propose, and with God's Assistance, to determine many
things now in difference, from the time we have spent, and the Experience we
have had in most of the Reformed Churches abroad. And besides what is quoted
out of it in the Second Plea, page 65. he has these words, We must for the
honor of all those of either Persuasion, with whom we have conferred, declare
that the Professions and Desires, of all for the advancement of Piety and true
Godliness are the same, their Professions of Zeal for the Peace of the Church
the same; of Affection and Duty to us the same: They all approve of Episcopacy;
they all approve of a set Form of Liturgy; and they all disprove and dislike
the Sin of Sacriledg, and the Alienation of the Revenue of the Church; and if
upon these excellent Foundations, in submission to which, there is such an
Harmony of Affections, any Superstructures should be raised, to the shaking
those Foundations, and to the contracting and lessening the blessed Gift of
Charity, which is the vital part of Christian Religion, we shall think our
selves very unfortunate. Page 8. We have not the least doubt, but that the
Present Bishops will think the present Concessions now made by us, to allay the
present Distempers, very just and reasonable, and will very cheerfully conform
themselves thereto. Thus the King declares his Confidence of the Bishops
Compliance with his Proposal, and Declaration, which is thus contracted.

1. Our purpose is to promote the Power of Godliness, to encourage the Exercise
of Religion, both public and private; that the Lord's day be applied to holy
Exercises; that insufficient, negligent, and scandalous Ministers be not
permitted in the Church; to prefer none to be Bishops, but Men of Learning,
Virtue and Piety, that they be frequent Preachers, etc.

2. Because the Diocesses are too large, we will appoint Suffragan Bishops, for
the due performance of the Work.

3. No Bishops shall ordain or exercise any Jurisdiction without Advice of the
Presbyters; no Chancellor or Commissary shall decree any Excommunication or
Absolution; nor shall the Deacons exercise any Jurisdiction without the Advice
and Assistance of six Ministers.

4. That (Cathedral) Preferments shall be given to the most learned, and pious
Presbyters of the Diocese; and that an equal number (to those of the Chapter)
of the ablest Presbyters, of the Diocese annually chosen by the major Vote of
the Presbyters, shall be always advising and assisting with those of the
Chapter, in all Ordinations, and every the part of Jurisdiction and Censures.

5. That Confirmation be solemnly performed, by the Information and Consent of
the Minister of the place; who shall admit none to the Lord's Supper, till they
make a credible Profession of their Faith; Care be taken to instruct and reform
the scandalous, whom the Minister shall not receive to the Lord's Supper, till
they have openly declared their Repentance. The rural Dean, with three or four
Ministers of the Deanary, chosen by Ministers of the Deanary, shall meet once a
Month, to receive Complaints and Presentiments, to compose Differences, reform
things amiss by Admonitions, and to present such things to the Bishop, as
cannot be reformed by their pastoral Persuasions; to see that all the younger
sort be carefully instructed, before they be confirmed.

6. No Bishop shall exercise any Arbitrary Power.

7. -- Since we find some Exceptions made against several things in the
Liturgy; we will appoint an equal number of Divines of both Persuasions, to
review the same, and to make such Alterations, as shall be thought most
necessary, and some additional Form, and it shall be left to the Minister to
choose one or other. In the mean time, we desire that Ministers would read those
parts, against which there lies no Exceptions; yet in compassion to them that
scruple it, our Will and Pleasure is, that none be punished or troubled for not
using it, until it be effectually reformed, as aforesaid.

8. We gratify those who are grieved with the use of some Ceremonies, by
indulging to, and dispensing with their omitting those Ceremonies: and leave
all Decisions about them, to the Advice of a National Synod.

None shall be denied the Lord's Supper for not kneeling; none compelled to use
the Cross, it shall be lawful to him that desires to use the Cross, to have
such Ministers as will use it; and if the proper Minister refuse to omit it,
the Parent shall get another Minister that will, to baptize his Child. None
compelled to bow at the Name of Jesus. The Surplice left to liberty, except the
Royal Chapel, Cathedral Churches, or Colleges in Universities. Those that
cannot subscribe the Canon, and take the Oath of Canonical Obedience, shall
only take the Oath; of Allegiance and Supremacy; that none forfeit his
Benefice, that subscribes all the Articles of Religion, which only concern the
Confession of the true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments. He
repeated again his Declaration of Liberty of Conscience before cited; -- And
conclude, and in this place to explain what we mentioned before, That we hoped
in due time, to propose somewhat for the Propagation of the Protestant
Religion, that will satisfy the World, that we have always made it both our
Care and our Study, and have observed enough, what is most like to bring
Disadvantage to it. We do conjure all our loving Subjects to acquiess, and
submit to this our Declaration, concerning those Differences which have so much
disquieted the Nation at home, and given so much Offense to the Protestant
Churches abroad, etc.

The Parliament which restored the King, then sitting, thanked him for this
Declaration; the Divines of London, called the Presbyterian, did also thank him
for it: and I never was acquainted with any conforming Divine, that did not
approve of it, more than of the exact Conformity afterward required; and I
cannot but think, if a Scrutiny were to be made, but more Ministers of
Learning, Plety and Experience, that are not biassed with Preferments, would
judge it a far better Expedient for our Peace, and the Propagation of the
Protestant Religion (as his Majesty speaks) than our tried Strictress and
Rigor; yea, I doubt not but many of our considerable dignified Clergy, are, or
would be, of the same mind.

After this, the King gave a Commission according to his Declaration, to an
equal number of Divines, to review, and reform the Common Prayer. The
Presbyterian Divines (as they were called) presented their Exceptions to the
Bishops and Commissioners, who returned them an Answer, not favoring of
fatherly Condescension, nor giving hopes of a desirable Closure, not as much as
to leave the use of a Ceremony at liberty and free; and by the style it seems
to be written by one or more of the Doctors, and not by the Bishops themselves.
To this the other Commissioners replied, which was not thought worth their
notice, so much as to give them another gentle Rebuke.

When the four Months, allowed for the Debates and Confultation, were expired,
the Commissioners, who were slighted, present a Petition and due Account of the
matter to the King, and say thus. And tho the Account which we are forced to
give to your Majesty, of the Issue of our Consultation, is, that no Agreements
are subscribed by us, to be offerered to your Majesty according to your
Expectation; and tho it be none of our intent to cast the least unmeet
Reflection upon the Right Reverend Bishops, and learned Brethren, who think not
meet to yield to any considerable Alterations, to the Ends expressed in your
Majesty's Commission, yet we must say it is some quiet to our Minds, that we
have not been guily of your Majesty's and Subjects Disappointments, and that we
account not your Majesty's Gracious Commission, and our Labor lost, having
Peace of Conscience in discharge of our Duty to God and you, that we have been
the Seekers and Followers of Peace, and have earnestly pleaded, and humbly
petitioned for it. And we humbly beseech your Majesty to believe that we own no
Principles of Faction or Disobedience, nor patronize the Errors and Obstinacy
of any. -- It is the desire of our Souls to contribute our Parts and Interest
to the uttermost, for the promoting of Holiness, Charity, Unity, and Obedience
to Rulers in all lawful things; but if we should sin against God, because we
are commanded, who shall answer for us, or save us from his Justice? -- And we
know that conscientious Men will not consent to the practicing of things, in
their Judgment unlawful, when those may yield who count the matter indifferent
--. We must not believe that when your Majesty took our Consent to a Liturgy,
to be a Foundation that would infer our Concord, you meant not, we should have
no Concord, but by consenting to this Liturgy, without any considerable
Alteration --. We most humbly beseech your Majesty, that the benefit of the
said Declaration, may be continued to your People, and in particular, that none
be punished or troubled for not using the Common Prayer, till it be effectually
reformed, and the Addition made as these express.

They presented to the Bishops and the other Commissioners the Reformation of
the Liturgy, and a most humble, grave, pathetical Petition, called the Petition
for Peace; toward the end, the address themselves to them in these Words,
Grant us but the Freedom which Christ and his Apostles lost unto the Churches;
use necessary things as necessary, and unnecessary things as unnecessary; and
charitably bear with the Infirmities of the weak, and tolerate the tolerable
while they live peaceably, and then you will know when you have done; and for
the Intolerable, we beg not your Toleration, etc.

I am sensible I have been long upon this historical Retrospect of these
Passages, to inform those who seem not to know, or remember these things; Yet I
cannot go on without leaving some Animadversions and Remarks upon them.

1. We might have seen the disagreeing Parties running into an Union under the
King, as their supreme lawful Head and Governor. The reputed Presbyterian
comprehending a great, powerful, considerate, substantial part of the Kingdom,
most close and deliberate in Counsel, active in Endeavors, fervent in Prayer
with their Ministers for the Restoration of the King and the ancient
Government, watching all Opportunities, and using all means to engage General
Monk, and his well disciplined, and most Presbyterian part of the Army, to
declare for the restoring the secluded Members in order to a free Parliament,
and that in order to bring back the King. The most eminent of the Royal Party,
declaring a Reconcilableness, and Oblivion of all Sufferings, acknowledging the
Hand of God in them all. And the King to complete and perfect all, by laying a
Top-stone, as well as the Foundation of the Temple of Peace, gathers all
Parties into himself; some by Comprehension in a wider Constitution, others by
a safe indulgent Toleration, which if granted, had been desired by the least
and most inconsiderable part of the Nation; for the Dissenters had been fewer
than now they are, because abundance had been taken into the proposed
Settlement: The Sects have much increased, since that time of Papists, if not
other Denominations --. The King and his wise Council had a perfect full view
of all Interests, and did weigh out proper Preparatives for an healing Effect.

2. It is a Shame and Grief to think that a divided Nation can be sooner
composed and settled, than a broken divided Church, who have, besides the
Motives and Principles of Nature, the most gracious Reconciler for their
Lawgiver, the most perfect Laws of Love, the most indulgent Government, under
the strict and indispensible Duty of Self-denial, opposite to Self-seeking, and
should have the least Consideration and Regard of a wordly Interest, because,
They that are of Christ, they are not of this World; and having nothing to do
but to promote, enlarge, and build up Christ's Kingdom upon Earth, and for all
their Self-denial, Services, and Sufferings, have the Promises of Eternal Life,
an everlasting Kingdom, and Thrones in it. It is a most afflicting Meditation,
that Church-Divisions are most difficultly healed. What an humbling Thought is
this! that a temporal Interest divides wordly Men, in whom Self prevails, and
yet worldly Men can unite under general Common Laws, because it is their
Interest to unite; and yet they, who of all Men are under the greatest
Obligations to unite, that declare they are not of this World, that teach the
way of Peace to others, cannot find it themselves! But it is not Religion, and
Light, that divide, but it is Darkness, and the Spirit of this World. If to us
to live were Christ, then Christian Faith and Love, would make us more
heavenly, and by Consequence, more united. Popery could never have that Compass
to work our Ruin in, had we agreed as we should have done: Pardon this
Excursion; I Will return. The Church is rent from the Top to the Bottom, the King
surveys it, and has a Proposal in his Mind, which will not only repair the
Breaches, but propagate Religion, as he often said; he seems to be fond of it,
he speaks so often of it. It was meditated, and formed in his Royal Mind while
he was in Breda; that it may not be thought an hasty and immature Production,
he gives it full time, and cherishes it. And what is it but his Declaration
about Ecclesiastical Affairs! It was beheld, as the most Royal Issue of an
happy Mind, as the Firstborn of Church-Peace, after the most affectionate
Conjunction of a most well-come King to a Kingdom that longed for him.

Observe, 1. He offers himself as an Umpire and Reconciler.

2. He declares, to his great Satisfaction and Comfort, that while he was in
Holland, he found the principal Assertors of the Presbyterian Opinion, full of
Affection to him, Zeal for the Peace of the Church and State, neither Enemies
to Episcopacy nor Liturgy, but modestly desiring Alterations without shaking
Foundations; and to the same purpose over again, page 8.

3. He thinks himself to be competent to make his Proposal, and determine many
things in difference, as abovesaid, and page 4. of the Declaration.

4. He expressed some great Considence in the Bishops: We have not the least
doubt, but that the present Bishops will think the present Concessions made by
us to allay the present Distempers, very just and reasonable, and will very
cheerfully conform themselves thereto, page 10.

5. He conjured all his loving Subjects to acquiesce in, and submit to that his
Declaration concerning those Differences, page 18, 19.

3dly, You have read the King's Character of the Reforming Divines (so I Will
call them, rather than Presbyterian) and they made it good, they strictly
followed the Orders in the King's Commission, made their Exceptions, which they
were empowered to do, explained, and showed the Reasonableness of them; when
answered, they replied; when called to dispute, they disputed; and when they
saw all was but dashing against a Wall, they petition for Peace, both the King
and Bishops.

Now to all them that speak slightly or scornfully; These Men, these kind of
Men; as if they were some Monsters rolling in a troubled Sea, and not suffering
the Ark of Christ's Church to rest, here is some account, if not Satisfaction,
given.

But after our great hopes of Church-Peace and Union, what followed but a
dismal Breach? a Wound that lies a bleeding! and they upon whom the Pinacles of
the Temple fell, and bruised and crushed, are now instead of a cleanly Hospital
to live in, threatened with Bridewel, and Prisons, and with that dreadful
Sentence of Abjuration. And Christian Reader, if you do as I do, here Grief
does make you stop. That any Magistrate that has taken the Sacrament to prove
himself a Protestant, dare menace, or admonish any Christian Minister to do
what he cannot do, or forswear his native Country! And woe be to England, when a
Minister of Christ, successful in his Work, not imaginary but real, shall be
carried to the Seaside, and swear he will never return to his Native Country;
and that such Ministers shall not have as much as a mean House or Barn to
preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ in!

But who made the Breach? who hindered the hopeful Closure? selfwilled,
obstinate Nonconformists? The Nonconformity to the Law of Love, Peace,
Meekness, Forbearance, has done the Mischief. The King's Declaration would
have done what the Act of Uniformity could not do, but we may look, and find
the first Cause to lie between them both.

To lay this open, compare but some words in the King's Commission, with some
of the Answers of the Anti-reforming Commissioners, and then judge impartially.

The King according to his Declaration, gave his Commission to an equal number
of Divines of both Persuasions, bearing date March 25, in the thirteenth Year
of his Reign.

We in the Accomplishment of our said Will and Intent, -- do authorize you --
to advise upon, and review the said Book of Common Prayer, comparing it with
the most ancient Liturgies of the purest Times, -- to take to your serious
Consideration, the several Directions, Rules, Forms of Prayer, and things in
the Book of Common Prayer contained, to advise, consult upon and about the
same, and the several Objections and Exceptions, which shall now be raised
against the same; and, if occasion be, to make such reasonable and necessary
Alterations, Corrections, and Amendments therein, -- as shall be agreed upon to
be needful and expedient, for the giving Satisfaction to tender Consciences,
etc.

The Bishops, etc. answer, On the contrary we judge, That if the Liturgy should
be altered, as is there required, not only a Multitude, but the Generality of
the soberest and most Loyal Children of the Church of England would justly be
offended, since such an Alteration would be a virtual Concession, that this
Liturgy was an intolerable Burden to tender Consciences, a direct Cause of
Schism, a superstitious Usage (upon which Pretenses it is here desired to be
altered) which would at once justify all those who have obstinately separated
from it, as the only pious, tender-conscienced Men, and condemn all those that
have adhered to it, in conscience of their Duty and Loyalty, with the loss and
hazards of their Estates, and Fortunes, as Men superstitious, schismatical, and
void of Religion and Conscience. For these Reasons and those that follow, we
cannot consent to such an Alteration as is desired, till these Pretenses be
proved.

And now it might easily appear to them, what afterward came to pass; but let
us observe:

1. There is no doubt but some of them knew what his Majesty's Proposal was,
for the Propagation of the Protestant Religion; being his Chaplains and chief
Ministers about him, and some of them (if I am not misinformed) made some
Alterations and Amendments in the King's Declaration.

2. They do manifest an Opinion of the Reforming Divines, inconsistent with the
Character which his Majesty gave of them, as grave and learned Ministers; and
proceed with them according to a mean and uncharitable Opinion.

3. If they saw no necessity of any Alterations: 1. They dissented from the
Judgment of as eminent Divines of the Church, See First Plea, p. 22, etc. p. 32.
as any in it. 2. They do not agree among themselves; for Mr. Thorndike, one of
them, thought a Reformation was necessary to Union. 3. They made some
Alterations, such as were pleasing to them, though not satisfactory to others.
4. They destroy the King's Supposition, and the reason of his Proposal, for the
Propagation of the Protestant Religion, Peace of the Church, satisfying tender
Consciences, etc.

4. If they were commissioned to advise, etc. then had it not been a great
Satisfaction to the whole Church, and an effectual way to silence the cavilling
Opponents (if they were but Cavillers)? 1. To have answered their Reply. 2. to
have petitioned his Majesty for a longer time, to have heard them out, but when
eight Points were to be disputed, they had only time for one of them, being the
last day of their Commission. If I am mistaken in any of these things, as I
believe I am not, I shall be glad to be corrected by a try History of those
Passages.
It was about giving the Sacrament to Persons that scruple kneeling; about
which there was a Division among themselves: Some of them held that we are not
to refuse to give it to them that kneel not, but to give it to them that kneel:
the words of the Rubric being, -- The Minister shall take in both kinds
himself, -- and deliver it into the hands of the People kneeling; as if the
sense were, we are to give the Sacrament into the hands of the People kneeling;
but are not forbid to give it to them that do not kneel: Dr. G. Dr. P. and Dr.
S. were for this lax Interpretation; Now Lord Bishops of Ely, Chester, Norwich.
other Dr. M. now Bishop of Winchester, was for the rigid sense, that the
People must kneel, or we must not give it. And Dr. P. now Dean of Salisbury,
offered to maintain against Mr. Baxter, See Mr. B's Defense against Mr. Cheney,
page 38.
that it was an Act of Mercy to those that scruple and refused to receive the
Sacrament kneeling, to deny them the Communion of the Church therein; but the
Commissioners of his own side restrained him. 4. How little did some of them
care for the King's conjuring them, to acquiesce in, and submit to his
Declaration? Or, tho his Majesty thought himself competent to propose (a
Remedy) they thought him not, or else they would have advised a little further,
having so great a charge from him, giving him hopes of their Compliance, and
seeing the Peace and Settlement of the Church so much concerned in it, and the
House of Commons approving of it, to whom they owned an Acknowledgment for
their Service done for them, they might have made their Memorial blessed to all
Generations, as Healers and Peacemakers.

And now it is plain that those who ruled most in those Councils, exercised a
kind of Sovereignty over the Reason of all others, and waited for a Parliament
and Convocation that should at once silence Objections, and answer Petitions.

Since those Transactions, the reforming Divines never had but one: or two
Opportunities of treating and composing our doleful Differences; the Composers
agreed; but the House of Commons hearing of it, voted against bringing in a
Bill of Compreehension, and the Reverend Dr. Burnet, in the Life of the Great
Sir Matthew Hale, gives us the Reasons that prevailed at that time against it.
And if I may not be too tedious, I will crave leave totranscribe his Lines.
Page 70, 71, 72, 73.


But two Parties appeared vigorously against this Design (of Comprehension by
Law) the one was of some zealous Clergymen, who thought it below the Dignity
of the Church to alter Laws, and change Settlements for the sake of some, whom
they esteemed Schismatics; they also believed it was better to keep them out
of the Church, than bring them into it, since a Faction upon that would arise
in the Church, which they thought might be more dangerous than the Schism it
self was. Besides, they said, if some things were now to be changed in
compliance with the Humor of a Party, as soon as that was done, another Party
might demand other Concessions, and there might be as good Reasons invented for
these as for those; many such Concessions might also shake those of our own
Communion, and tempt them to for sake us, and go over to the Church of Rome,
pretending that we changed so often, that they were thereby inclined to be of a
Church that was constant and true to her self; and these Reasons wrought on the
far greater part of the House of Commons --. There were others that opposed it
upon very different Ends: They designed to shelter the Papists from the
Execution of the Law, and saw clearly that nothing would bring in Popery so
well as a Toleration; but to tolerate Popery barefaced, would have startled
the Nation too much, so it was necessary to hinder all the Propositions for
Union, seeing the keeping up the Differences was the best color they could
find, for getting the Toleration to pass, only as stackening the Laws against
Dissenters, whose Numbers and Wealth made it advisable to have some regard to
them; and under this pretense Popery might have crept in more covered, and less
regarded: so these Councils being more acceptable to some concealed Papists
then in Power, as has since appeared too evidently, the whole Project for
Comprehension was let fall, and those who had set it afoot, came to be looked
on with an evil Eye, as secret Favorers of Dissenters, Underminers of the
Church, and every thing else that Jealousy and Distaste could cast on them.

I do not question but this excellent Historian has given us a faithful
account of the Reasons against Comprehension, as he received them from those
eminent Persons engaged in it, or some that knew them; and I will make bold to
cast some Reflections upon them.

1. On the one part some zealous Churchmen, who thought it below the Dignity
of the Church to alter Laws, etc. But when it is more agreeable to their Spirit
and Ends, it is no Indignity to change moderate Laws into more severe; nor, to
practice arbitrarily beyond Laws.

2. They who rationally and conscienciously dissent, are esteemed Schismatics:
but retaining all other their Opinions and Principles, and abating the rigor of
their Dissent, by conforming, would they be of the Church, or still esteemed
Scismaticks? By this Notion, the Conformist, qua talis, is no Schismatic; and
the Nonconformist, quatenus such, is a Schismatic. Conformity takes away all
name of Schism: But then the Question might be, Whether the Nonconformist be a
Stateschismatick, or a Church-schismatick? and, whether he was a Schismatic,
when he treated about, and petitioned for Peace and Union? and what has made
him to be one since?

3. They are afraid of Faction: but do those Fears arise from a Catholic or a
Factious Spirit? Are there not factious Spirits in the Church, that harbor
factious Affections, and utter factious Words, contrary to true Charity?

4. And what if other Parties might demand Concessions? Either those
Concessions were rational, becoming the Wisdom, Peaceableness, and Grace of the
Church, or not; methinks it is a Royal Dignity in the Church, to make reasonable
Concessions: if they are unreasonable, unchristian, impious and the like, the
Church may deny them with Honor. But these Sons and Fathers, represent the
Church like a stately Lady that keeps Chamber, and must not be spoken to.

5. But really, are there such among us, as taking Offense, might go over to
the Church of Rome, constant and true to her self? How much do they owe to the
Nonconformists for their Company and Communion! How inclinable are they to
Rome, that are ready to depart upon small Concessions! The Constancy of the
Church of Rome, is as inseparable a Property of hers, as her Infallibility.
Methinks this is much to the Dishonor of many of our Church, and much to the
Honor of the Nonconformists, that whatever they suffer, there is no danger
that they will turn Papists: But weak Reasons have great force in them, when
they that are narrow in their Charity, and powerful in Place, have the
Management of them.

6. The World is too apt to be jealous; but have not the Nonconformists some
Reason to be jealous of this sort of zealous Clergymen, that there is some
Agreement, or Bargain between them and the Friends and Kinsmen of the Church of
Rome? that both shall agree to keep the Nonconformists out? And is not the
Church of Rome better conditioned, and better natured than these zealous
Clergymen? for there is not a Nonconformist but may be entertained among them,
without fear of increasing a Faction.

7. It is not a very doubtful thing, whether our zealous Clergymen are the
best or the worst sort of our Clergy, that argue so stisly against a legal
Comprehension of the Orthodox Nonconformists, with Reasons of so little weight,
or that are so little sensible of the Usefulness, and Serviceableness of the
Abilities of the Nonconformists, to the great and crying need of Souls.

8. This is a Vindication of the Nonconformists from bringing in of Popery; for
the way of getting into the Papists has been the shutting out of them; they
hope to get by a Toleration. There would be no colorable Reasons for a
Toleration, if it were not a pretended Favor to the Nonconformists. Take away
Nonconformity as much as you can, and you take away the fairest pretense for a
Toleration. They that appear against the uniting of Protestants upon Catholic
Terms, serve the Popish Turn and Interest, and are effectually ill Friends to
the Protestant Interest, and by Consequence our excluding Impositions do more
real Hurt than Good, to the Protestant Church of England.

9. The dissenting Protestants may know who are their Friends, and who their
Enemies, and what Potent Enemies they have, they have the Zealous Clergy
against them, and the Politic Potent Papist.

10. We see the little Confidence or Assurance we have of the Constancy of many
that are in the Communion of the Church of England; for if the receiving of the
Protestant Dissenters upon Catholic Terms, be hazardous of losing, or of the
revolt of them to the Church of Rome, as the more constant and true to her
self, then what will become of them, if Popery should so far obtain, as to be
able to give them Countenance and Favor? for if they are so inclinable to
revolt for the Condescentions of the Church, in some things extra-essential to
the Church, upon show of Inconstancy, what would they be, when our Church is
like to be lost, or suppressed?

11. Whether there is not a latent untrusty Party of schismatical Formalists in
the Church, that are Schismatics depositive? for it seems they cannot bear the
Reconciliation, and Restitution of the ejected; and if they are upon that in
danger of apostatizing to the Church of Rome, are they not in danger of
becoming the rankest Schismatics in the World, by returning Members of an
apostate, schismatical Church, the Mother of Schisms?

12. By this, among other Reasons, I am convinced that it is the Duty of all
sound and sincere Protestants of the Church of England, to pray for and by all
peaceable ways to endeavor the readmission of all sound Protestant
Dissenters, and a Catholic Union of us all. And I am convinced the learned
Bishop Cosins saw the State of Religion, when he declared in his last
Testament, that it was the great Duty of us all to unite. And how much we are
bound to acknowledge, and with all due Honor to remember the Loyal and
Christian Endeavors of our late Parliaments, to unite us. I did at first
design to compare the foresaid Declaration, to which, if turned into an Act,
the Nonconformists would have conformed; and the Act of Uniformity to which
they cannot conform, for a further Illustration of the despised Case of the
Nonconformists; but I hope there is enough spoken to inform the less knowing,
and to confirm the more knowing, in their charitable Opinion of them. I have
traced the divided Rivers to the Head of them; and for that reason, that Truth
may appear. From all this you may see a Concord between the King proposing, and
the House of Commons, by their Thanks, approving of it; and the major part of
the Nonconformists ready to submit to it. On the other side, you see the
Bishops and Doctors dissenting from the King and Commons (that restored them)
and the reforming Divines, and not so concordant in their Sentiments and
Opinions, as to denominate them unanimous, and could they have extended their
Charity but wide enough, they had provided well for a more durable Peace,
defended with Considerations, against which, but few would have drawn out the
small Powers of their Mis-understandings, to give trouble to it. There was not
an exact Uniformity in their Notions; some thought a Reformation necessary to
the Church's Settlement: Mr. Thorndike wrote for it; and when the Commissioners
on both sides, began to dispute, it was seasonably closed up; lest the
Disogreements of the anti-reforming-side had more appeared, some of whom
undertook the Conduct of others, under whom a Promoter of their Design, the
Lord Chancellor Hide, appeared and acted, (who in the Year 1641, was Chairman
of the Committee against the Bishops;) others gave Reputation, but little
Addition of Help; others were varlously instrumental, some by their Learning,
others with their eagerness, and others with their keen and inverate Antipathy
against some, if not all of the reforming side, and differed in as many Points
from the Doctrine of the Church, as the Nonconformists differed from the
Discipline and Ceremonies of the Church, and were doctrinal Nonconformists. And
it is clear, that they did not humbly and brotherly advise, nor maturely debate
the matters committed to them, and not doubting of an hopeful manageable Number
of the succeeding Parliament, their Resolutions passed into an Act, they took
no more notice of the King's Declaration, than to make an historical mention of
it, that such a thing had been, but enact nothing commended by it, in
mittigation or favor to the Dissenting-side, requiring more Conditions, and
adding heavy Penalties, which that Parliament in the latter times of it would
have abated; but it was too late, as was said elsewhere. This is the Act to
which the Nonconformists cannot conform; and they have given such Reasons, and
so many, for this passive Nonconformity, that as many good Men as I know, are
sorry they have so much to say, and their disgusted Adversaries are displeased
and incensed with them, and no Man is thought yet to give a full and sufficient
Answer to them, being rather slighted than answered; or what the one takes in a
strict and honest sense, the other is fain to expound in a very general, and
well-meaning sense; according to one, more may conform than yet have conformed,
according to the other, there are but few, if any, that have conformed, in my
acquaintance. This being in part spoken to in the First Plea, I cannot stay any
longer upon this Head, but pass to the other Consideration of Nonconformity.

2. Nonconformity taken actively and positively; and that is preaching and
performing other Religious Exercises, as it is commonly said, contrary to Law,
by forbidden Men, and in a disallowed way. And for this several Nonconformist
Ministers are at this time hunted, molested, and admonished, according to the
strictest Form of Law, in order to Banishment with Abjuration, or to be
prosecuted as Felons, in case of their Obstinacy and Refusal: Some of them have
apologized for their preaching in such a manner, that if they are not answered
in a rational, peaceable convincing way, they will not be used as rational Men,
and their Sufferings will be the more harsh, but not more hard to be born by
them, because they have given Reasons for their Actions, which will appear to
them either unanswerable, and that will make their Sufferings more comfortable;
or else their Oppressors are the more implacable, and then they must the more
meekly acquiesce in the divine Pleasure, as called forth to suffer. The
Reverend Mr. Baxter has written an Apology for the Nonconformist Ministry,
dedicated to six of the Right Reverend Bishops, by Name, and a Petition, which
deserves the serious perusal of their Lordships, and all other Ministers,
Magistrates, and Gentlemen, that they may either satisfy them, or be satisfied
by them. The Case is momentous, because the Salvation of Souls, the many
personal and real Sufferings of Men in Bodies and Estates, the healing of
Divisions, and settling of the Church, are unconceiveably touched, and
concerned in it: Mr. John Troughton has written a Book with the same Title,
upon the same Argument. And although the Right Reverend Bishop of Cork has done
well in dealing faithfully with Mr. B. he did ill in not dealing fairly with
that Book, and worse in exposing him as incapable, unfit to propose Terms of
Peace; by which I think that Excellent Bishop has not seen his Terms of
Concord, 2d part.

And this being stated, let us modestly consider:

1. Whether this their positive Nonconformity be not capable of an Apology?

2. Whether it be not an hard case to silence, suppress, and punish them for
endeavoring the Good of precious Souls?

For the first;

1. No Christian should doubt that the Office of the Ministry is originally
from Jesus Christ, and not of Men. The extraordinary and ordinary Office of the
Ministry of the Word and Sacraments are derived from the same Divine Supreme
Authority. He that made the Apostles able Ministers of the New Testament, has
made, and makes all other lawful, 2 Cor. 3.5, 6.
sitted, and faithful Ministers, Ministers of the New Testament; it is their
Gift, and their Learning, their Office and Work, to declare and publish that
New Testament, or Covenant of Grace, the Commands, Conditions Privileges, and
Promises of it, to call and invite Sinners to it, to accept of the Grace
therein revealed, to submit to the Commands of it, perform the Conditions and
Duties required, to make them thereby capable of the Privileges and Promises
annexed to it, and to train up, edify, build, comfort, and perfect all that are
in it. This is an Office necessary, useful and proper to his Kingdom.

2. They who are called and sent by Christ, Qui fecit not doneos Ministros N.T
quomodo fecit? per Spiritum suum tanquam per Principium effectivum; per Gratium
Spiri^us tanquam per principium formal, Eplisc. Davananius in c.p. 1. ad Coloss
v. 29.
and according to his Mind, are qualified, prepared and instructed for their
Work and Office, by the Holy Ghost, who was promised and sent by Jesus Christ.

3. Being in some lower measure at first prepared and fitted for their Work;
the Holy Ghost is the prime, and effectual Mover of them to exercise those
Gifts which they have received in the Service of their Master in Heaven, Jesus
Christ. And this that great and solemn Interrogatory, which requires a sincere,
sensible, solemn, and serious Answer, our Ordination does put out of doubt. Do
you trust that you are inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost, The ordering of
Deacons.
to take upon you this Office, etc? Answ. I trust so.

4. Being prepared and moved by the Holy Ghost, they offer themselves unto, and
are called by some in a Church (where a Church is constituted) to exercise
those Abilities, received from Christ by the Holy Spirit, for the Ends of the
Gospel, the Salvation of immortal Souls.

5. All that the Bishops and Pastors of the Church are required to do, or can
do as Ordainers, is, to try their Fitness and Disposition, and finding them
fit, to approve and separate them to the Office of the Ministry, to declare
them to have Authority, to exhort them to Diligence and Faithfulness in their
Office, and to testify this to the Church.

6. No Bishop or Pastors can justly refuse, and justify the refusal before
Jesus Christ, to whom they must give an account, of any Person duly qualified
with necessary Qualifications for the Ministry; for it is a Sin to refuse him,
whom Christ has by his Spirit fitted for, and excited to his Work by his
Spirit.

7. As long as their Gifts and Abilities are continued, and the Holy Ghost does
continue his gracious Motions and Assistances, so long these Ministers must
continue in the Exercise, and discharge of their Office; for there is the same
Reason to continue them, as there was to admit them, they continuing the same.

8. Their fitness for the Work of the Ministry consisting in soundness of
Knowledge and Faith, aptness to teach, gift of Utterance, declared Resolutions,
and undertaking to teach and do what Christ has commanded, with Perseverance
therein, as a Guide and Example to the Flock, are sufficient Conditions of
admittance into the Ministry of the Gospel. To do all things decently and in
order, and to Edification, are necessary by the Law of Christ's Kingdom, and
not indifferent. It may well be questioned, whether any Man otherwise fitted
for the Ministry, should be refused, because he refuses to subscribe, vow,
promise, declare, to any doubtful, controverted Conditions of Admission or
Continuance; which are commonly invented by controversial, contentious, and
imperious Men, who do not only propose their Conceptions to others, but make
them a Standard and Measure to regulate other Men's Minds, and Practices; and
not only so, but think it meet, that all shall be punished that disagree, and
dissent from them.

For the Confirmation of these things, with the Authority of the Church of
England; Let us observe the Form of ordering Priests and Deacons: The Preface
says, The Bishop knowing either by himself, or by sufficient Testimony any
Person to be of virtuous Conversation, and without Crime, and after Examination
and Trial, finding him learned in the Latin Tongue, and sufficiently
instructed in Holy Scripture, may -- admit him Deacon --. The Bishop says to
the Archdeacon, Take heed that the Persons, whom you present unto us, be apt
and meet for their Learning, and Godly Conversation --. The Bishop examines
them in the presence of all the People -- Do you trust you are inwardly moved
by the Holy Ghost to take upon you this Office --? Do you think you are truly
called according to the Will of our Lord Jesus Christ --? Do you unfeignedly
believe all the Canonical Scripture of the Old and New Testament? Then opening
his Office, he asks him, Will you do this gladly and willingly? Will you apply
your Diligence to frame and fashion your own Lives, and of your Families,
according to the Doctrine of Christ, and be Examples of the Flock of Christ --?
The other Question relates to the Government of this Church, as Obedience to
the Ordinary, and his godly Admonitions, which is a local Condition, in order
to their Admission under our Church-form of Government, which is disputed by
some of the Parties when any is presented to the Priesthood: The Bishop
cautions the Archdeacon; Take heed that the Persons whom you present unto us,
be apt and meet, for their Learning and godly Conversation, to exercise their
Ministry duly, to the honor of God, and the edifying his Church --. I think
them so to be: Then shall the Bishop say unto the People, Good People, these
are they whom we purpose, God willing, to receive this day unto the Holy Office
of Priesthood; for after due Examination we find not to the contrary, but that
they be lawfully called to their Function and Ministry, and that they be
Persons meet for the same.

Note from this, that Learning and Godly Conversation are the constituting
Qualifications of a Man lawfully called to the Function of the Ministry.

In the Collect afterward, they pray God to replenish them with the Truth of
his Doctrine, adorn them with Innocence of Life, that both by Word and good
Example, they may faithfully serve him in this Office, etc. Then follow the
Epistle and Gospel; after which the Oath of Supremacy is given, and after that,
an Exhortation to remember their high Dignity, and weight of their Charge, i.e.
to be Messengers, Watchmen, Stewards of the Lord, to teach, premonish, feed,
provide for the Lord's Family, to seek Christ's Sheep that are dispersed
abroad, and for his Children, who are in the midst of this naughty World, that
they may be saved through Christ for ever. Have always printed in your
Memories, how great a Treasure is committed to your Charge, the Sheep of
Christ, Covetous Non-Residents, and negligent Residents is hereby condemned,
and a personal Inspection required, which some of our Brethren call Gossiping;
others Conventicling.
bought with his Death -- the Congregation which you serve is his Spouse and
his Body --. And if it shall happen any Member of that Church take any hurt by
your Negligence, ye know the Greatness of the Fault, and also the horrible
Punishment that will ensue --. See that you never cease your Labor, your Care
and Diligence, until you have done all that lies in you, to bring all under
your Charge, to Agreement in Faith, and Ripeness of Age in Christ, that there
be no Error in Religion, or Viciousness of Life --; ye ought to pray earnestly
for his holy Spirit --, consider how studious you ought to be in reading and
learning the Scriptures; and framing your Manners, and of yours, according to
the Scriptures; and for this Cause ye ought to lay aside all worldly Cares and
Studies; we have good hope that you have clearly determined by God's Grace, to
give your selves wholly to this Office, whereunto it has pleased God to call
you, etc.

This is enough to prove their Fitness and their Call to the Ministry; and such
as are thus fitted, are admitted and ordained.

9. It is so far from being any part of their Office, that it is altogether
inconsistent with it, to disturb the Peace, or sow Sedition against Heathen
Magistrates, or to derogate from their Authority, much more to do any such
thing against Christian Magistrates that profess the Truth, to whom they are
engaged by more and stricter Bonds.

10. Their Persons and Estates are subject to the Magistrates Power and Laws,
their Consciences to God, and in him and for him, to them as his Ordinance; but
to require more of them, than of other Subjects, carries in it a vehement
Suspicion, injurious to Religion, because a Suspicion of them more than others.

11. They cannot impose themselves upon any People, as their Teachers, but if
any are desirous of their Labors, or accept their Pains, and find benefit
thereby, how can they that are given to the Work, refuse to instruct and
minister to them, any more than Paul and Silas, when constrained by the
importunity of Lydia? Acts 16.15. Will it not instill an ill Opinion of our
Rulers, and Laws, if they shall say, Good People, I would preach, instruct,
exhort, and comfort you, but I dare not, I am forbidden, and it may cost me my
Liberty, and more than I am worth? Would it not be a sowing of Sedition among
the People, to tell them, Orthodox and faithful, and skilful Preachers dare not
preach the Truth, no not in Corners, except to a very few!

12. Their Office is Divine, and their Calling not of Men, but of God, their
chief Encouragements are spiritual and heavenly, but they ought to be
protected, encouraged, and maintained, with all needful and competent
Susistence, for their bodily and ministerial Support, and Comfort in their
Work, and live of the Gospel.

13. The Temporalities in the Donation of the Supreme Powers, or private
Patronage, may be given to whom they please, but still as accountable to God;
they should not be denied to Persons fitted for the Work of the Ministry, nor
given to Men more suitable to their Fancies, than the Mind of God: Magistrates
and Patrons have Rules for their Direction, as Inferiors have for theirs.

14. And therefore Superiors have need of great Wisdom and Wariness to discern
who are fit and worthy, and who not, and what are the necessary Conditions to
capacitate Men, for the temporal Rewards and Subsistence, lest by their
unnecessary Jealousy, and Arbitrary Qualifications, they reject Men that are
furnished with the most necessary Qualifications of Learning, and Holiness,
which contain Peace and Honesty. Men that fear a Net, may starve for want of
Corn: It is hard Fare to swallow and eat Scruples of Conscience.

15. Governors may deprive Ministers of their Temporal Maintenance, remove
them from their Stations for their Noncompliance with their Laws and Orders,
but no humane Power can deprive them of what they could not give them, nor take
away from them, viz. their ministerial Abilities and Authority. I think it
clear, nothing can eject them, or un-make them, but the Privation of those
things which could make them Ministers.

The Crimes for which Ministers might be deposed are, either Impiety,
Unrighteousness, and Immorality, few in Number, but gross in Quality.

And lest I be thought too positive, let me propound some Questions.

1. Whether those Men who are fitted by Christ for the Ministry, that are moved
and assisted by the Holy Ghost, that are devoted to Christ and his Work, that
are invited to preach by many, that are moved with Compassion toward many
People that want, that have had Success in their Labors, are not obliged in
Conscience to preach the Gospel, as often, as much, and to as many as they can?

2. Whether it be a sufficient Reason to refuse to admit such, otherwise able
and worthy Men, or to eject and silence them, because they cannot subscribe,
swear, declare, what a few Men, without asking Counsel and Direction of God by
solemn Fasting and Prayer, or by Deliberations with the fairly and equally
chosen Representatives of the whole Church, did resolutely carry on by ways and
Instruments of their procuring? We have our Ember Weeks for Ordination; and why
not before framing Conditions, upon which, Continuance or Deprivation did
depend of many hundreds of able Ministers? I do not question the lawful
Authority of Governors, or detract from Order and Government; but the Question
is, Whether Rulers should wholly reject such. Men as are duly qualified with
Gifts necessary for the Office of the Ministry, who refuse no Catholic, but
Conditions dubious in their Sense, and unnecessary in their nature and kind?

3. But granting that the Rulers of the Church, can justify to Christ their
Rejection of qualified Men, which is not past doubt, from those public
Stations and Endowments of the Church and charge of Souls; yet what Harm or
Danger can come to precious Souls by the profitable and wholesome Labors of
learned, judicious and sound Christian Ministers, endowed with the Gifts and
Graces of the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of the Catholic Church? Why should
not they preach the Word? Why may not People hear them? Or, why should not we
accept their Help, and repute them our Fellow Laborers, and rejoice in their
Success?

4. Have any of us that conform, heard any of them vent in the Pulpits in
former times, while they had the Liberty of their Pulpits, any disloyal, or
rebellious Doctrine? any Fanaticism inconsistent with sound Reason, and the
Oracles of God, the Faith of the Catholic, or Reformed Churches? Name the Men,
admonish them, labor to reclaim them, and testify against them. If they were
such Seeds-men, why did not the Church after her Restitution cite them, and
proceed against them to Excommunication and Ejection, as intolerable Men? But
on the contrary, Do we not remember our selves, and have we not heard others,
remember what manner of Men they were, both in the Universities and Countries?
Do we not remember some of them, as Governors of Colleges, as Tutors, as
Preachers in the University, City and Country? and why may not they, who have
been our Teachers, teach others? by whom we are saved and effectually called,
by whom we believed, become blessed Instruments, and Ministers, by whom others
may believe, be born again, and saved. Is Nonconformity an Extinction of the
Spirit of Light. Truth, Purity, and Power in them? Does Nonconformity separate
them from Christ? Are they none of his, because they cannot submit to the
Inventions of some, who were not so much as Bishops, when they vehemently
coucurred to bring us to this pass? and were restless to pass some of their
particular Problems into a Law, to which all Men must declare Assent, if the
Assent be declared in their sense. As I should think it a great Sin, not to
succor my Father or Brother in want and distress; so I do think it a great Sin
not to relieve my Fathers and Brethren in Jesus Christ, by a Faithful
Testimony, and Apology, when they are oppressed, and in danger of Prisons,
Poverty, and many Miseries. And let it be noted, The like is gratefully
acknowledged by the Godly and Reverend Bishop if Co k, of a Nonconformist, p.
73.
that I am obliged to acknowledge the Efficacy of the Holy Spirit upon the
preaching of several of them, toward my Salvation; and having known the proof,
and Power of Christ speaking in them, I dare not deny them before Men, lest I
also deny Christ Jesus my Savior in them. There are several learned, holy,
laborious, and successful Ministers that were our Instructors in our younger
time, who have conformed, but not so many as refused to conform, within my
Knowledge, as I could name, but for offending them, and some other Reasons of my
Silence, and in those times of Liberty, these seemed to be all of one Mind in
the Lord. I and many more rejoiced in their Light; and some of them were among
Preachers, as Solomon says, As the Apple Tree is among the Trees of the Wood;
we sat under their Shadow with great Delight, and their Fruit was pleasant to
our Taste. I could name the wise Master Builders that laid the Foundation,
other than which no Man can lay; I could name the Paul, and the Apollos, and
the Peter's that preached to the Heart, the Barnabas and the Boanerges; the
Friends of the Bridegroom, that woed and besought us, and would not be denied
till our Souls had received Christ Jesus the Lord: some of them are at rest in
the Lord, and let their Names be blessed; and others are in the Cloud, and
Storm, and Warfare; and to add Bonds to their many Afflictions is no small
unkindness to Religion. We know of what Spirit they were, that dug up the
Bodies of Wikcliff, and other Saints; it is not hard to find of what Spirit
they are, that rake into the Ashes of the Dead, and sprinkle them with their
profane Wit, which is like Salt that has loss its Savor, not good for the
Dunghill; it proceeds not from that Charity which covers a multitude of Sins.

5. Whether they who are called of God to the Work of the Ministry, should
forsake and renounce their Calling, and look upon themselves as Laymen, and be
but as Laymen, because they are ejected out of their Places, and conform not
to the Injunctions of the Law? Many of the Nonconformists have Episcopal
Ordination; shall they forbear all Ministerial Acts, and do but what any Master
of a Family should do, instruct their own Family, and admit four more to a
Participation of the Benefit? shall they renounce their Calling, who declared
their Trust, that they were moved by the Holy Ghost, to take the Office (of
Deacon) whom the Archdeacon declared, when presented to the Priesthood, he
thought them apt and meet for their Learning and godly Conversation; and the
Bishop declared, after due Examination, We find not the contary, but that they
be lawfully called to their Function; for whom the Bishop prayed, and whom he
hoped, that they have determined by God's Grace to give them wholly to this
Office, whereunto God has called them; and also called to declare and profess
(before God, Angels, and the Congregation) that they were truly called
according to the Will of the Lord Jesus Christ, give faithful Diligence always
so to minister the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as
the Lord has commanded, and this Church received according to the Commandments
of God; to drive away erroneous Doctrines, to use both public and private
Monitions and Exhortations to sick and whole within your Cures, as need shall
require, etc. Can any discharge them from God's Call, but God that called them?
Can they sit still, and do no Ministerial Work, These other Arguments are urged
by heavenly Mr Jos. Allen, say to Archippus, etc.
that have been devoted to the Ministry, that have been prayed for, and
exhorted to give themselves wholly to it? Or do they cease to be Ministers,
except it be in that Cure to which they were instituted and inducted? Then are
we made, tho not Independent, yet Congregational Ministers, and are Ministers
only in that particular Congregation? If they ought not to renounce their
Ministry, then they may preach, and do other Ministerial Offices, as they have
opportunity. Others are not Episcopally ordained; but if they are moved by the
Holy Ghost, are learned, exercised in the Scriptures, are of Godly
Conversation, and give themselves to the Work, are not they called of God? If
not, what is the meaning of the forecited Word in the ordering of Priests and
Deacons; Then shall the Bishop say unto the People, Good People, these are they
whom we purpose, God willing, to receive this day unto the Office of
Priesthood: For after due Examination we find not the contrary, but that they
be lawfully called to their Function and Ministry, and be persons meet for the
same --? Does not the Bishop look upon them as internally called, and that
internal Calling declared and signified, and therefore receives them? And tho
they have not Episcopal Imposition of Hands; if they have Imposition of Hands
of Presbyters, and are set apart by Fasting and Prayer, are they not more than
Laymen, or private Believers? They who say they are but Laymen, have no
better Reasons than the Romanists had, who called our Reformed Bishops, no true
Bishops, nor Priests. Anthony Champney dedicated, or rather directed his Book
of the Vocation of Bishops, etc. to Archbishop Abbot, with no higher Title,
then To Mr George Abbot, called Aroh-bishop of Canterbury. And the most eminent
Defenders of our Protestant Religion, tho they asserted a Power of Ordination
to reside in the Bishop, as without whom there was no regular Ordination; See
Mr. Fran Mason,. 7, 9. Defense of Ordination.
yet they justified the calling of Foreign Divines and Churches by Presbyters
without Bishops, and the Reasons they used to vindicate them, will serve to
vindicato those among us, D. Jo. White's Works, way to the true Church,. 53. p.
211.
that have no other --. And when as he (the Jesuit) says, They ( Luther and
Calvin) succeeded no Apostolic Bishops, neither had any Calling to preach that
now Faith. I answer, That for the External Sucecssion, where of we have spoken,
we care nor; it is sufficiont that in Doctrine they succeeded the Apostles, and
Primitive Churches --. It is the Custom of the Catholic Church, See Dr. Field
of the Church, Book 3 c. 39. Consensus Eccles. Cathol centra Trident.
pralectionibus, c. 11. de Ecclesia, R. 289. Bishop Biron of Subjection, Par. 3.
p. 535. 4o.
ut Episcopi legitime ordinent, sed siquis a Presbytere ordinats fuerit,
Ordinatio illa etiam vera est, ex ejusdem Ecclesiae Catholicae judicio, says
the Reverend Bishop Carlton: and Bishop Bilson, that learned Defender of
Bishops Answers Philander. Phil. The Apostles Commission we know, but yours we
do not know. Theop: You cannot be ignorant of ours, if you know theirs, so long
as we teach the same Doctrine which they did, we have the same Power and
Authority to preach which they had, etc.

If these Answers of the learned Defenders of the Protestant Cause, are not
true and catholic, they are not good, nor sufficient: if they are good against
the Papists, they are strong for our Protestant dissenting-Preachers; who, if
they be but Laymen, should be ordained: but the very word Reordination does
imply an Ordination. And Ordination is not to be repeated, Praelection, de
Ecclesia, c. 11. p. 283.
although it be disorderly and out of Course, any more than Baptism in the
Catholic Church, says the same Reverend Bishop Carlton.

I must keep my self to Generals, for I do not know the particular Cases,
Scruples and Reasons of particular Persons. Some have taken Episcopal
Ordination, that cannot conform, that were ordained by Presbyters before; those
that have not, scruple Reordination, lest they should null their former, and
their Administrations, and plead for themselves, that they were innocent from
the Exclusion of the Bishops. And what if some songht Episcopal Ordination, and
were refused, tho sufficiently recommended? The most that were ordained, were
ordained by an Irish Bishop in London, which needed not, if all our English
Bishops had been willing to ordain. I could name one Bishop that did refuse to
ordain, that lived most conveniently for Access; and the Ordination of that An
Irish Bishop.
Agadoensis, was not Canonical, nor free from just Offense.

But further, even they who have the internal Call, consisting of good
Learning, Knowledge in the Scriptures, and are of a good exemplary Conversation,
and moved by the Spirit, are not to be reckoned as Laymen, but next to
Presbyters or Ministers, according to the declared Judgment of great and
eminent Protestants. Archbishop Abbot added this Observation, to the 9th
Section of the second Chapter, De Circumcisione and Baptismo. Questiones fox
discussae, etc. perv G^^. Abbatium; page 109.
Martin Bucer says, that some of the Lay men, were admitted to read and
interpret the Holy Scriptures, in the Primitive and purer Church, which they
sometimes did perform in the presence of the Bishops; and names Origin and
others; namely, Such in whom the singular Gists of the Holy Spirit did appear,
that it might be manifest to the Rectors of the Churches, that their Labor in
instructing the People in the Mysteries of the Faith, would not a little profit
them. And says he, If any Man add, what the truly learned Hieron Zanchius
speaks indefinitely --, when from the Practice of the purer Church, they who
were not in Holy Orders, did preach the Gospel. We answer, There is a
difference to be made between the simple Layman, or the common sort, to whom
Power is given in the Romish Church to baptize, and them who are instar
Ministrorum Evangelic; who are like the Ministers of the Gospel; and who not
only excel the common sort of Men, for their Learning in holy things, but are
called by the special, public and common Decree of the Bishop, and them that
are over the Congregation, publicly to interpret Scripture. And these, and not
others, the words of Bucor do note or point at, etc. -- Istos ego non audeo, ad
ordinariorum, and vulgarium Laicorum Conditiones revocare cum ad Presbyteros
tam prope accedant. I dare not bring down these to the Condition of ordinary,
and vulgar Laymen, that come so near to Presbyters (or Ministers) says the
learned Abbot of this sort; there are scarce any to be found at this day (says
he) for the multitude of them that serve in Churches. And whether Tertullian
and Hierom speak of such as these, that were permitted to baptize, I leave to
the Judgment of the Learned.

By these Testimonies we see how different the Judgment of too many of this
present Age is, from the Judgment and Candor of the most venerable Writers of
former times. Now Schismatic is but a common Name to distinguish the
Nonconformists from the Churchmen; and one as in a fit of Kindness is far from
charging them with Schism, Defense of Dr. Stillingsleet, page 69.
if they would not leave the Church, but conform as Laymen, as the
Nonconformists did. But did the old Nonconformists conform as Laymen? So I
suppose we all conform but as Laymen, when we do not officiat as Ministers; we
answer as People answer, and do no more than People do. But I think the old
Nonconformists did reckon themselves when they left their Livings, as much, and
as truly Ministers, as they did when they had their Livings, and did preach
publicly by Connivance, as Ministers in most Counties. Our present
Nonconformists would thankfully accept the Favor, which most of the old did
enjoy, till Conformity grew too hot even for many Conformists; I need not name
the Times, nor the Planets that then bore Rule.

But who can forbear lamenting the Condition of our Brethren, and of multitudes
of precious Souls! Is there any Man qualisied with a Competency of Learning,
that can say, he is moved by the holy Ghost? that leads a good Life? that
promises to give himself to the Work of God? but shall be acknowledged by the
Ordainer, to be called of God, even before he lays on his Hands? but if this
very same Man shall afterward scruple, or refuse, to assent to all and every
thing, etc. he shall no longer be accounted by some Men, as a Man called of
God, but must become again as a Layman, or else he cannot escape being a
Schismatic: which is enough to tempt a Man to think, that these make the Gift
of Subscribing, and the Faculty of assenting and consenting to other Men's
Inventions, to be the essentiating and constituting Qualification of a
Minister, without which, tho he be never so well furnished with other Gifts, he
shall be accounted but a Layman, and must do no more than a Layman, or else
there is no avoiding the odious Crime of Schism. And hence this Notion may
arise, like a Meteor in the Firmament of the Church, to be gazed upon, and
afford matter of Observation, if not of Prediction. That Conformity to an
Ordinance of Men does effectually make a Minister of Jesus Christ, in the
Church of England; and while he continneth in the same Mind he was in, at 24.
Years of Age, all his lifetime, and be not prepared to submit to all
after-Devices, that may be added, he shall fall from the Grace and Dignity of
his Ordination and Ministry, and return to his first simple Being, of remotely
disposed matter of mere Laity. If it be said, no; for he being once ordained,
he is a Minister of the Universal Church. Well, that is true; but if he cannot
conform to every Point, then he cannot exercise his Ministry in this Church:
and then the Consequence is obvious; such are the Conditions of the exercise of
the Ministry in the Church of England at this day, that a Minister of the
Universal Church cannot exercise his Office, no not in any Chapel of Easd in
this Kingdom, except he submit to them; and if he cannot exercife his Ministry,
after he is called unto it, what does it profit him to be a Minister? or what
is the Church the better for his Office? If one acknowledged to be a Minister
of the Universal Church, may not administer in a particular Church, then is it
not because that particular Church requires some Conditions, which are not so
large as the Rules and Conditions of the Universal Church? This may put us to
search whether different Rules, stricter Laws prescribed, as Conditions of
Entrance and Continuance in the Ministry, and Church Communion, be not the
Cause or Occasion of Schisms in particular Churches? These Catholic Rules and
Conditions are to be taken, and received from the Apostles, who went into all
the World to gather, and to found Christian Churches. They gave us Laws enough to
govern any particular Church, who were sent into all the World: And no Decrees
of General Councils are of equal Observation with the Scriptures, not only
because of their Sanctity, but because of their Universality; and the very
Errors and Mistakes of them in some Particulars are tolerable, that do what
they can to find out and follow the Will of God in Scripture.

And this Diversity can be no Inconvenience to any Church, because of the plain
Injunctions and Commands of keeping the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace, of loving, and forbearing one another in Love.

But to return, What shall we say? Are they but Laymen, or but quasi Laymen,
that were once ordained by Diocesans? or what it others can prove by the Holy
Scriptures, and the Catholic Rules of Faith, that they are called of God, and
make proof of their Gifts, which make there serviceable to the Souls of poor
Sinners, and only scruple some late implicating perplexing Terms, what shall
they do in this case? They would enter into the Service, according to the
uncontroverted general Rules of Christ, the Sovereign Lawgiver of his Church;
but that will not serve the turn, they must do more: They have received Gifts
from the Spirit, of the same nature with other Ministers, they will submit their
Gifts to the Trial, to free them from the Fanaticism imputed to them. These
Gifts are for some use; they are their Talents, and they must give an account
of them to the Giver of them at his appearing. Whither can any of them go, and
not be serviceable? Is there any City, Town, Parish, or noble Family in
England, in which there is not need, or where such as they may not be exceeding
profitable? but in some Places, there is a crying need! O how few, few
Laborers are there in very large Fields! yea, as offensive as the presence of
the Brethren are in many places, there is not an useless Man among them, nor
one place hardly where is not need, if not extreme need. What shall they do?
conform to the Church as Laymen only! What if the Bottle be so full, that its
ready to burst? what if the Fire of Zeal, true Zeal, kindle? must they not
speak with their Tongue! What if the Breast be full, and they who were begorten
in Christ Jesus by their Ministry, cry, cry to them; O give us of the sincere
Milk of the Word! shall they say, No, my Breast is full, but I must not draw it
out? What if they have Bread enough, and can divide it, and see a Company of
poor Souls ready to starve, and pine for Want, and yet they must not give them
a piece of Bread? City Ministers are most quarelsome and contentious with them;
but if from their high Places they saw and knew but what I know, instead of
charging them with Separation and Schism, they would beg of Authority, that
they would send them into many places of the Land, which are more like a
Wilderness, than the Garden of the Lord: but instead of doing this, some have
written to prepare a prejudiced People to entertain them with Stones; or
beseech them to depart out of their Coasts; and not to open their Doors to
entertain them, or their Ears to hear them. Oh! how are many of the Servants of
God, true Subjects, able Preacers, at this day forced to hide, and many are as
shy, and close to entertain them, as if they were Traitors, and the Hue and Cry
were out against them!

But what if these Men cannot think themselves discharged of their Work, when
their Hire is stopped? they cannot but pity those that have no Shepherds, or not
enough; they cannot stop their Ears against the Cry of the poor; what if
Conscience cry, Woe to me, if I preach not the Gospel! O there are too many that
never heard that Preaching in their Bosom. Some have pleaded that Woe concerned
none but the Apostle; what shall they do between two Woes? Woe from Christ if I
preach not, and Woe from Men if I preach!

Object. They must obey the Laws, obey Authority.

Answ. So they must, and, as far they can, they do.

Object. But they say, they must obey God rather than Men.

Answ. So did the Apostles, who taught Obedience to Governors. Neither may any
godly Prince take it as any Dishonor to his Estate, to see God obeyed before
him; Defense of the Apology, part 1. p. 20. of my Edit.
for he is not God, but the Minister of God, says our Venerable Father, Bishop
Jewel.

Object. But our King, and Magistrates, and Laws, are not such as They were,
neither are our Conventiclers Apostles.

Answ. True, I cast no Reflections upon the King, but acknowledge his Life, and
Protestancy to be singular Mercies and Privileges. But if the first Christian
Churches were planted, and the Faith preached where the Rulers were
Unbelievers, disaffected to it, and Persecuters of it; then Preachers that
preach the Doctrine of the Apostles, and live according to the Gospel, may
humbly expect, if not lay some Claim to a Privilege of preaching, and
worshipping God, as near as they can discern, according to his mind.

The Case of the Brethren is so clear in it self, The Canon Law calls their
diverse Orders, Religion; but to Christians and Protestants there is but one
Religion.
that some in Power have no other color for proceeding against them, than as
Men that exercise another Religion, as I can produce, which clearly intimates,
that it is unreasonable to proceed to Confiscations and Banishment against Men
that profess the same Religion. And whereas Godliness and Honesty may claim
Protection, they represent them as wicked and dishonest in the highest Degree,
that is, seditious, and withdrawing the King's Subjects from their Allegiance,
etc.

But this is the old Language, Apolog. c. 2. Divis. 7. p. 21.
as the most Reverend Bishop Jewel writes, as objected against them, that we be
fallen from the Catholic Church, and by a wicked Schism have shaken the whole
World, and troubled the common Peace, and universal Quiet of the Church: and
that as Dathan and Abiram conspired in times past against Moses and Aaron; even
so we this day have renounced the Bishop of Rome, without any reasonable Cause.

But let us see wherein our Brethren are to be blamed, or do any thing but what
our King and Governors may allow, the Primitive Bishops of our Reformation
being Judges.

The Religion of our Brethren is, Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve. It is the Religion of Christ, and not of Antichrist. I
reckon it cannot stand with the Prince's Duty to reverse this heavenly Decrce;
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, etc. with establishing two Religions in
one Realm; the first authorized by Christ, Bishop Bilson of Subjection, Part 1.
p. 21. Edit. 4o.
and bequeathed in his Testament to the Church; the next invented of
Antichrist, and flatly repugnant to the Prophetical and Apostolical Scriptures
--. [Our Brethren endeavor to keep strictly to the Scripture, and Christ, as
Lawgiver.]

Then as the Minister must dispense the Word of Truth, be therewith offended
and grieved who list; so the Magistrate may draw the Sword of Justice to
compel, and punish such as be blindly led, Part 1. page 33.
and maliciously bent to resist sound Doctrine: Who then should be punished,
Preachers? or they, or those Officers that trouble them?

Object. But the Magistrate is to be obeyed in all lawful things, and every
particular Church has power to ordain Ceremonies, so they be not contrary to
God's Word.

Answ. No Man disputes the Magistrate's Power in commanding things good and
necessary; the Doubt is concerning things which are indifferent, as some
suppose, but not indifferent as the Dissenters suppose. Of things indifferent,
hear the Judgment of the same learned Bishop: We may not for things indifferent
trouble the weak Minds of our Brethren; yet this Rule binds no Magistrate to
remit the Punishment of Error and Infidelity, Ibid. Page 33.
because God has charged to suffer no kind of Evil unrevenged (and this is the
greatest) whose Voice they must hear, whose Will they must obey, though they
were sure thereby to scandalize never so many both Aliens and Subjects.

If they are things truly indifferent, then Governors may forbear to command
them, whereas many do rationally scruple the Observation of them, and cannot
without Sin, observe them. Condescension and Selfdeial would rid Men's
Consciences out of this Strait, between the Magistrate's Command, and the
Dictates of Conscience.

Object. But by their Preaching, and separate Meetings, they break the
Communion of the Church, and are guilty of Schism, and to tolerate them is to
tolerate a Schism.

Answ. This is the great Clamor of the Accusers: but let us see wherein
Communion of Saints and Churches does consist, and then we shall see what
Schism. I cannot quote a more learned Doctor of this Church, Ibid. Part 2. p.
223, 224.
or of greater Authority, than the same Reverend Bishop Bilson, he shall decide
this Case.

It is a most pernicious Fancy to think the Communion of Christ's Church
depends upon the Pope's Person, or Regiment (let them that imagine one
Universal Sovereign Power over the Church in our days, whether one or many,
observe this Doctrine;) and that diverse Nations and Countries differing by
Customs, Laws, and Manners (so they hold one and the same Rule of Faith in the
Bond of Peace) cannot be parts of the Catholic Church, Communicant one with
another, and perfectly united in Spirit and Truth each to other; and fie on your
Follies that rack your Creed, and rob Christ of his Honor, and the Church of
all her Comfort and Security, whilst you make the Unity of Christ's Members to
consist in Obedience to the Bishop of Rome, and not in Coherence with the Son
of God!

The Communion of Saints, and near dependence of the Godly each on other, and
all of their Head, stands not in external Rites, Customs, and Manners, as you
would fashion out a Church observing the Pope's Canons --; but in believing the
same Truth, tasting of the same Grace, resting on the same Hope, calling on the
same God, rejoicing in the same Spirit, whereby they be sealed, sanctified, and
preserved against the day of Redemption --. The Communion of the Catholic
Church is not broken by diversity and variety of Rites, Customs, Laws, and
Fashions, which many Places and Countries have different each from other,
except they be repugnant to Faith and Good-manners, as St. Augustine ad
Januarium, Irenaeus etc. Eusebius, l. 5. c. 23. Socrates, l. 5. c. 22.

Simple Verity is the Band of Unity. Jewel. Defense, p. 460. Praelection. de
Ecclesia.
Bishop Carlton makes the Unity of the Church to consist in one Head, Christ;
one Body, one Spirit, one Faith, or one Rule of Faith.

And if Unity consists in Uniformity in the same Form of Prayer, Liturgy, and
Ceremonies, there was no such thing as Unity, there were as great Schisms in
the Apostles days, as among our Brethren, according to the Judgment of the same
learned Bishop Bilson. Ibid. fourth part, p. 619, 620, etc.
Some of their own might be so vain-glorions as in making their Prayers at the
Lord's Table (which was then done by Heart, and not after any prescribed Order
or Form) to show the Gift of Tongues --. In the public Service of the Church,
the Ministers and Elders, which were many, both Travelers, and there Dwellers,
had every Man his Psalm, his Instruction, his Tongue, Revelation, or
Interpretation, as the Spirit of Grace thought most expedient --. And other
Order in the Divine Service in the Apostolic or Primitive Church, we read for
certain of none, besides the Action of the Lord's Supper, which the Apostles,
and so no doubt all their Churches, always used in the end of their public
Meetings, but with no set Prayers, save only the Lord's Prayer, as Gregory
confesses.

The rest of their Prayers, Blessings, and Thanks-givings, were in every place
made by the Gift of the Holy Ghost, inspiring such as were set to teach and
govern the Church. And you have long since their time, framed a Liturgy in
James's Name. Page 620.
-- Yet for so much as the Church of Christ did not acknowledge it -- your main
Foundation is a Dream of your own, that the Church of Gorinth had a prescribed
number and order of Prayers pronounced by some one Chaplain, Page 621
that said his Lesson within-book, or might not go one Line beside his Missale
for any good --. Where the Christians under the Apostles had in their
Assemblies, first, prophesying, i. e. declaring of God's Will, and revealing of
his Word; at which the Insidels, and new Converts unbaptized might be present:
and next, Prayers and Psalms, to celebrate the Goodness and Kindness of God,
and to prepare their Minds for the Lord's Table, to which all the Faithful came
with one Consent of Heart and Voice, giving Thanks to God for their Redemption,
etc. And this was done by the mouths of such Pastors and Ministers, as it
pleased the Holy Ghost to direct and inspire for that Function and Action. The
People hearing, understanding, Page 622.
and confirming their Prayers and Thanks with saying, Amen: and other Divine
Service than this they had none --. Page 636.
We do not think that Basil or Chrysostom, would take upon them to make a new
Form of Church Service, if St. James the Apostle had done it before them.

From this Testimony, it is clear, that if Uniformity in one Form of Worship,
or Common Prayer, and Ceremonies be necessary for Church-Union, then there was
no Church-Union, or Catholick-Communion in the Apostolical-Churches, because
there was no Form or Order of Divine Service set and prescribed: But there was
the most Christian and Catholic Communion in that Diversity; therefore
Catholic Union and Communion, without one prescribed and set Form.

And hence the Dissenting Brethren have the Countenance of an ancient venerable
Bishop of Winchester for them, and to convince their Troublers for using a
Worship different from the Liturgy of the Church of England. Prophe-ying,
praying, praising God, are parts of God's Worship, tho in differing Words and
Method, they are the same Divine Worship. And who act nearest the Primitive
Pattern of the Apostles, and purest times, they who worship God in Christ by
the Spirit, or they who will not suffer them?

Object. But the Apostles and Teachers had the Guidance of the Spirit.

Answ. They had, but that Assistance which they had for performing the Worship
of God, was not extraordinary, or peculiar to their Times; because
Gospel Worship was to be performed in all After-ages of the Church, -- Q^o in
loco ( scil. Jo. 20.) ostendi^ eum solum ^osse baptizare, and temissionem
peccatorum dare, qui habeat Spi^itum Sanctum Cyprian ad magnum.
and by Consequence, the Assistance of the Spirit was to continue to all
Ministers in succeeding Ages, without whose Assistance we can do nothing. And
the Holy Spirit does continue to give Gifts and Graces to his Ministers and
People: and if one Form were absolutely necessary for all Ages, it is a wonder
that the Apostles did not leave us one. Form is but a mode, and to be used, or
not used, as is most for Edisication; and they that use it not, should not
condemn them that use it, and they who use it, should not, as I conceive, judge
them as Schismatics that use it not, but join one with another.

Object. But it is a Disorder in the same Church and Government, and not to be
born, it looks like a different Religion.

Answ. The Romanists have often charged the Church of England with permitting
different Religionsin the Nation: But let the same learned Bishop answer for
me. In England, the People, Page 15.
both strange and liege, worship God the Father in Spirit and Truth, according
to the Gospel of his Son, agreeing together in the Substance of one Faith, and
the right Order of Christ's Sacraments: Only Strangers are suffered in their
Churches to use their own Tongue, and retain their own Ceremonies, as be
neither against Faith, nor adverse to good Manners, and therefore, by St.
Augustine's Judgment, may go for indifferent, and may be born in Christian
Unity, without Offense or Confusion -- Oh! if this Doctrine were believed in
our days, the People of God might be said to rest at Noon! And he was not
singular. In Doctrina and Fidei Orthodoxae Professione discordia inter nos
nulla (says the learned Crakenthorp of the Puritans) Hac integra in Ritibus,
Defensione Eccles. Angl. contra Spalat. c. 43. p. 254.
and Disciplinsi discrimen ferendum utrique scimus. Difference in Ceremonies
and Discipline was tolerable in their Opinion, but now intolerable. The
Champions of the Church of England in former days against the Papists were
moderate, when we know there was a different way of Discipline and Decency
secretly practiced. If Doctrine be the direction of Practice, to be moderate in
Doctrine, but severe in Practice and Execution, is to put out the Candle, and
kindle a Fire; to preach Charity, but to show no Mercy.

To draw toward a Conclusion; Let us but truly judge of the elder
Nonconformists with righteous Judgment.

1. Before his Majesty's wonderful Restoration, in all Countries and Places
where they lived and preached, who did rebuke, reprove, exhort, and fulfill all
parts of Minsters more than they? Who maintained Protestant Doctrines, preached
for Conviction, Conversion, Holiness and Righteouness more than they? Who
vindicated all Ordinances from some that pretended to live above them? Others
that denied the necessity and use of them? and from the Profanation of sacred
Things? And who did more forwardly assist and concur to settle the Government
upon ancient Foundations, and in the Inheritor of the Royal Throne? Who were
more hated by impious Sects, or that labored more to convince and reduce them,
than they?

2. At that time, and since, how highly were they placed in the King's good
Opinion? as is fully expressed in his Royal Declaration.

3. They did show a Forwardness and Zeal to settle the Church, denying their
own private Opinions, to lay down solid Foundations for a Comprehensive Church.

4. When they quietly submitted to the Law of their Ejectment; did they, did
any of them sow Sedition, or ill Principles of Faction? was their Exhortation
of deceit or guile? to incense their loving Auditors, or oblige and conjure
them to any thing inconsistent with the Gospel? or unlike Men, as going from
the Pulpit, to God's Tribunal, to give him an Account of their Doctrine, Faith,
manner of Life? see any of their broken Notes, and Farewell-Sermons, printed
much to their Disadvantage! Testify against them who can!

5. Except they had renounced their sacred Calling, and silenced themselves,
who could have employed their Labors with more inoffensiveness to Authority,
more Toil to themselves, and more Profit to precious Souls, and less Opposition
to the public than they did? (as will appear in Instances) An honorable
Member (Sir H. C. Anno 1670, 71) in full Parliament took notice of it that
there were no Conventicles: yes, they took pains to preach, when others were at
rest in great Privacies and Solitudes. And let us be just: who has made any
Observation of People, and Assairs, that will not say, for one Schismatic we
had had many, had it not been for their great Industry; and who for all that
are Schismatics but they! See Mr. Allen, Say to Archippus p. 23. scil. your
not p eaching will occasion Separation indeed, etc.
It is not Thanks-worthy to keep poor weak Souls in the Faith and Truth, except
they turn Laymen, and all come up even to the Rails, i. e. to the height.

6. God and the King made their Assemblies so numerous and public; God by a
tremendous course of Judgments, yet remembering Mercy: The King, after 12 Years
Experience of fruitless Severity, sent out his Declaration of Indulgence. Some
of themselves have published the Providence of God, but it is not worth the
noting; and they that are resolved on their way, will not be hindered by making
Observation, even of the Works of God. When God sent a dreadful Plague, and the
Angel stood over London with his drawn Sword, as our Jerusalem; then the King,
and Court, and Parliament removed to Oxford; and when many Churches were empty,
God stirred up many of the Nonconformists to go and preach up and down; then
they had the use of Churches, and numerous Assemblies, and gained many Souls to
God by them, and drew the Hearts of a desolate People to themselves, which
could never since be alienated from them. And when the Popish Faction opposed
by the Loyal Persons, got an Act to remove them from Corporations; they were
then most employed in the Capital City in spite of their Adversaries, and God
protected them, and the Plague proved their Sanctuary from that Law. Next Year
the City was burnt, and the Inhabitants of the principal Parts of it were
driven into Corners; and the Nonconformists had the advantage! Who that knew
them would not entertain them as Comforters, in a distracted ruined Condition!
Then the Conformists were driven out of Churches too, and some felt the loss of
Livings, to teach them Compassion toward their ejected Brethren; and the
common Enemy of them both showed the World what he would do with us, as well as
them: And I am confident, if now the Nonconformists could be rooted out, the
Churchmen shall not stand long after them; no, tho they should, which God
forbid, comply with them. Popish Mercy is like raging Fire, takes all before
it, and even turning shall not save us; and they who are so officious to serve
their Interest now, may not come off so well with their Reward as Adonibezek
did. Many suffered great Losses, lived in great danger and distraction by that
Corporation-Act, but the Enactors could never accomplish their full design by
it; the very Soldiers that were employed to keep out People, and to guard the
Meeting-places, were not pleased with their Office, and showed Civility to the
Ministers in some places. Their Sufferings went against the common sense of
Men: but so captions were some Men, so zealous, rather so jealous, to justify
their Resolutions, that strange Stories were carried, and dispersed of
seditious Doctrines, Preachers were presented as Incendiaries, to incense the
Magistrate against them; that it was dangerous for the Preachers to quote some
Texts of Scriptures; and just cause there is why such unchristian Spirits
should be afraid of Scriptures.

7. After all this Distraction and Trouble, His Majesty sent out his
Declaration of Indulgence, and they became licensed Preachers. It is true, the
Parliament at their next meeting declared againstit, as contrary to the Laws,
and his Majesty called it in; but it proved, and proves profitable to the
Nonconformists several ways.

1. The very Parliament that was against the Declaration, continued rather
favorable toward the Nonconformists than sharp; the Laws continued, but the
Execution cooled and abated.

2. Such as built Tabernacles and the most convenient Places they could, held
them, and their Congregations stuck to them, and both without Molestation,
until now, that their old Friend awakes as one out of sleep, lest they should
sow good Seed in the Field.

3. Though that Declaration of Indulgence, Nor could at that time, as is to be
seen in what follows of the Sufferings of the Nonconformists.
and the Licenses granted them, cannot protect them from the Arrests of Men's
Passions, nor from the violent Hands of such (as are like Readiness) against them;
yet they do clearly vindicate them from the odious Slander of seditious and
evil Men. For can it be thought that the King would have so little regard to
Truth, Faith, Peace, to his own Safety, and the Preservation of his Subjects
from the infection of wicked and cursed Principles, as to grant Licenses to
seditious Preachers, to Doctors of Rebellion, or Underminers of Church and
State? they are most the saine Men, who were licensed by the King; if the King
was deceived in them; if they are dangerous and evil Men, testify against them,
and no greater Favor is desired for them, but Truth and Justice. Let them that
clamor against them and asperse them, do it, and preserve their Honor and
Reverence of the King immaculate if they can.

Christianum esse (Nonconformistam esse) aut est Crimen, aut non est; so Crimen
est, cur non interficis confitentem? si Crimen non est, quid persequeris
innocentem? Cyp. contra Demetrianum. Tract. 1.

And so much for that, by way of Apology; now follows the second Query.

2. Whether it be not hard to silence, suppress, and punish the Orthodox
Nonconformists, for endeavoring the everlasting Salvation of precious Souls by
their Preaching and other Religious Exercises?

I cannot call to mind more than three things that can be urged against them,
or to justify their Sufferings.

1. They transgress the Laws and Orders of the Church, made by the Bishops,
Rulers, and Fathers of the Church.

2. They transgress against the Statutes of the Land, and why should they be
privileged or spared if they transgrest?

3. They are Men uncalled to preach the Gospel; and it is fit such Men should
be restrained.

To the first, It may be answered, waving the Disputes about Church-Rulers, and
the Restriction of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; that the present Terms of
Ministerial Liberty were not the Result and Decrees of all the Bishops of the
Church after Consultation and free debate, supposing all the Power to be lodged
in them; but we know that our Ecclesiastical Laws are made by our Convocation,
and enacted and established by the Civil Power; whether there was any Debate or
Disputation about these Impositions, is not altogether unknown. We read that in
the Council at Jerusalem, met to consider a Case, as plain and easy as any of
our Matters can be supposed to be, that they came not to a Determination, till
after much disputing, there was nothing but open dealing. The Apostle of the
Circumcision did not protest against the Apostle of the Uncircumcision, as
unfit to be there, no tart Reprehensions or Magisterial Checks were given, but
what concerned the whole Church, was debated by the whole Church, the Apostles
and Elders, and the Church, Acts 15.6, 7, 22.
and nothing resolved; but after Consideration and Disputation, they give the
Churches of Antioch an account of their Consultation, and lay upon them none
but necessary things, without either Penalty or Sanction, but this, from which,
if you keep your selves ye shall do well. I cannot think that the Reverend Mr.
Baxter does reflect upon all, or most of the Bishops, Ver. 29.
by his frequent mention of Ithacius and Idacius, but well knows our
Impositions to be the Will and Pleasure of but a small number of them; and if
it be so, we may question the Right which a few Bishops had to make Laws for
the whole Church, till we see their Patent.

2. But they transgress other Temporal Laws made by lawful Authority. 1. A
lawful Authority is made up of several Estates in this Kingdom; whereof one is
chosen by the free Votes of the People of such a rank, as have an Interest in
the Land. I have heard some doubt, whether that House of Commons were so truly,
their Representatives, because many of them were obtruded upon the People, and
many indirect and unlawful ways were taken to sort them together. But 2. waving
that, succeeding Parliaments have marked out these Laws to give them an
Expiration; and were it not for Fomentations, and high Drops used by some, to
keep them in Life and Vigor, they had been buried in neglect by this time. 3.
But granting they are in as full force as ever; yet Laws are compared to the
Grape, which being too much pressed, yields an hard and unwholesome Wine; as
the wise Lord Chancellor Wise and moderate Discourse concerning Church Affairs,
p. 37.
Bacon said. To press out such a Wine, and force an exhausted party to pay
dearly for it, is not the way to nourish good Blood in such a diseased Body as
ours is. But having spoken of this in the Second Plea, I shall add no more
here, but reserve something for a Postscript, concerning what I said in that.

3. The last Prejudice against them is, that they are Men uncalled to preach.

Answer; All of the Seniors of them had Episcopal Ordination; others have
another kind, and most, if not all I plead for, have the internal, and I dare
say, would cheerfully answer all the Interrogatories in the Examnation, in the
ordering of Priests, except a part of the last. But my Answer is, that when the
calling of Ministers has been doubted of, or questioned, as the calling of our
Bishops and Ministry has been by the Papists, Our most Reverend Fathers have
insisted upon one certain Rule of Trial of true Ministers and Pastors. Hear
what our famous and blessed Bishop Jewel preached. By this therefore, Sermon on
1 Cor. 4.1, 2. fol. 223.
my Brethren, shall you soon try, whether they are the true Servants of God;
for if they shall only disclose unto you the Will of God, if they shall preach
unto you the Secrets of God's Gospel, and the Glory of his holy Name, then are
they true Servants, then are they Christ's Ministers, and faithful Dispensers
of God's Secrets, etc. In these our days the Ministers of God, and Preachers of
his Gospel, are evil spoken of among all Men; some say, they are unlearned,
they are Crafts-men --. Some say they preach they cannot tell what; they speak
against Prayer, Faiting, Alms-deeds, and all other good Works --. Unto all this
I say, it is sufficient for us to be found the Servants of God, and faithful
Dispensers of God's Secrets. When Paul came from Berea to Thessalonica, and
began to preach the Gospel there, the People ran to their Books, searched the
Scriptures, and when they found in all Points they agreed therewith, then they
believed Paul --. Even so let us do, good Brethron --; let us examine and try
their Doctrine with the Touchstone of God's Word, and confer their Teaching,
their Discipline with the Scriptures of the Holy Ghost --, and then be you
Judges; then if you see that we teach you nothing but the Mysteries of God;
Folio 225, 226. So Dr. Benefield, de Sacerdotio. Evangelico,. 43 besides
Bilson, etc. above quoted.
that we disclose to you the Will of God; if you see we preach unto you no
other thing than the Secrets of God's Gospel, esteem us to be the Servants of
God, the Ministers of Christ, etc.

There are some other popular Prejudices instilled into many, and dispersed to
no other effect, but to foment ill Nature, Passion, and a Spirit of Faction:
such is that of a late Writer, who writes, Defense of Dr. Stilling. page 70.
They set up Schismatical Conventicles, and preach People into Scruples and
Factions. How knows he that? by his own hearing, or by hearsay? How many has
he cured, that resorted unto him for Satisfaction? It is no wonder that People
are abused into a Suspicion, that their Nonconformity is but a Pretense, a
conscientious Disguise to cover Rebellious Principles; that they began the War,
which was as impossible, as it is historically untrue: That they preach in
Barns, and other places, out of dislike of Churches. I suppose, if they were
offered Churches, they would not refuse them: But as Conventicles are counted
as places of Disgrace, so it is an Unhappiness they have no better, and a
greater, that they may not have them. His Gospel who was laid in a Manger, may
be preached in a Barn, if there be no room for his Preachers in better places.
The Primitive Christians were glad of any places. The Waldenses preached in
Barns, who were glorious Confessors of the Christian Verity. And to avoid both
Danger and Offense, some of our Nonconformists have preached in Caves and Pits;
to whose Honor or Dishonor be it spoken.

These Prejudices cast out of the way, it were easy to out match these
Prejudices; but I will not use a hand to record what is not to be heard without
Trouble; but it is not unfit to take notice of so much as belongs to the
Question in hand; and no more than will serve to prepare Men's Minds to believe
there are Complaints, which should affect and move the Hearts of our Rulers, to
hearken to the Motions of the Reconcilers, and Peacemakers. And that I may
handle a tender Point, with as much Tenderness and Modesty even toward them,
that make the Hearts of Christians groan and mourn, I Will proceed by Questions.

1. What had the Parishes and Congregations of England done to provoke the few,
but potent Managers of our Ecclesiastical Affairs, to deprive them of some of
the most painful, vigilant, successful, exemplary Pastors, that ever any Church
enjoyed? The most learned Lord Chancellor Bacon said (of the Bishops) As for
their easy silencing of them in such great scarcity of Preachers, it is to
punish the People, and not them. Wise and moderate Discourse, p. 35.
It must be confessed, we all had sinned; but most notoriously two sorts of
People; first, those that could not endure sound Doctrine, nor Reproofs, and
hate to be reformed; and others, who knew not the time of the Visitation, were
too sleepy and lukewarm, and could too easily part with those who labored to
win them, and bring them to God by Repentance, Faith and Love. Could they put
in better in their rooms? Was there too many, and could hundreds be spared?
then why had some one Man many Livings? Was it because there were too many? or
why might not many that seldom or never well could preach, be rather
maintained, and eased? Was this to do as our Savior commanded, Pray ye to the
Lord of the Harvest to send Laborers into his Harvest? See Bishop Jewel's
Sermon on that Text.

2. What had the Preachers done to merit silencing? I could fill up my Page
with Queries; but I will keep close to the general Point. If they will not
subscribe, declare, and swear such prescribed Forms; they are judged by the Law
to be mute. The best is, they dissented from the Law; without Impeachment of
their Loyalty to the King, for they would gladly have submitted to his Terms,
and could not obey the Law, without any great Dishonor to the Legislative
Power, for they only dissent from a few Men, who then could sway enough to do
their Work.

They must not only do, but they must subscribe. Is that true of the same wise
Lord Bacon? Their urging Subscriptions to their own Articles, is but lacessere
and irritare morbos Ecclesiae; which otherwise would spend and crush themselves
--. And it is true, there are some which (as I am persuaded) will not easily
offend by Inconformity, who notwithstanding make some Conscience to subscribe:
For they know this note of Inconstancy, Page 35.
and Defection from what they have long held, shall disable that Good which
otherwise they would do.

When they have done this, they must assent and consent, etc. Non consensum
quaerit, sed dissidium auget, qui quod factis praestatur, verbis exigit: He
seeks not Union, but Division, which exacteth inwardly, that which Men are
content to yield in outward Action, the same great Man still.

If some of the things themselves be small, yet it is not a small thing that is
required of us about them, namely, a Declaration and Subscription, our
unfeigned Assent, etc --. yea our quiet Submission to the use of them, as
tolerable, suffices not (as we apprehend), Principles and Practices of the
N.C. p. 13.
etc. says the wise and holy Mr. Corbet. I know all is sheltred under, and
fathered upon the Law; but who invented, who formed these things? Had they the
Catholic Spirit, Wisdom, Charity, Authority of the whole Church in them, to
which all must yield Assent, and to whom all must consent, under peril? they
could not but know there were and would be Dissents, and Disatisfactions; they
could not but know these Injunctions could not be so pleasing to the generality
of the Kingdom and Church, who had received the King's Declaration with such
Applause and Gratulation. And here may the fifteenth Query of the learned and
judicious Sir Thomas Overbury come in: Men are not Masters of their own
Persuasions and can not change their Thoughts as they please. He that believes
any thing concerning Religion, cannot turn as the Prince commands him, or
accommodate himself to the Law, or his present Interests, except he turn
Atheist, etc. Reverend Dr. Purnet's Preface before the History of the Rights of
Prince, page 49.
Whether to require Conformity in Practice, where there is difference in
Judgment, be not to command a Man to act against Light and Conscience, and
consequently to sin? and Query XXI, etc.

3. Whether it does not imply, that if a Man assent to all Articles of Faith,
to the Doctrine of the Apostles concerning the Authority of the Magistrate,
concerning Decency and Order, and things indifferent, and be otherwise fitted
for preaching the Gospel, and Administration of all Ordinances; yet except he
do assent and consent to all things required by some modern Bishops, and
Clergymen, it shall avail him nothing, he shall be incapable to officiate: and
whether these modern Churchmen do not set up themselves above, and exercise an
Authority to dictate, most absolute, and higher than the Apostles did, who were
next to Christ himself?

4. Suppose a Man be a lawfully ordained Minister, i. e. by Bishops, as many of
the Nonconformists are; or able, and fit, in respect of soundness of Faith,
Utterance, Aptness to teach; and be scrupulous of the Truth of some Proposition
which is no Article of Faith, or of some Ceremony, and Modes of Practice; is it
not hard that for some Weakness of Understanding, he cannot assent to what is
formed by others not infallible, that he should be incapable of the Exercise of
the Ministry, and the Church deprived of his other Abilities, for that Mistake,
Weakness, or call it Error? Our Savior bore with his Disciples, when he
reproved them; Are ye yet without Vndrstanding? and did not turn them out.

5. Whether Assent and Consent, to some human Laws, Rites and Ceremonies, upon
which neither Faith, nor Unity depends, be not hereby made more necessary for
Exercise and Practice, than the assenting to Articles of Faith, or than
preaching the Gospel, or by consequence, the Salvation of Immortal Souls? It is
true, there is a vast difference in the nature of the things; but as to
Capacity and Incapacity to minister in the holy Office, it is all one, for a
Man to refuse Assent and Consent to every thing, as it is to an Article of the
Creed.

6. Or that Conformity to Order, and the use of the Liturgy, a monthly Sermon,
or a Homily, is more for the Edification of the Church, than diligent and
constant preaching, without a particular Assent to all, every thing? Which (I
will freely speak it) can be affirmed by none, but a Man that sets light by his
own Salvation, and never personally conversed with his own Flock, or knows the
Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, or Eternal Life, or the Practice of the
Primitive Church.

Hitherto I have labored to open the nature of the Cause of these Proceedings
against our Protestant Brethren, and it is their Nonconformity, passive and
active; the first of which is a refusal of the modern Terms of Church-Freedom;
the second is a worshipping of God in Christ, according to the Rule of the Holy
Scripture, as nearly as they can discern it; and after the common, either
allowed, or not disallowed manner of the Reformed Protestant Churches, and
particular this of England: And in what they do, they follow the same Rule, and
act from the same Principles, which our first Reformers professed, and their
learned Defenders have maintained: And three Questions shall take up the whole
of what is to follow.

1. Whether they, the Protestant Nonconformists, justly deserve to be silenced,
suppressed, and punished, as they have been, and are?

2. Whether they are not at least to be permitted, and indulged?

3. Whether we ought not to unite and become one, by removal, or abating the
things, that divide and break us? so that we may hold mutual, and actual
Communion in the same Exercises of Religion, without fear of offending our
Superiors thereby, or any other?

So much has not been spoken of the first Question in the Second Plea, but
that much more may be produced, to incline, if not draw the sensible Reader to
the right side of the Question.

1. It is clear that they are not deposed and prosecuted for such Crimes as
were meritorious of Deposition in the Ancient Church by their Canons; those
Crimes were Fornication, Perjury, Theft. Let a Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon,
convicted of Fornication, Perjury, or Theft, be deposed, but with caution that
he be not separated, Canons, called the Apostles Canons.
i. e. from the Communion of the Faithful, as Balsamon expounds, and non
segregetur; adding a Reason for this Moderation, that no Man be punished twice
for the same Fault, as says the Scripture, Nah. 1.9. as the learned Mr.
Beveredge, in his Notes upon those Canons, has observed. Is it likely these
should be Canons of the Apostles, contrary to 1 Cor. 5.11? Or if they be
genuine and ancient, how disagreeing is the modern Usage of the Nonconformists,
who are convicted of no such Crimes, according to the ancient Canons, but yet
who are for their Nonconformity punished in several Courts, and several times,
and ways? Deposition is judged Punishment sufficient, says Zonaras; so
Aristenus, for to subject to a double punishment, omnino inhumanum est, is
altogether inhuman. Other Canons command a Bishop, Presbyter or Deacon to be
deposed, that beat offending Believers, or Infidels, that have done wrong. Can.
27. If a Bishop, Presbyter or Deacon obtain his Dignity with Money, let him be
deposed, and he that ortained him; Can. 29. If a Bishop have made use of
Secular Princes to obtain a Church, let him be deposed, and excommunicated. If
a Presbyter, contemning his own Bishop, shall separate from him, and set up an
Altar without Cause, or blameless, either in respect of Religion, or Justice,
let him be deposed; Can. 31. But this is not the Case of our Nonconformists.
Duarenus reckons the deposing and ejecting Crimes to be, 1. Simoniacal
Ambition. 2. Incontinency. 3. Perjury. 4. Manslaughter. 5. Treason. 6. Or
besides these Crimes, any legal Infamy. But Panormitan admonishes, that they
were not to observe the Severity of the ancient Canons, because the Men of this
Age, are not like those ancient Men, or Men of ancient Times. Duaren. de sacris
Eccles-Ministris, etc. l. 8. c. 6. There are other Causes, which touch not our
Brethren, but other Men much nearer.

2. In what they do, they proceed upon Principles common to all Christians, and
Protestant Churches, in taking the Word of God for their Rule, as a divine and
perfect Rule. The Christian Faith, as they (of the Church of Rome) had
explained it, was a Submission to the Church. The Reforming, finding that this
was the Spring of all their Errors, and that which gave them Color and
Authority, did on the other hand, set up the Strength of their whole Cause on
an explicit believing the Truth of Scriptures, because of the Authority of God,
who had revealed them, says the Reverend Dr. Burnet --. History of the Refor.
Book 3. p. 286.
It were easy to be copious on this Argument; They who began the Reformation,
labored in translating, and publishing the Scriptures; and would have all
their Doctrines tried by them. The Reverend Bilson bids the Papists, Prove your
Religion and Service (which you stoutly and falsely term Catholic) to be
commanded by Christ, or else Women and Children, be they never so silly, will
collect by the manifest Words of our Savior, that their Promise in Baptism,
does straightly bind them from believing your Errors, and admitting your Masses,
until you show good and effectual Warrant out of the Word of God, that you do
what Christ did, and teach what he taught, without adding or altering any jot.
For this is the Duty that Baptism requires of us, to believe no Teacher but
one, which is Christ, to follow no Stranger, to regard and obey no Lord or
Lawmakers in the Church, but only the Son, whom the Father appointed to be
Master and Leader, Subject, part 1. foreing to Religion, p. 18.
and Ruler of the Gentiles.

This being a Principle common to all the Protestant Reformers, they who hold
it and no other repugnant to it, or inconsistent with it; Jewel's Apolog. c.
16. Divis. 1, 2. C. 17. Divis. 1, 2.
every true Protestant must needs hold they ought not to be punished for
walking after it. And suppose any particular Man, or Denomination of Men err in
their Superstructures, and Consequences; yet whether that Error be not a
tolerable Error, and not a punishable Crime, which is consistent with Piety and
Charity, may be left to the Judgment of every charitable Christian.

3. According to this Rule and Principle, they frame their Worship, and model
their Government and Discipline, and they that keep to that, though by
different Schemes, having their Flaws and Failings, they cannot err a damnable
Error; and if not damnable, it is want of Charity that will judge it
intolerable. And there are those General Rules and Directions, which direct us
as by a Pattern; they direct us to our End, God's Glory, and mutual Edification;
the outward manner, Decency and Order: and although in particular Decencies and
Rules of Order, there may be a Diversity, yet all agree about Order; and the
greatest Disagreement is in some Points of Decency, which are but Accidents,
which are no Parts of Divine Worship, as the Reverend Bishop Abbot writes, The
Means by Christ, the Spring and Pranciple, the holy Spirit, the Matter, Word
and Sacraments, Traditions, p. 844
in Defense of Mr. Perkins, and do properly and immediately respect Men. It is
a hard Case to punish all Men that are not of the same Complexion, or that
cannot see alike clearly, tho they walk with us in the same way, of Faith, and
Holiness, and Peace. The Church of Christ never bred that Notion, that
Church-Unity and Communion does consist in Accidents, no more than Humane
Nature, in Complexion, Shape, Stature; or of Children in Clothes of the same
Color, Fashion Length, etc.

4. And once again; they are punished for Nonconformity; and besides, what has
been said elsewhere, in particular; besides the Consideration of the wicked
Design, Sedition, Rebellion and Schism, and the odious Pretense, take the Law
in the Strictest Sense of it, and any Exercise of Religion in other manner,
than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, seems to
be forbidden by it. It seems to be unsafe for any to punish upon this Law; and
it is hard to be punished by it; it signifies something, but certainly what, is
very dubious. For in the Liturgy, i. e. Book of Common Prayer, there are two
things only. 1. Rules, Directions, and Orders, called Rubricks. 2. The Parts of
the Worship and Ceremonies, ordered, prescribed, and directed by them. It seems
the meaning of the Law is, That no other Exercise of Religion shall be lawful
without the Common Prayer, both Matter and Rites, according to the Rubric; but
then, the Words of the Act agree not; because the Practice of the Church, in
many Places, is different from the manner of the Liturgy, as others have proved
by Instances. The Practice of all Cathedrals may not be alike, for ought I
know. The Practice of the Cathedral and Parish-Churches, are not the same, as
all Men know; nor of one Parish like another, while so many go beyond the Rule;
the Practice of some Churches, and Colledge-Chappels, and some Chapels differ
from others; some reading all Psalms and Canticles and Chapters on Wednesdays
and Fridays; and others reading only some Prayers and the Litany: And this is
according to the manner of the Church of England in Q Eliz. days, Vid. Injunct
4o, An. 1559.
And yet the Law for all these places is the same. The Law is uniform, but the
Practice multiform: But if the use of the book, both Rules and Things ordered
by it, be enjoined, then it seems strange that the Words should be after the
manner of the Church of England; for suppose any should compose a Form of
Worship, begin with some apt Sentences of Scripture, then go to an Exhortation
to Confession, but use another Confession; and throughout observe the Rubric,
but not the same number of Psalms, nor the same Canticles, and Lessons, or one
of the three, or ancient Creeds, and other Prayers; whether this would not be,
tho not the same things, yet after the manner of the Church of England, as
being after the same Order. But take the words as before, That no Exercise of
Religion to above four and the Family shall be lawful, except they use the
Common Prayer. Then may some be apt to think, that,

1. Here is a Conformity allowed by this Act, to overthrow and weaken that
required by the Act of Uniformity. I query; If a Minister shall in any public
place, so he be neither Parson, Vicar, or Stipendary, read the Common Prayer,
although he do not subscribe, nor declare Assent and Consent, whether he may not
lawfully preach to as large an Assembly as will hear him? And so may not a Man
that is a Nonconformist, in respect of Subscription and Declaration, lawfully
preach, as publicly as he can? and so be a legal Nonconforming Conformist; as
honest Mr. C. called himself; and whether this Act does not strike at the Act
of Uniformity?

2. Does it not cast an ill look upon all other Modes of Divine Worship, as if
no other Form were consistent with the Peace of the Kingdom, but what is
according to the Liturgy?

3. That all that dissent from all things in the Liturgy, are Persons to be
suspected of the King, except such as say, or hear the Liturgy, and for that
Cause are not; and by Consequence, whether the Execution of it does not clearly
tend to divide between the King and his Subjects, and between Subject and
Subject; yea, to make them that are religious appear more formidable than the
irreligious?

4. And whether it is not to set up a manner of Worship composed by Men, above
the matter of Worship appointed by God? for let the Worship as to the Matter
and End and Principle be divine, it is not tolerable, except it be after that
one Manner and Practice. I Will add no more Doubts and Prejudices, but come to
plain Argument.

They who ought to be encouraged and protected by the King of England, as
Supreme Governor, ought not to be punished:
But our Protestant Nonconformists ought to be encouraged and protected:
Therefore, etc.

They who set up no false and Idolatrous Worship, contrary to the Word of God,
that worship God according to his Word, ought to be encouraged and protected by
the King of England, as Supreme Governor, and his Laws. But such is their
Worship (in every part;) Therefore, etc.

I Will touch the Minor first, and then go to the Proposition: That Worship which
agrees in the right Object, of Scripture-matter, according to Scripture, and to
divine Ends, is true Worship: but such is their Worship. Therefore, etc.

To multiply no more Syllogisms; I prove the Proposition by the constant
Uniform, allowed Doctrine of the Church of England. And to strike home at one
blow, thus I argue:

They who ought to be encouraged and protected, and not punished, according to
the allowed Doctrine of the Church of England, explaining the King's Supremacy,
ought not to be punished by any new or subsequent Law, that does not condemn
that allowed Doctrine of the Church, as this Act does not. But according to the
allowed Doctrine of the Church of England, explaining the King's Supremacy;
they, and such as they, are to be encouraged and protected: Therefore etc.

This is the Proposition I am to prove, the Major being clear.

Those Reverend Fathers of the Reformed Religion, which disputed against the
Pope's, and proved the King's Supremacy, did thus state and explain it, Set
forth by Hen. 8th. Vid. Dr. Bur. 1 Vol. History of the Reform. p. 142.
in the necessary Erudition of a Christian Man.

To them specially and principally it pertains to defend the Faith of Christ,
and his Religion, to conserve and maintain the true Doctrine of Christ, and all
such as be true Preachers and Setters-forth thereof; and to abolish Abuses,
Heresies, and Idolatries, and to punish with Corporal Pains, such as of Malice
be the occasion of the same; and sinally to over-see, and cause that the said
Bishops and Priests do execute their Pastoral Office truly and faithfully, and
specially in these Points, which by Christ and his Apostles were given and
committed to them; and in case they shall be negligent in any part thereof, or
would not diligently execute the same, to cause them to redouble and supply
their Lack; and if they obstinately withstand their Prince's kind Monition, and
will not amend their Faults, then and in such Case to put others in their room
and places. And God has also commanded the said Bishops to obey with all
Humbleness and Reverence, both Kings, and Princes, and Governors, and all
their Laws, not being contrary to the Laws of God, whatsoever they be, and that
not only propter Iram, but also propter Conscientiam. With this Doctrine all
our best Writers of unquestionable Authority agree: See Jewel's Apology, Part
1. p. 15. Edit. 1570. Apol. c. 11. Divis. 3. cut down Groves, break down
Images, coerce and chastise Negligence, and Falsehood of the Bishop, page 715.
Joshua also Ap. c. 11. Divis. 6, 8, 9, 10, 11. c. 15. Divis. 1, 3. c. 17.
Divis. 1, 2. -- The Reproof of Mr. Dorman, with a Defense of the chief
Government of Christian Princes, by Dr. Alexander Nowel, London, 1566. p. 24.
b. p. 131, 143, 161. b. Dr. Jo. Rainold's Conference with Heart, c. 10. We never
affirmed that Princes might cammand what God forbids, or prohibit what God
commands. Bishops have their Authority to preach and administer the
Sacraments from Christ himself -- only the Prince gives them public Liberty
without let or disturbance to do what Christ commands --. Princes suffer and
incite them with Peace and Praise to do their Duties --. Princes may by their
Laws prescribe the Christian Faith to be preached, the right Service of God in
Spirit and in Truth to be used, the Sacraments to be administered, according to
the Lord's Institution --. Bilson of Subjection, page 216, 217, etc. We say
that Princes, as public Magistrates, may give Freedom, Protection, and
Assistance to the preaching of the Word, ministering the Sacraments, and right
using of the Keys, page 227, 236, 240, 249. See Bishop Bridges of the Supremacy
against Stapleton, and Saunders, p. 672, 673. I Will quote no more of him.

There is neither Idolatry in Worship, nor Heresy in the Faith of the
Nonconformists, for which they ought to be restrained, nor Ungodliness and
Dishonesty, for which they should be punished, any more than the best of Men:
But worshipping the true God in Christ by the Spirit according to his Word,
etc. By the foregoing Doctrine they are to be encouraged and protected. There
is but one thing to their Prejudice, their Disobedience to some Temporal
Ecclesiastical Laws, requiring Subscriptions. etc. Hear a little further the
Doctrine of the Bishops and Doctors. To devise Rites and Ceremonies for the
Church is not the Prince's Vocation, but to receive and allow such as the
Scriptures and Canons commend, and such as the Bishops and Pastors of the Place
shall advise, not infringing the Scriptures or Canons. And for all other
Ecclesiastical Things and Causes, Princes be neither the Devisers non Directors
of them, but the Confirmers and Establishers of that which is good, Bilson,
page 252.
and Displacers and Avengers of that which is Evil --. The Ceremonies in diverse
particular Churches, are of diverse sorts, and that without any Inconvenience at
all, so they all agree in those unchangeable Laws, given by the Universal Head,
Christ. The Reverend Dr. Nowel's Reproof of Dorman, p. 25. See Homil. of
Fasting, second Part. How easy may the Bishops if they pleased, take away the
Causes of our decried Schism? or without any Crime of Schism, permit a
Diversity, to them that are governed by the unchangeable Law of Josus Christ?
and only differ from their particular and changeable Laws.

To conclude; If the Faith of the Nonconformists be the Catholic Faith, (as it
is in all and every Point and Article, even the same which is professed in the
Church of England) contained in the Scriptures; if they are good Men, and
honest Subjects; Then we are taught and exhorted to pray, that the King, and
all in Authority under him, may have Wisdom, Strength, Justice, Clemency, and
Zeal to God's Glory, to God's Verity, to Christian Souls, and the
Commonwealth. Let us pray they may rightly use their Sword and Authority, for
the Maintenance and Defense of the Catholic Faith, contained in the Holy
Scriptures, The 3d part of the Homily of Obedience, p. 69. Land. Edit. 1673.
and of their good and honest Subjects, for the Fear and Punishment of the evil
and vicious People.

Object. But they transgress the Laws, therefore are not good and honest
Subjects, break the Orders of the Church, etc.

Answ. Preaching and hearing the Catholic Faith, is, I hope, no Transgression
of the Laws: if it be, then, you do in effect say the Laws are against
Godliness, and the Exercise of the Catholic Faith. They are good and honest
Subjects, that pray for the King, pay Tribute, live in Godliness and Honesty;
therefore they are to be protected and encouraged, which was the Proposition to
be proved. I suppose no Law ought to be construed, or executed, which in
Construction and Execution is contrary to the Catholic Doctrine of the Church
of England, established by Law. The Faith they profess is Catholic, their
Worship is according to the Scripture, and they corrupt the People neither with
Sedition, or Disobedience. The Conditions of Liberty which they refuse, are no
Article of Catholic Faith or Practice; therefore they ought not to be
punished, according to the Doctrine of the Church of England.

The second Question is, Whether the Nonconformist Protestants are not to be
indulged and permitted?

The former Discourse answers this Question. If they do not deserve to be
punished, but protected and encouraged; then they ought to be permitted and
indulged, while they design and act nothing inconsistent with, or contrary to
the Duties of good, honest, peaceable Subjects.

2. Permission and Indulgence is the lowest degree of Favor that can be showed
to Catholic Christians and Protestants in a Christian Protestant Kingdom.

1. If more be due to the Profession of Christian Religion, yea, of the
Protestant Religion: Then a Permission, or Indulgence, is the least Respect and
Favor due to it. But more is due to it than Permission; therefore that is the
least.

2. If Permission was due to Godliness and Honesty from adverse Powers, both
Jewish and Heathen; and if it be due to Reformed Christians, in Popish
Countries; then it is much more due to Protestant Professors in Protestant
Kingdoms and States: But the former is true; therefore much more the latter.

Of these in particular:

1. The Jewish Powers ought to have permitted the preaching of the Gospel to
our Savior and his Apostles, because it was of God; and God has Soverign
Power in all the World, to set up his Kingdom, and Laws. It was the Sin of the
Jews to forbid the preaching of the Gospel; it was a Duty in the Apostles to
preach it, even when forbidden. If it was a Sin in the Jews to forbid it, they
ought certainly to permit it; yea, they ought to have received, and obeyed it.
If it had been a Duty, (and no Sin) in the Jews to forbid the preaching of
Christ, it had been a Sin in the Apostles notwithstanding, and against that
Prohibition, to preach it. But it was an Obedience to God (the higher Power) to
preach it; therefore they who forbad it, ought to permit it, yea much more, it
was their Duty to believe it.

2. The same Reason will hold all the World over; because Christian Religion is
from God, and teaches the Knowledge, and Obedience, and Worship of God, and the
way to Life; therefore God may send it all over the World by Men called and
sent by him, without the Commission of the Powers of the World. And if Men knew
the Gift of God, they ought to esteem it the greatest Mercy, and manifestation
of Grace, that was ever showed to the Sons of Men.

Our Savior commands his Apostles to go into all the World, to preach the
Gospel to every Creature. It comes among them without their Knowledge, and
against their Wills: Ought it to be received or not? if not, then God ought not
to be obeyed according to his revealed Will, which no Man dare affirm: if it
ought to be received, it ought to be permitted and indulged with an overplus of
Reverence and Honor. Godliness and Honesty was to be privileged, and
protected, to be cherished, ard not extinguished in Heathen Kingdoms: 1 Timothy
2.2. They desired to lead quiet Lives, free from Trouble and Persecution, the
use they were to make, and did make of their Quietness, was the Exercise of
Godliness and Honesty. To this end they were to pray for Kings, and all in
Authority: And Kings, and all in Authority, may venture and not fear to give
Protection and Security to all that pray for them, and that live in Godliness
and Honesty under them. If protection and Quietness might be expected from
Heathens, much more from Christians.

3. If Refermed Christians ought to be permitted in Popish Kingdoms and States;
then Christians professing the Reformation, may be much more permitted in
Protestant Kingdoms and States, and by Consequence, in this Kingdom. Popish
Kings and Rulers ought to receive, and obey the Truth, and to believe no more
than what Christ has commanded to be believed, and to worship God according to
the Will of Christ. Shall we say the Protestants in France do not hold the
Faith, nor worship God according to the Gospel? then what are they who say so?
If they profess and believe the Truth, they ought to be permitted, that is
plain, for the Truth's sake, and for the Lord's sake. Does Christian Love and
Compassion prompt us, to wish our persecuted Brethren in France enjoyed the
Liberty of the true Religion there? and if they should enjoy a Freedom there,
shall we deny a Liberty to Protestant Brethren here? I can see no way to avoid
a Justification of the barbarous Usage of Protestants there, by them that
prosecute Protestants here, for far lesser Differences from our Establishments,
than theirs from the Papists. Suppose an Ambassador was sent to treat with the
French King, at this time of Prosecution of our Native Protestants, for a
Cessation of that cruel Persecution: how readily might an Answer be made, Why
may not I suppress Heretics, when in England you suppress Protestants?

4. A Diversity of Order and Manner of Discipline and Worship, may be as well
permitted without breach of Church-Unity in the same Nation, as in diverse
Nations, without breach of Christian and Catholic Unity. If different Forms of
Belief are allowed, the matter being divine, and the one more large and
explicit than others; why may not different Modes and Order of Discipline and
Worship be allowed and permitted? Our Worship is according to our Faith; as we
believe, so we worship: Notwithstanding our use of three Forms of Profession of
our Faith, we agree in one Faith; so in different Forms of Worship we agree in
one Evangelical Worship: And our Reformers might with as great Reason have
pitched upon one of the three Creeds, and for Uniformity sake, required Assent
to that, and the use of that and no other, as our Modern Fathers pitch upon one
Form of Worship, and require our Assent and Use of that, and no other. For
Uniformity in Faith is more necessary than Uniformity in Orders and Rites. We
use the Creed called the Apostles, Athanasian, and Nicen Creed. Bishop Jewel
has written a larger Form, in his Apology for the Church of England, agreeing
in Words with neither; and, in his Reply to Harding, reckons up eight Forms,
composed by several Authors and Fathers. Apol. 2d part, 1. c. Divis. 1.
Diversity of Creeds, fol. 38.
Harding, cavilling against his Declaration of our Faith, (as many in our days
exclaim aagainst Dissenters,) said, In our Fathers days, Christian People lived
in perfect Unity, etc. before Luther 's New Gospel --. But let us learn from
our Reverend Father Jewel, that Unity of Faith may agree with Diversity of
Forms of Faith; and by Consequence, with Diversity of Forms of Worship.

Object. But the Administration of God's Worship ought to be uniform in one
Nation; and variety of Rites in one National Church, would Cause Division of
Judgment, and by Consequence Division of Affection; and to tolerate diverse ways
of Administrations, would be to tolerate matter of perpetual Discord and Schism.

Answ. Besides what the learned and acute Sir Thomas Overbury answers to a part
of the matter of this Objection, page 106. and the Commissioners in the Savoy;
Account of Proceedings, p. 8, 9.
I Will return my Answer in two things. 1. Without Controversy, our Lord Jesus
took care for the Preservation of Unity, such a Unity as is necessary among his
Disciples; and yet took no such Course as these Men build all Unity upon. 2.
The Church of Corinth was doubtless a particular Church, and according to the
Sense of the Reverend Bishop Bilson, quoted before, there was no Form of
Liturgy prescribed, p. 619, 620.

To be short, Multitudes of learned and able Men, living in one Kingdom, have
diversity of Apprehensions and Notions of things, as well as in diverse Nations;
and except Uniformity of Words might produce an inward Uniformity of
Conceptions, it has not that Influence upon Unity as some Men think, by their
too violent urging of it.

3. I am for Uniformity according to General Rules, not excluding Prudence,
which must judge what is necessary, what is expedient, what is edifying, or what
not: for to exclude Prudence, is to limit Divine Providence to particular
Rules. Divine Providence proceeds from Sovereignty; Prudence observes it, and
Conscience must obey it: Saving the Dominion of Providence, and the Exercise of
Ministerial Prudence, let us be as uniform as we can. This prudential Latitude
is allowed to every Curate, in the choice of Homilies, in dividing them,
leaving a part for the Afternoon, and changing of Lessons, reading one for
another, as shall be most for Edification, in the Admonition to all
Ecclesiastical Ministers before the second part of the Homily.

To conclude this Question; I desire the violent and active, and the violent
and oppressive Disputants of these times, to answer, Whether they think that
our Protestant-Dissenting-Brethren, that preach the Faith, and labor to
convert and build up precious Souls, are unworthy to enjoy Liberty to preach
the Gospel, or to enjoy their Estates, or to live in any part of the World? If
not, what ground have they for their ill Opinion? What Christian Charity have
they? How do they conspire with Bloody Inquisitors, and French Persecutors! yea
Irish Rebels, and Inhuman Rooters out of Heresy! But if not worthy to live
among us, retaining their Liberty of Conscience and Religion, Whither shall
they go? Where are they like to sind more natural Affection, than among their
Native Countrymen and Acquaintance? Where shall they be more wel-come? among
the Papists? among Infidels, where Satan bears so much Rule? or among
Protestants abroad? Alas, where! who can entertain them? Would you banish them
to Scotland, Ireland? there are too many already? Whither would you have them
go (for they are bid begone, if they will not conform, by some) where they may do
good? there is work enough for them, where ever they are? Why may they not do
good here among us? To be short, they who turn them out of their Hearts, and
Charity, upon the same reason banish them out of the Land, if not out of the
World: And what if they should say as their Ejectors do, We had better live or
be in any Land or Nation, even among the Papists or Insidels, than live among
such as these. Would it not sound worse than all that yet they have said? And
what a Division, or Schism at the very root, would that be, if it grew to it?
Which it has not done, and I wish never may. But we may see that Violence is a
Wedg to make the most ghastly Schism that ever was seen in a Christian Church.

But rather than be guilty of so unpeaceable and uncharitable a Thought or
Carriage, capable of such a Construction, which all Christians should as ill
endure to lodge within them as the Devil himself, or expose our Brethren to
Temptations and Sufferings; let us all most earnestly pray for Peace and Union,
and lay aside all Thoughts and Passions, which are the beginnings of Schism.
And so I come to the last Query.

Query 3. Whether we ought not to unite as abovesaid, and so to unite, and
become one, by the removal or abating the things which divide and break us, so
that we may hold mutual and actual Communion in the same Exercise of Religion,
without fear of offending our Superiors or any other?

That we ought to unite, is the Cry and Voice of all, in whom Christianity does
but faintly breath, and the Spirit of God has any effect or Interest; but the
Quomodo is most difficult, in this, as in many other Operations. I have
betrayed my self, and discovered my poor Opinion in the very Question, by
removing and abating the things which divide and break us. But it appears clear
to my Apprehension, that no other way or means will ever do. If the Dissenters
should be miraculously convinced, or charmed into a Consent; then that which
was a Cause of dissent, is become as no Cause: and while their Understandings
stand at this distance, and they be but sincere and obedient, and honest to
their own Thoughts and Judgments, they can never come over to us; and to use
force without Reason, is the way to drive them from God, when we pretend to
drive them to Church. Would we have them act against the settled Dictates of
their Conscience? and is Force the way to convince the Conscience? And really
what has been offered to inform their Understandings, has been ineffectual to
that End. Is it likely such Writtings that convey neither Love nor distinctive
Reasonings, will ever persuade Men, better studied in their own Case, than they
that unite against them? Is it likely that a display of Words, and sounding the
Trumpets, not to call the Congregation together; to unite in Love and Peace,
but to alarm People, to arm themselves, and to watch as against Seditious
Persons, will ever encourage them to come in and unite with us? We must argue
from better Topics, than Sarcasms, Flouts, Mockery, Emulation, Wrath and
Reviling; these Deeds of the Flesh will never allure Men to walk with us in one
Spirit.

There are large Encomiums of Unity and Peace, and every part of the Encomium,
or praise of it, contains an Argument in perswado us to it. And two mighty
Arguments should at this time prevail with us, Since this was written, I find
the Right Reverend Bishop of Cork, ^^se these two Arguments in terminis, p. 29.
of the first (excellent) Sermon.
Necessity, and Self-preservation; we see our apparent Dangers by being
scattered abroad, like an Army in a Rout, or Disorder, or Tumult, while our
Potent Enemies are united against us. We cry out upon Dissenters as factious,
but were it not for a Factious Spirit among our selves, they had never been
thus broken and separated from us. Our Life, our Delights, our Happiness, does
consist in, or spring from Union; after this our Desires do run or fly, they
move at no slower rate: Our Death, Sorrows, Griefs, and Unhappiness does follow
our Separation from the things, wherein Life, Delight and Happiness consist. A
divided State is an unhappy State; Charity is the Bond of Perfectness; when
Charity dies, then the Church is like a Princely Family broke up, dispersed and
divided. They who do not love, cannot unite, but make a Breach, and Separation.
The uncharitable Man is the factious Man. To impute Factiousness to one Party,
who would unite, but cannot, and to excuse another who may unite, but will not,
is to judge with too apparent a Partiality for an equal Judge. Had the upper
side, but the very same Reasons and Arguments, which now the oppressed use and
urge for themselves, they would be of Authority, and very considerable, if not
unanswerable; whereas now they are looked upon as weak, and scorned as
ridiculous. Favor and Authority gives Force and Weight to the Reasons of them
that enjoy the benefit of the Favor; and when Persons are exposed to Contempt,
their strongest argnings are despised as weak, and their loudest Complaints are
not heard, but rebuked as causeless, and themselves branded as a Faction, tho
they are Catholic and Loyal in their Faith and Principles. And this is plain,
the Nonconformists have found it so; their Arguings, Representations,
Complaints (which have been but few) Motions, Supplications, Apologies have
been despised, because they are despised and low in the World, and a worldly
Interest keeps them down. I have sometimes thought, that if Authority had been
against the use of the Cross, and commanded Mr. Parker to write his Book
against it, then he had been dignified with the Epithets, that Mr. Hooker has
been adorned with, of the Judicious Parker, and the Profound Parker, and the
Excellent Parker, whereas being on the decried side, he has been often laughed
at. The greatest number of Men consider more the Condition of the Person, than
the thing spoken or written by him; and give him the greatest Honor, by whom
they may receive a Favor. From this Partiality a Faction grows up and thrives
exceedingly, when it is fatned by the Richness of the Soil, and influenced from
some that sit above; and hence it comes, even from Partiality and Faction, that
the imputation of Faction is constantly thrown upon Dissenters, because they do
not what they cannot do with a good Conscience according to their Light. But if
all of us would set up God's Glory, the Edification of his Church, Truth,
Peace, and Union in the middle as a Center, and all of us that are scattered
and divided in the Circumference, run up to it, by the Lines of
Scripture-Rules, then God would be more glorified than he is, Vid. Cypr. de
simplicitate Clericorum --, Unitas servatur in Origin --.
the Church more edified, and we more happy in Peace and Union than we are; or
if we were all affected to glorisy God, to edify the Church, and to keep the
Unity of the Spirit in the Rond of Peace, as long as we agreed, and met in God
as in a Center, and the Lines of Holy Scripture, tho we did not all run in on
Line, in one Way, but different Ways. Our Diversity would be without Schism,
and all our Divisions would be like the dispersing of a numerous Family without
Alienation of Affection; like the Distribution of the Patriarchs into their
several Tribes, inhabiting the Land of Canaan, all of the same Blood, the same
Religion, in the same Covenant with God.

Toward this Union, we must confider; I. Wherein it consists. II. Remove the
Causes of Division as much as possibly we can. The Causes of Division are, 1.
Inward, 2. Outward, and apply our selves to the Means of Union. III. Wherein
the nature of Schism does properly consist.


I. The Persons united, are Christ and his Church, under the Denomination of
his Members, his Body, and his Spouse, compared to several kinds of Union, as
natural and political. Every Christian is united to Christ by the Spirit of
Christ's working Faith, and Faith perceiving, or seeing Christ to be what he
is; and what he is, made of God to us, does attract Love to him, which is
entire, sincere, fervent. By Faith and Love the renewed gracious Soul does
confederate with, and consent, and submit to Jesus Christ, according to the
Articles of the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace. Every Member of Christ is a part
of the whole, and there is the same Spirit in all, they are all Members of
Christ, and Members one of another, and that Spirit, Faith and Love, which
unites to Christ, does unite them one to another. This Union is from active
operating Principles and Graces, which are quickened, and strengthened by the
Spirit of Christ, making use commonly of outward Means and Ordinances to that
End: And these Graces, or the New Man, so quickened and assisted, exercise that
Power toward Christ and one another; and this mutual Exercise of Grace, is our
Communion with Christ, and his with us, and of one toward another, according
to our various Conditions, in mutual Care, Sympathy, Compassion, and Joy. 1
Cor. 12.25, 26.

This Communion with Christ, and one another, in this Life, is but imperfect,
we understand but in part, and our Faith serves and helps us but in an
imperfect State, and by Consequence our Love is weak, and other Graces are at
best but in a growing Condition. Our Administrations, and Communnion in
Ordinances have great Imperfections, according to the weakness of our
Perceptions, Light and Judgment, and other Graces. And suppose our Love were
strong and entire to one another, yet in this bad Light, we are subject to many
great Errors and Mistakes: And our Union and Agreement lies, 1. In one general
End, God's Glory. 2. In one Common Principle of Operation, or Efficient Cause,
the Spirit of Jesus Christ. 3. In one way and means of Conveyance and
Acceptance, Jesus Christ, as our Mediator and Advocate. 4. In one General
Rule, the Holy Scriptures, and the Institutions of Jesus Christ the Lawgiver;
where there are these Ones, there is Catholic Unity: There is one Body, and
one Spirit; even as ye are called in one hope of your Calling; One Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism; One God and Father of all, which is above all, and through
all, and in you all. Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6, etc. The ancient true Bonds of Unity,
are one Faith, one Baptism, and not one Ceremony, one Polity, says the Lord
Bacon; Vbi supra. p. 4.
our Disagrement is in the latter, we agree in the first and principal.

From this Union proceeds Communion; for, the Church, the Body of Christ,
consisting of living Members, quickened by the renewing, sanctifying Spirit,
and exercising the Graces received, have Communion with God through and by the
Spirit; and with one another, as Children of the same Heavenly Father, and
Subjects of the same Heavenly King, and Members of the same Family. And this
Communion is held, maintained, exercised, and increased by Laws and Ordinances,
in the Observation of which, there is a conveyance of many and great
Privileges and Benefits.

This Union and Communion, is either inward or outward; inward, in being joined
to the Lord, and to one another, in being of one Mind and Heart: Outward, and
that is twofold: 1. In spiritual things. 2. In outward and carnal things.

1. In spiritual things. So the first Church, continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread and Prayers; Acts
2.42. And they continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking of
Bread from House to House, did eat their Meat with Gladness and Singleness of
Heart, praising God, etc. Verse. 46, 47. And let us consider one another to
provoke unto Love and to good Works, not forsaking the assembling of our selves
together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another. Heb. 10.24, 25.
Let the Word of God dwell in you richly, in all Wisdom, admonishing one another
in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, etc. Col. 3.16. Exhorting one
another; Heb. 3.13. Comforting one another; 1 Thessalonians. 4.18. Edifying one
another; Chap. 5.11. Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication in the
Spirit; Ephesians. 6.18. Confessing their Faults one to another, and praying one
for another, etc. James 5.16.

2. In outward and carnal things; Acts 2.44, 45. c. 4.32, 34, 35. c. 5.4. Heb.
13.16. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, etc. This kind of Communion is beside the Subject now
in hand.

It is said, there can be no Union without Communion: be it so. Is not that
Communion both of Churches, Pastors and Persons, a sufficient Communion to free
any Churches or Persons from the Guilt of Schism, which is answerable and
proportionable to the Union of the Body of Christ, and agreeable to the
Institutions and Ordinances of Christ? His Ordinances are sufficient Means and
Instances of Communion, without any Additions of Forms and Ceremonies; we have
his Law, and Form of Admission into his Family and Church, Baptism: And being
baptized by one Spirit into one Body; we have his Word, which is sufficient to
make us wise unto Salvation, and to make the Man of God perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto every good Work; we have a Form and Pattern of Prayer, and
Directions and Matter for all manner of Prayer; we have a Sacrament for
Communion and Confirmation; we have what Christ thought sufficient Means of
Communion in all and every Nation that should receive the Gospel; and by
Consequence for the universal, and every particular Church. And it is observed,
what the Spirit of Christ did to preserve Unity, and prevent Schism. He gave
diversities of Gifts, for diverse Administrations and Operations: The Church is
compared to a Body, consisting of different Members, in Subordination, for
Service and Usefulness; some to do the Office of an Eye, others of an Ear; some
of a Hand, others of a Foot; some honorable, and some dishonorable, that
there should be no Schism in the Body, 1 Cor. 12. He inspired holy Men, and
they spoke as inspired by him, but not the same form of Words, without a great
variety, not the same Form of Prayer in the same Words and Syllables; no not
the same Form of Words to a word in the Institution of the Lord's Supper; St.
Mark leaves out, Drink ye all of it; Mark 14.23. and for Remission of Sins,
ver. 24. St. Luke adds to, This is my Body, given for you, Do this in
Remembrance of me; Chap. 22.19, and 20. to the Cup, which is shed for you; and
not as the other two Evangelists. And St. Paul delivers to the Corinthians,
what he received from the Lord, and adds to St. Matthew. and Mark, and varies
from St. Luke, This is my Body which is broken for you, and keeps the words of
St. Luke, In Remembrance of me; but adding, As often as ye do it in Remembrance
of me, after the Cup; 1 Cor. 11.23, 24. -- If either of these Holy Apostles
gave the Sacrament, using his own Words, and so it be delivered in four Forms;
who will doubt but he holds Communion sufficient to the Ends of the holy
Sacrament? And the Uniformity lies in Blessing and giving Thanks, in taking
Bread, breaking it, giving and taking it, as a Token of the Body of Christ to
the appointed End; and so also the Cup, as a Token of his Blood, drinking it to
the appointed End. Uniformity of Words is not necessary to Church Communion,
neither in Articles of Faith, nor in Preaching, nor in Prayer, nor in
Sacraments; and yet Church Communion is as necessary a Duty, as associating of
Churches and Assemblies, it being truly the End of such Association and
Assembling: And yet no Man of sense will deny the great Advantages of Consent,
Agreement, Similitude, and Uniformity in all our Administrations, as near as we
can frame our Minds thereunto, which will never come nearer than according to
general Rules, without Debates and Disputes, as many, if not more, and of as
great an Influence upon Peace, as can arise from the Application and
Construction of General Rules.

II. Let us remove and take away the Causes of Disunion and Division as much as
possibly we can.

And first, Those that are within us, which may be reduced to Flesh and Self.
For whereas there is among you Envying, Strife and Divisions, are ye not carnal
and walk as Men? For while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of
Apollo, are ye not carnal? 1 Cor. 3.3, 4. Self is the Schismatic within us,
till we are converted from it, we are separate from Christ, and by Consequence
are disunited from his Body, and do not consent to the Terms of his Covenant
and Salvation, Self-conceit, Pride, and Loftiness, Self-will, Self-seeking, and
Self-love, are the Springs of our bitter Waters of Strife and Separation, that
run into diverse Channels, or rather break the Banks, and overflow the Church.

2. The outward Causes are besides the Cooperation of the World and Devil, the
rigorous exacting and enforcing of particular Conditions of Church-Liberty and
Communion, with such Forfeitures and Penalties, as hinder the Progress of the
Word of Life, and the Salvation of Souls: All our Wars have been before the
Gates of the City, since many have been turned out; we say they shall not come
in, except they will subscribe to Terms; and they say they cannot, except they
are taken away: Both Sides must sound a Parlee; and our Governors have the
greatest, and most imitable prevailing Example of the King of his Church,
Homily of Fasting ^^st part, p. 172, 173. Edit. Land. 1673.
and his Apostles. Hear our Homily. God's Church ought not, neither may it be
so tied to that, or any other Order now made, or hereafter to be made and
devised by the Authority of Man, but that it may lawfully for just Causes,
alter, change, or mittigate those Ecclesiastical Decrees and Orders; yea,
recede wholly from them, and break them, when they tend either to Superstition,
or to Impiety, when they draw People from God, rather than work any Edisication
in them (and not in these Cases alone, as you shall hear afterward). This
Authority Christ used for the Order and Decree made by the Elders for washing
oft-times --, tending to Superstition, our Savior changed into the Sacrament
of Regeneration. This Authority, To mittigate Laws and Decrees Ecclesiastical,
the Apostles practiced --. Acts 15. signifying, they would not lay any other
Burden upon them, but these Necessaries --. Thus ye have heard that Christian
Subjects are bound to obey, even in Conscience, sincere Laws, which are not
repugnant to the Laws God --. Ye have heard that Christ's Church is not so
bound to observe any Order, Law, or Decree made by Man: To prescribe a Form in
Religion; but that the Church has full Power and Authority from God to change
and alter the same, when need shall require, etc. Was there ever greater need
than now? Love of Union, Peace and Growth of Godliness, Sense of imminent
Danger, and that Danger no less than Destruction, has moved the Right Reverend
Bishop of Cork to print those pressing Divine Sermons, and take his Testimony,
(as carrying greater Authority than of private Men's) of the necessity of
Union: speaking of the Protestants in Ireland, We must unite, or be destroyed.
First Sermon. p. 29.
And how far is Ireland from England? Can the Protestant Church in Ireland be
destroyed, and England be safe? Yea, how much further is the Destruction from
England, than from Ireland? may not England be destroyed first? It is most
likely: for if England be destroyed, Ireland cannot escape; if Ireland be
destroyed, England will be endangered, but may better withstand it, than
Ireland can. The same discerning and sensible Bishop cannot conceive any
Possibility of an Union of all honest-minded Men of different Persuasions
amongst us, that call themselves Protestants, but by the coming of such several
Dissenters into the established Church. Hence the Inference is not far to be
fetched. Second Sermon. p. 61.
That this Union can never be but by taking away the Bars, and the Chains that
keep the Dissenters from entering in: Upon what Terms (says that Right
Reverend and Excellent Person) must we of the Established Church come over to
you, that dissent, or you come over to us? We declare, we cannot without
Schism; and then adds a most generous Expression of a large and catholic
Spirit: -- But are ready to sacrifice all we can otherwise to the Public Peace
and Safety. Page 29
O that all were thus frank, in their biddings for Peace and Union! But Right
Reverend Father, Dissenting-Protestants and Independents, will never press you
so far, as to come to them, that is, to be Presbyterians and Independents: If
you will, do what you may without Schism; and they do what ever can be done
with a good Conscience, the deadly Wound is in a hopeful way of cure.

Find out, first, what Unity is necessary for this imperfect State. 2. Observe
what Rules Christ gave by his Spirit, and the Holy Apostles practiced for
Unity, against Schism, for Truth and Faith against Heresy, for Government
against Confusion, for Order against Disorder, for Decency against Indecency,
for Worship against Idolatry and Irreligion, for Discipline against decay of
Piety, and for the soundness of its Members; in a word, for Admission into
Communion and Privileges, for Edification, Peace, and Comfort: And what more
can be necessary for Unity and Peace of Christians in one Nation, than what was
sufficient for Christians in all Nations? And then there will be neither Schism
on one hand, nor Dissent on the other. That one Rule of the Apostle, as far as
we have attained, let us walk by the same Rule, would unite and heal us, and do
us more Service than all the Volumns of Canons besides. And who can walk by the
same Rule further than he has attained?

The Means to be used for Union, are 1. A sincere Observation of, and
conscientious Consent unto the Terms of our Christianity and Salvation, our
Baptismal Vow. Hypocrites and Formalists, are the first Rank of Dissenters, and
Schismatics, that conform not unto the Laws of Christ, and Terms of Salvation.
2. A conscientious walking after the Spirit. Sensual Men, that have not the
Spirit, are the notorious Separatists. 3. A studious search into, and keeping
to the holy Gospel, wherein we are taught, as the way to Union.

1. A setting up, or rather acknowledgment of God, as in all, and above all; 1
Cor. 3.

2. An Imitation of Jesus Christ: Phil. 2.5. in Humbleness of Mind and
Condescension.

3. Unity of Mind in the Lord; Phil. 4.2. 1 Cor. 1.10. not contentious,
striving in Parties, as if Christ were divided.

4. By Charity which suffers long, is kind, envieth not, vaunteth not it
self, is not pussed up, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks
none Evil, rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth. By these
Divine Effects and Properties of Charity, we may lay our Divisions upon the
Head of Uncharitableness: Charity keeps all together as in a Bond of
Perfectness: Be kindly affectioned one to another, with brotherly Love, in
Honor preferring one another: Romans 12.10. Rejoice with them that do rejoice,
and weep with them that weep, ver. 15. 1 Cor. 12.25, 26.

5. By Self-denial. This is the individual Property and Effect of true Faith
and Love, and by Consequence the necessary Qualification of a Disciple. By this
we seek God's Glory, and not our own; pray that God's Kingdom may come, and his
Will be done; as if we had no Interest nor Concernment in this World, but the
Advancement of Christ's Kingdom; nor Work to do, but to do his Will. Except we
deny our selves we cannot condescend, not seek the good of all, but please our
selves; we cannot have a Care of one another as of our selves; we shall not
seek the things that be of Christ, but our own. This Factious, this Schimatical
Self must be denied, or we can never be healed, nor grow in one.

6. If we would unite, we must not aggravate Divisions, nor multiply Schisms in
our own Fancies, Opinions and uncharitable Affections, looking upon diversity
of Opinions, as hideous Errors; upon Errors as damnable; judging others as
Deceivers, and deceived, and admiring our selves, as if privileged with a
little Infallibility; censuring our Brethren, reviling, reproaching,
suppressing and persecuting of them. Our Union lies in a Point, it is in the
Head, And they were counted Schismatics, who separated from the Catholic
Church, by Cyprian ad magnum, etc. August. etc.
in the Essentials of Christianity, of Faith and Worship, and in Amen, as the
Sum of our Prayers. An so Schism, pernicious Schism, lies in a narrower
Compass, than most Men, I will not say, would have it; but than most do lay it
in.

Schism is a Breach of Union; but then it is a Breach of that Union which ought
to be among Christians, from the Nature and Laws of Christianity. But according
to some, the weaker side is always the Schismatical.

And so I come to the last Head, to show wherein Schism lies, or what Schism
is: It has many Branches, and Degrees; but I Will take the most authentic
Notion of it, from the prime Doctors and Fathers of the Church of England, by
which I dare say, our Protestant Dissenters will be tried and judged. Hear the
Canon, and let it be the Reed to measure our Schism by; we may stand to their
Rule, who made our Canons: Anno 1603. Can. ix. The Title is, Authors of Schisms
in the Church of England censured.

Whosoever shall hereafter separate themselves from the Communion of Saints, as
it is approved by the Apostles Rules in the Church of England, and combine
themselves together in a new Brotherhood, accounting the Christians who are
conformable to the Doctrine, Government, Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, to be profane and unmeet for them to join with in Christian
Profession; let them be excommunicated, and not restored, but by the
Archbishop, after their Repentance, and public Revocation of such their
wicked Errors.

Here Is the Nature of eulpable Separation opened. 1. It is a Separation from
the Communion of Saints. 2. Communion of Sains approved by the Apostles Rules.
3. Combination in a new Brotherhood. 4. The Reason of such Separation, and
Combination, accounting the Christians who are conformable, etc. to be profane
and unmeet for them to join with, in Christian Profession. The Nonconformists
both of Denominations, Presbyterian and Congregational, do declare, 1. That
they believe, and hold Communion of Saints. 2. That the Apostle's Rules are the
Rules of that Communion. 3. That conforming Ministers and Christians are true
Churches, a true and excellent part of the Catholic Church. 4. That they
separate not from any Christians, because they are, or that are Christians
conformable to the Doctrine, etc. There is not a conformable Christian in
England, or in the whole World, but they that are sincere Christians among
them, do and must hold Communion with them in the Christian Profession. The
Reason of their Combinations, is because of some Injunctions required of them
alien from the Apostles Rules; as we are Christians, and keep to the Apostles
Rules, they do not judge us to be unmeet for Christian Profession with them. As
this is clear from the declared Doctrines of the Nonconformists, so it is clear
in the Practice of many of them, as more than my self can testify, who have had
of them, communicate in Prayer, Preaching and Sacraments with us. There may be
some, who ignorantly, weakly and passionately, upon Prejudice and
Unacquaintance, may be too far estranged from us, but as many of these as are
Christians, dare not withdraw from Christian-Communion with us; or judge us
unmeet for Christian Profession with them; these are to be pitied and
rectified; but if they believe with the Heart, and confess with the Mouth Jesus
Christ; the Schism is verbal and oral, but not fundamental, and in the Heart. A
Man may be shy of another Man's Company, through Unacquaintance and Suspicion,
but if he will not keep the same Pace, or the same Track in the way to Heaven,
I Will own him for a Fellow-Traveller, if I see him go on in the beaten Path of
Christianity, tho not hand in hand with me. If he suspect me for a Robber, I Will
assure him of my Honesty if I can, that we have the Comfort of good Company,
There are not so many that declare themselves bound for Heaven, that I must cut
off them that do; because we have some Jars and Disputations upon our Journey
--. Let us learn Moderation from the highest Fathers of the Church in their
days, and learn this Canonical Notion of a Schismatic. A Schismatic from the
Church, is, He that separates from the Communion of Saints, according to the
Apostles Rules, as from Christians unmeet for Christian Profession, because
they conform; i. e. as from no Christians, but profane, because they conform
to the Doctrine, Government, and Ceremonies of the Church of England.

Agreeable with this, is that Description of Schism given us by that clear and
very learned Dr. Barnaby Potter, ( Answer to Charity mistaken, Sect. 3. p. 76.)
Whosoever professes himself to forsake the Communion of any one Member of the
Body of Christ, must confess himself consequently to forsake the whole. And
therefore her Communion we forsake not no more than the Body of Christ, whereof
we acknowledge the Church of Rome a Member, tho corrupted. And this clears us
from the Imputation of Schism, whose Property it is, (witness the Donatists and
Luciferians) to cut off from the Body of Christ, and the hope of Salvation, the
Church from which it separates.

I must confess, when the Jusuit-Knot frames an Argument from this Description
of Schism; the Rational Mr. Chillingworth, denies the Syllogism; saying, it is
all one as to prove, that because a Man has a Fever, therefore he has the
Plague; and makes this to be but one Property of a Schism. But be it so, if
this be a Vindication of the Protestants from being Schismatics, because of
our Separation from Rome; it will as clearly vindicate our Protestant
Nonconformists from the charge of Schism, from the Established Church, for they
do not cut off from the Body of Christ and hope of Salvation, the Church of
England. Indeed, the Separation with which they are charged, is not from it, as
from a Church, but as Separation in a Church, fundamentally and essentially the
same, but differing in Accidents and Modes, which must needs be the lowest kind
of Difference, and not comparable to that in Corinth; which our Famous Dr.
Rainolds ( De Lib. Apocryphis Praelect. 1.) calls only Schisma nascens; for the
Conformists and Nonconformists are all one in Christ; none of the
Nonconformists have been ever heard to divide, and cry, I am of Paul, and I am
of Apollo, etc. Our imposed Accidents are the dividing things among us. And
certainly, if the Nonconformists do sin grievously, in refusing Communion with
us in them, agreeing in all the Parts of Christian Catholic Communion with us;
It will be a remarkable Act of Charity and Goodness in our Governors to
deliver them from so great a Sin, by reducing the fore-quoted Doctrine of our
Church, in the Homily of Fasting, into Practice; for those be the things, at
which they stumble, it will be a Charity to take them out of the way: Or if
they will not remove them, then I Will conclude, it is hard to call them
Schismatics, who are all one with us, as far as we are all one with all
Reformed and Christian Churches, remembering the Words of the Learned Dr.
Stillingfleet, Page 359.
in his Defense of Archbishop Land; Before the imposing Humor came into
particular Churches, Schism was defined by the Fathers and others, to be a
voluntary Departure out of the Church; yet that cannot in Reason be understood
of any particular, but the true Catholic Church.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 10. dele to me. P. 4. l. 22, after etc. add which. P. 5. l. 21.
after Bishops, add 3 and dele And P. 8. l. 32. del. that. P. 9. l. 16. del.
only. l. 37. r. Church Order. Ib. 1. for. P. 10. r. of the National, etc. P.
11. l. 18. after Country, add they are unfit. P. 15. l. 4. r. 1660. P. 24. l
40. for they, r. we. P. 16. l. 4. r. dispositive. l. 29. r. Anti-reforming. P.
31. Marg. r. are, for is. P. 39. l. 40. r. is. P. 40. l. 15. r. Preachers. P.
57. l. 10. after Order, add 2.

The Preface, and some other Sheets the Author did not revise; therefore the
Printer desires the Reader to correct, or pardon what Errata he finds therein.


