THE VISIONS OF Dom Francisco de Quevedo VILLEGAS, KNIGHT of the ORDER OF St
JAMES.

Made English by R. L.

LONDON, Printed for H. Herringman at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in the Lower
walk of the New Exchange. 1667.

LICENSED,

March 26th 1667.
TO THE READERS, GENTLE and SIMPLE.
THis Preface is merely for Fashion-sake, to fill a space, and please the
Stationer, who says it is neither usual not handsome, to leap immediately from
the Title Page to the Matter. So that in short, a Preface ye have, together
with the Reason of it, both under One: but as to the Ordinary Mode and Pretense
of Prefaces, the Translator desires to be excused. For he makes a Conscience of
a Lie, and it were a damned one, to tell ye, that he has published This, either
to Gratify the importunity of Friends, or to Oblige the Public, or for any
other Reason of a hundred, that are commonly given in excuse of Scribbling. Not
but that he loves his Friends, as well as any man, and has taken their Opinion
along with him. Nor, but that he loves the Public too (as many a Man does a
Coy Mistress that has made his heart ache.) But to pass from what had no effect
upon him in this Publication, to that which overruled him in it. It was pure
Spite. For he has had hard Measure among the Physicians, the Lawyers, the
Women, etc. And Dom Francisco de Quevedo, in English, Revenges him upon all his
Enemies. For it is a Satyr (in fine) that taxes Corruption of Manners, in all
sorts and degrees of people, without reflecting upon particular States or
Persons. It is full of Sharpness and Morality; and has found so good
Entertainment in the World, that it wanted only English, of being baptized into
all Christian Languages.

Errata.
PAge 14 line 24 read a Lacquay, p. 23 l. 25 d. in, p. 48. r. Teize for seize,
p. 60 l. 5. r. Potosi for Potoss, p. 63 l. 24. r. Government for Governments,
p. 71 l. 13 r. ye for he, p. 90 l. 19 r. demurred for demurrer, p. 149 l.
penult. r. His for This, p. 160 l. 7 insert as, p. 171 l. 4. insert night, p.
180 l. 2 r. Discourse for Discourses, p. 192 l. 23 r. This for it, and dele to
us, p. 263 l. 4 r. now for no, p. 284 l. 14 dele and. p 319. l. 7. insert it.

THE FIRST VISION OF THE Algouazil (or Catchpole) possessed.
I Was going to other day to hear Mass at a Convent in this Town, but the door
it seems was shut, and a world of people pressing and begging to get in; I
asked, What was the matter? They told me that there was a Demoniac to be
exorcised (or dispossessed): Whereupon, I thrust into the Crowd for company, to
see the Ceremony; but to little purpose: for after I had half smothered my self
in the throng, I was even glad to get out again, and bethink my self of my
Lodging. Upon my way homeward, at the streets end, it was my fortune to meet a
familiar friend of mine of the same Convent; who told me over again what I had
heard before, and taking notice of my curiosity, bad me follow him; which I
did, and with his Passe-par-tout he brought me through a little backdoor into
the Church, and so into the Vestry, where we saw a wretched kind of a
dog-look'd fellow, with a Tippet about his neck, as ill ordered as you would wish;
his Clothes all in tatters, his hands bound behind him, roaring and tearing
after a most hideous manner. Bless me, quoth I, (crossing my self) what
spectacle have we here? This (said the good Father who was to do the Feat) is a
man that is possessed with an Evil-spirit. That Is a damned lie (with respect of
the Company, cried the Devil that tormented him) for this is not a man possessed
with a Devil, but a Devil possessed with a man; and therefore you should do well
to have a care what you say, for both by the Question and Answer it is most
evident, that you are but a Company of Sots. You are to understand that we
Devils never enter into the body of a Catchpole, but by force, and in spite of
our hearts; and therefore to speak properly, you are to say, This is a Devil
Catchpol'd, and not a Catchpole bedevil'd. To say the truth, you men can deal
better with us Devils, than with the Catchpoles, for we fly from the Cross,
whereas They make use of it for a Cloak for their villainy.

There is somewhat a better agreement, I must confess, between our Offices: If
we draw men into Judgment and Condemnation, so do the Catchpoles; we pray for
an increase of wickedness in the world, so do they; nay and more zealously than
we, for it is their livelihood, and we do it only for company: And in this, the
Catchpoles are worse than the Devils, they prey upon their own Kind, and worry
one another; for our parts we are Angels still, though black ones, and were
turned into Devils only for aspiring into an equality with our Maker: whereas
the very corruption of mankind is the generation of a Catchpole; so that, my
good Father, your labor is but lost in plying this Wretch with Relics; for
you may as soon redeem any thing from Hell as (be it never so holy, if he once
seizes it) out of his Clutches. In fine, your Algou^zils (or Catchpoles) and
your Devils are both of an Order, only your Catchpole Devils wear Shoes and
Stockings, and we go barefoot after the Fashion of this reverend Father, and
(to deal plainly) have a very hard time on it.

I was not a little surprised to find the Devil so great a Sophister, but all
this notwithstanding, the holy man went on with his Exorcism, and to stop the
Spirits mouth, washed his face with a little Holy Water, which made the Demoniac
ten times madder than before, and set him a yelping so horridly, that it
deafned the company, and made the very ground under us to tremble. And now,
says he, you may, perchance, imagine this extravagance to be the effect of your
Holy Water; but let me tell you, that mere Water it self would have done the
same thing; for your Catchpole hates nothing in this world like Water,
[especially that of a Grays-Inne Pump.] But to conclude, They are so reprobated
a sort of Christians, that they have quitted even the very name of Misins, by
which they were formerly known, for that of Algouazils; the latter being of
Pagan extraction, and made suitable to their manners.

Come, come, says the Father, there is no ear, nor credit to be given to this
Villain, set but his tongue at liberty, and you shall have him fall foul upon
the Government, and the Ministers of Justice, for keeping the World in Order
and suppressing wickedness, because it spoils his market. No more chopping of
Logic, good Mr. Conjurer, says the Devil, for there is more in it than you are
aware of; but if you will do a poor Devil a good office, give me my dispatch out
of this accursed Algouazil; for I am a Devil, you must know, of Reputation and
Quality, and shall never be able to endure the gibes and affronts will be put
upon me at my return to Hell, for having kept this Rascal company. All in good
time, said the Father, thou shall have thy discharge, but in pity to this
miserable Creature, and not for thy own sake. But tell me now, what makes thee
torment him thus? Nothing in the world, quoth the Devil, but a contest betwixt
him and me, which was the greater Devil of the two.

The Conjurer did not at all relish these wild and malicious replies; but ^o me
the Dialogue was extreme pleasant, especially being by this time a little
familiariz'd with the Devil. Upon which confidence my Good Father, said I, here
are none but Friends; and I may speak to you as my Confessor, and the
Confident of all the secrets of my soul; I have a great mind with your leave,
to ask the Devil a few Questions, and who knows but a man may be the better for
his Answers, though perchance contrary to his intention! keep him only in the
interim from tormenting the poor creature. The Conjurer granted my request, and
the Spirit went on with his babble: Well, says he smiling, the Devil shall
never want a Friend at Court, so long as there is a Poet within the Walls. And
indeed the Poets do us many a good turn, both by Pimping and otherwise; but if
you, said he, should not be kind to us, (looking upon me) you will bethought very
ungrateful, considering the honor of your entertainment now in Hell. I ask't
him then what store of Poets they had? whole swarms, says the Devil; so many,
that we have been forced to make more room for them: Nor is there any thing in
nature so pleasant as a Poet in the first year of his probation; he comes ye
laden forsooth with Letters of Recommendation to our Superiors, and enquires
very gravely for Charon, Cerberus, Rhadamanthus, AEacus, Minos.

Well said I, but what is their punishment (for I began now to make the Poets
case my own) Their punishments, quoth the Devil, are many, and suited to the
Trade they drive. Some are condemned to hear other men's works: (and this is the
plague of the Fiddlers too) We have others that are in for a thousand year, and
yet still poring upon some old Stanzas they have made of Jealousy. Some again
are beating their foreheads with the palms of their hands, and even boring
their very Noses with hot Irons, in rage that they cannot come to a resolution,
whether they shall say Face or Visage; whether they shall write Iayl or Gaol;
whether Cony or Cunny, because it comes from Cuniculus, a Rabbet. Others are
biting their Nails to the quick, and at their Wits end for a Rhyme to Chimney;
and dozing up and down in a brown study, till they drop into some hole at last,
and give us trouble enough to get them out again. But they that suffer the
most, and fare the worst, are your Comic Poets, for whoring so many Queens and
Princesses upon the stage, and coupling Ladies of Honor with Lacquies, and
Noblemen with common Strumpets, in the winding up of their Plays; and for
giving the Bastonado to Alexander and Julius Caesar in their Interludes and
Farces. Now be it known to you, that we do not lodge these with other Poets,
but with Petty-foggers and Attournies, as common dealers in the mystery of
Shifting, Shuffling, Forging, and Cheating: And now for the discipline of Hell,
you are to understand we have incomparable Harbingers and Quarter Masters;
insomuch that let them come in whole Caravans, as it hapn'd to other day, every
man is in his quarter before you can say what is this.

There came to us several Tradesmen; the first of them a Poor Rogue that made
profession of drawing the long Bow; and him we were about to put among the
Armorers, but one of the company moved and carried it, that since he was so
good at draughts, he might be sent to the Clerks and Scrivners; a sort of
people that will fit you with draughts good and bad, of all sorts and sizes,
and to all purposes. Another called himself a Cutter, we asked him whether in
Wood or Stone? Neither said he, but in Cloth and Stuff: (Anglice a Tailor) and
him we turned over to those that were in for Detraction and Calumny, and for
cutting large Thongs out of other men's Leather. There was a Blind fellow would
fain have been among the Poets, but (for likeness sake) we quartered him among
the Lovers. After him, came a Sexton, or (as he styled himself) a Buryer of the
Dead; and then a Cook that was troubled in Conscience for putting off Catts for
Hares: These were dispatched away to the Pastry-men. A matter of half a dozen
Crack-brain'd Fools we disposed of among the Astrologers and Alchymists. In the
number, there was one notorious Murderer, and him we packed away to the
Gentlemen of the Faculty, the Physicians. The Broken Merchants we kennel'd with
Judas for making ill bargains. Corrupt Ministers and Magistrates, with the
Thief on the left hand. The Embroylers of Affairs, and the Water-bearers take
up with the Vintners; and the Brokers with the Jews. Upon the whole matter the
policy of Hell is admirable, where every man has his place according to his
condition.

As I remember (said I) you were speaking even now concerning Lovers. Pray tell
me, have you many of them in your Dominions? I ask, because I am my self a
little subject to the itch of Love, as well as Poetry. Love (says the Devil) is
like a great spot of Oil, that diffuses it self every where, and consequently
Hell cannot but be sufficiently stockt with that sort of Vermin. But let me
tell you now, we have several sorts of Lovers; some dote upon themselves;
others upon their Pelf; these upon their own Discourses; those upon their own
Actions; and once in an Age perchance, comes a fellow that dotes upon his own
Wife; but this is very rare, for the Jades commonly bring their Husbands to
repentance, and then the Devil may throw his Cap at them. But above all, for
sport (if there can be any in Hell) commend me to those Gaudy Monsieurs, who by
the variety of Colors and Ribbands they wear ( Favors as they call them) one
would swear, were only dressed up for a Sample, or kind of Inventory of all the
Gew-Gaws that are to be had for love or money at the Mercers. Others you shall
have so overcharged with Perrugue, that you will hardly know the Head of a
Cavalier, from the ordinary Block of a Tire-woman. And some again you would take
for Carriers, by their pacquets and bundles of Love Letters; which being made
combustible by the fire and flame they treat of, we are so thrifty, as to
employ upon the sindging of their own Tails, for the saving of better Fuel.
But, oh! the pleasant postures of the Maiden-Lover, when he is upon the
practice of the Gentle-Leere, and embracing the Air for his Mistress! Others we
have that are condemned for Feeling, and yet never come to the Touch: These
pass for a kind of Buffon Pretenders; ever upon the Vigil, and never arrive at
the Festival. Some again have lost themselves with Judas for a Kiss.

One story lower is the abode of contented Cuckolds; a nasty poisonous place,
and strewed all over with the Horns of Rams and Bulls, etc. Now these are so
well read in Woman, and know their destiny so well before hand, that they never
so much as trouble their heads for the matter. Ye come next to the Admirers of
old Women; and these are wretches of so depraved an Appetite, that if they were
not kept tied up, and in Chains, they would horse the very Devils themselves, and
put Barrabbas to his Trumps, to defend his Buttocks: For the truth is, whatever
you may think of a Devil, he passes with them for a very Adonis, or a
Narcissus.

So much for your Curiosity; a word now for your Instruction. If you would make
an interest in Hell, you must give over that Roguy way ye have got of abusing
the Devils in your Shows, Pictures, and Emblems: One while forsooth we are
painted with Claws, or Talons, like Eagles, or Griffons. Another while we are
dressed up with Tails, like so many Hackney-Jades with their Fly-flaps: And now
and then ye shall see a Devil with a Coxcomb. Now I will not deny, but some of
us may indeed be very well taken for Hermites, and Philosophers. Help us, if
you can, in this particular, and you shall find one good turn paid with
another. I was asking Michael Angelo here a while ago, why he drew the Devils
in his Great Piece of the Last Judgment, with so many Monkey Faces, and
Iack-Pudding Postures. His answer was, that he followed his Fancy, without any
Malice in the World, for as then, he had never seen any Devils; nor (indeed)
did he believe that there were any; but he has now learned the contrary to his
cost. There Is another thing too we take extremely ill, which is, that in your
ordinary discourses, ye are out with your Purse presently to every Rascal, and
calling of him Devil. As for Example. Do you see how this Devil of a Tailor has
spoiled my Suit? how the Devil has made me wait? how this Devil has cozened
me. etc. whic is very ill done, and no small disparagement to our Quality, to
be ranked with Tailors: A company of Slaves, that serve us in Hell only for
Brush-wood; and they are fain to beg hard to be admitted at all: though I
confess they have possession on their sides, and Custom, which is another Law:
Being in possession of Theft, and stolen goods; they make much more Conscience
of keeping your stuffs, then your Holidays, grumbling and domineering at every
turn, if they have not the same respect with the Children of the Family. Ye
have another trick too, of giving every thing to the Devil, that displeases ye,
which we cannot but take very unkindly. The Devil take thee, says one: A goodly
present I warrant ye; but the Devil has something else to do, then to take and
carry aw^y all that is given him; if they will come of themselves, let them come
and welcome. Another gives that whelp of Laquey to the Devil; but the Devil
will none of your Laqueys, he thanks ye for your love, for those Rogues are
commonly worse than Devils, and to say the truth, they are good neither roast
nor sodden. I give that Italian to the Devil, cries a third; thank you for
nothing: For ye shall have an Italian will chouse the Devil himself, and take
him by the Nose like Mustard. Some again will be giving a Spaniard to the
Devil; but he has been so cruel wherever he has got footing, that we had rather
have his Room then his Company, and make a Present to the Grand-Signior of his
Nutmegs.

Here the Devil st^pt, and in the same instant, there happening a slight scuffle,
betwixt a couple of conceited Coxcombs, which should go foremost: I turned to
see the matter, and cast my Eye upon a certain Tax-gatherer, that had undone a
Friend of mine: And in some sort to revenge my self of this Ass in a Lions
Skin, I ask't the Devil, whether they had not of (...) sort of Blood-Suckers
among the rest, in their Dominions (an Informing, projecting Generation of men,
and the very bane of a Kingdom.) You know little (says he) if you do not know
these vermin to be the right Heirs of Perdition, and that they claim Hell for
their Inheritance: And yet we are now even upon the point of discarding them,
for they are so pragmatical, and ungrateful, there is no enduring of them. They
are at this present in Consultation about an Impost upon the Highway to Hell;
and indeed payments run so high already, and are so likely to increase too,
that it is much feared in the end, we shall quite lose our Trading and Commerce.
But if ever they come to put this in Execution, we shall be so bold, as to
treat them next bout to the Tune of Fortune my Foe, etc. and make them cool
their Heels on the wrong side of the Door, which will be worse then Hell to
them, for it leaves them no retreat, being expelled Paradise, and Purgatory
already. This Race of Vipers, said I, will never be quiet, till they tax the
way to Heaven it self. Oh, quoth the Devil, that had been done long since, if
they had found the Play worth the Candles: but they have had a Factor abroad
now these half-score years, that is glad to wipe his nose on his sleeve still,
for want of a Handkerchief. But these new impositions, upon what I pray ye do
they intend to levy them? For that (quoth the Devil) there is a Gentleman of the
Trade at your Elbow can tell you all; pointing to my old Friend the Publican.
This drew the Eyes of the whole Company upon him, and put him so damn'dly out
of Countenance, that he plucked down his Hat over his Face, clap't his tail
between his Legs, and went his way; with which we were all of us well enough
pleased, and then the Devil went on. Well (said the Devil and laughed) my
Voucher is departed ye see; but I think I can say as much to this point as
himself; The Impositions now to be set on foot, are upon bareneck'd Ladies,
Patches, Mole-skins; Spanish-paper, and all the Mundus Muliebri^ more then what
is necessary and decent; upon your Tour a la mode, and Spring Garden-Coaches;
excess in Apparel, Collations, Rich Furniture, your Cheating, and Blaspheming
Gaming-Ordinaries, and in general, upon whatsoever serves to advance our
Empire; so that without a Friend at Court, or some good Magistrate to help us
out at a dead lift, and stick to us, we may even put up our Pipes, and you will
find Hell a very Desert. Well said I, and methinks I see nothing in all this,
but what is very reasonable; for to what end serves it but to corrupt good
manners, stir up ill Appetites, provoke and encourage all sorts of Debauchery,
destroy all that is good and Honorable in humane Society, and chalk out in
effect the ready way to the Devil.

But you said something even now of Magistrates, I hope (said I) there are no
Judges in Hell. You may as well imagine (cried the spirit) that there are no
Devils there; for let me tell you (Friend mine) your corrupt Judges are the
great Spawners that supply our Lake; for what are those Millions of Catchpoles,
Proctors, Atturneys, Clerks, Barristers, that come sailing to us every day in
Shoals, but the Fry of such Judges! nay sometimes, in a lucky year, for
cheating, forging, and forswearing, we can hardly find Cask to put them in.

From hence now (quoth I) would you infer, that there is no Justice upon the
face of the Earth. Very right (quoth the Devil) for Astraea (which is the same
thing) is fled long since to Heaven. Do n't ye know the story? no (said I) then
(quoth the Devil) mind me and I Will tell ye it. Once upon a time Truth and
Justice came together to take up their Quarters upon the Earth: But the One
being naked, and the Other very severe and plain-dealing, they could not meet
with any body that would receive them. At last, when they had wandered a long
time like Vagabonds in the open Air; Truth was glad to take up her Lodging with
a Mute; and Justice, perceiving that though her name was much used for ^ Cloak
to Knavery, yet that she her self was in no Esteem, bethought her self of
returning to Heaven: and in order to her Journey, she bad adieu in the first
place to all Courts, Palaces, and great Cities, and went into the Country;
where she met with some few poor simple Cottagers, that gave her entertainment;
but Malice, and Persecution, found her out in the end, and she was banished
thence too. She presented her self in many places, and people asked her what she
was? She answered them Justice, for she would not lie for the matter. Justice
(cried they) she is astranger to us; tell her here is nothing for her, and shut
the door. Upon these repulses, she took wing, and away she went to Heaven,
hardly leaving so much as the bare print of her footsteps behind her. Her Name
however is not yet forgotten, and she is pictured with a Scepter in her hand,
and is still called Justice; but call her what ye will, she makes as good a
Fire in Hell as a Tailor; and for slight of hand, puts down all the Gilts,
Cheats, Picklocks and Trepanners in the World: to say the truth, Avarice is
grown to that height, that men employ all the faculties of Soul and Body to
Rob, and Deceive. The Leacher, does not he steal away the honor of his
Mistress? (though with her consent) The Attorney picks your Pocket, and shows
you a Law for it; The Comedian gets your money and your time, with reciting
other men's Labors; The Lover couzens you with his Eyes; The Eloquent with his
Tongue; The Valiant, with his Arm; The Musician, with his Voice and Fingers;
The Astrologer, with his Calculations; The Apothecary, with Sickness and
Health; The Surgeon, with Blood; and the Physician, with Death it self; And in
some sort or other they are all cheats: But the Catchpole (in the name of
Justice) abuses you with his whole Man; He watches you with his Eyes; Follows
you with his Feet; Seizes with his hands; Accuses with his Tongue; And in fine,
put it in your Litany, From Catchpoles as well as Devils, Libera nos Domine.

But how comes it (said I) that you have not coupled the Women with the
Thieves? for they are Both of a Trade. Not a word of Women as ye love me (quoth
the Devil) for we are so tired out with their Importunities; so deaf'd with the
Eternal Clack of their Tongues, that we start at the very thought of them. And
to say the Truth, Hell were no ill Winter-Quarter, if it were not so
overstock'd with that sort of Cattle. Since the Death of the Witch of Endor, it
has been all their business to improve themselves in sub^lety and ^alice, and
to set us together by the Ears among our selves. Nay some of them are confident
enough, to tell us to our Teeth, that when we have done our worst, they will give
us a Rowland for our Oliver. Only this comfort we have, that they are a Cheaper
Plague to Us then they are to You; for we have no Exchanges, Hide-Parkes, or
Spring-Gardens in our Territories.

You are well stored then with Women I see, but of which have you most (said I)
Handsome or Ill-favored? oh, of the Ill-favored six for one (quoth the Devil)
For your Beauties can never want Gallants to lay their Appetites; and many of
them, when they come at last to have their Bellies full, even give over the
sport, Repent and 'scape* Whereas no body will touch the Ill-favored without a
pair of Tong^; and for want of water to quench their fir^, they come to us such
Skeletons, that they are enough to afright the Devil himself. For they are most
commonly old, and accompany their last groans with a Curse upon the younger
that ar^ to survive them. I carried away one the other day of threescore and ten,
that I took just in the nick, as she was upon a certain Exercise to remove
Obstructions: And when I came to land her; Alas for the poor woman! what a
terrible fit had she got of the Toothache! when upon search, the Devil a Tooth
had she left in her head, only she belyed her Chops to save her Credit.

You have exceedingly satisfied me (said I) in all your answers; but pray'e
once again, what store of Beggars have ye in Hell? Poor people I mean. Poor
(quoth the Devil) who are they? Those (said I) that have no Possessions in the
World: How can that be, (quoth he) that those should be damned, that have
nothing in the World? when men are only damned for cleaving to it. And briefly,
I find none of their names in our Books, which is no wonder, for he, that has
nothing to trust to, shall be left by the Devil himself in time of need. To
deal plainly with you, where have ye greater Devils, than in your Flatterers,
false Friends, lewd Company, Envious Person^, than a Son, a Brother, or a
Relation, that lies in wait for your life to get your Fortune, that mourns over
you in your sickness, and wishes you already at the Devil. Now the Poor have
none of this; They are neither flattered, nor envied nor befriended, nor
accompanied: There Is no gaping for their Possessions; and in short, they are a
sort of people that live well, and dye better; and there are some of them, that
would not exchange their Rags, for Royalty it self: They are at liberty to go
and come at pleasure, be it War or Peace; free from Cares, Taxes, and public
Duties. They fear no Judgments or Executions, but live as inviolable as if
their Persons were Sacred. Moreover they take no thought for to morrow, but
setting a just value on their hours, they are good Husbands of the present;
considering that what is past, is as good as Dead, and what is to come
Uncertain. But they say, when the Devil preaches, the world's near an End.

The divine Hand is in this (said the Holy Man that performed the Exorcism)
Thou art the Father of Lies, and yet deliver'st truths, able to mollify and
convert a Heart of stone. But do not you mistake your selves, (quoth the Devil)
to suppose that your Conversion is my Business; for I speak these Truths to
aggravate your Guilt, and that you may not plead ignorance another day, when
you shall be called to answer for your Transgressions. It Is true, most of you
shed tears at parting, but it is the Apprehension of Death, and no true
Repentance for your sins that works upon you: For ye are all a pack of
Hypocrites: Or if at any time you entertain those Reflections, your trouble is,
That your Body will not hold out; and then forsooth ye pretend to pick aquarrel
with the Sin it self. Thou art an Impostor (said the Religious) for there are
many Righteous Souls, that draw their sorrow from another Fountain. But I
perceive you have a mind to amuse us, and make us lose Time, and perchance your
own hour is not yet come to quit the Body of this miserable Creature; however,
I conjure thee in the name of the most High to leave tormenting him, and to
hold thy Peace. The Devil obeyed; and the Good Father applying himself to us,
My Masters (says he) though I am absolutely of Opinion that it is the Devil
that has talked to us all this while through the Organ of this unhappy wretch,
yet he that well weighs what has bin said, may doubtless reap some benefit by
the Discourse. Wherefore without considering whence it came; Remember, that
Saul (although a wicked Prince) Prophesied; and that Honey has been drawn out
of the Mouth of a Lion. Withdraw then, and I shall make it my Prayer (as it is
my hope) that this sad and prodigious spectacle may lead you to a true sight of
your Errors, and in the end, to amendment of Life.

The end of the first Vision.
THE SECOND VISION OF DEATH and her EMPIRE.
MEan Souls do naturally breed sad Thoughts, and in Solitude, they gather
together in Troops to assault the Unfortunate; which is the Trial (according to
my Observation) wherein the Coward does most betray himself; and yet cannot I
for my life, when I am alone, avoid those Accidents and Surprises in my self,
which I condemn in others. I have sometime, upon Reading the Grave and Severe
Lucretius, been seized with a strange Damp; whether from the striking of his
Counsels upon my Passions, or some tacit reflection of shame upon my self, I
know not. However, to render this Confession of my weakness the more excusable,
I Will begin my Discourse with somewhat out of that elegant and excellent Poet;
Put the Case (says he) that a Voice from Heaven should speak to any of us
after this manner; What do thou ail, O Mortal Man, or to what purpose is it,
to spend thy life in Groans, and Complaints, under the apprehension of Death?
where are thy past Years and Pleasures? Are they not vanished and lost in
theFlux of Time, as if thou had put Water into a Sieve? Bethink thy self then
of a Retreat, and leave the World with the same content, and satisfaction, as
thou would do a plentiful Table, and a jolly Company upon a full stomach.
Poor Fool that thou art! thus to Macerate and Torment thy self, when thou
may enjoy thy Heart at Ease, and Possess thy Soul with Repose and Comfort,
etc.



This passage brought into my mind, the words of Job. Cap. 14. and I was
carried on from one Meditation to another, till at length, I fell fast asleep
over my Book, which I ascribed rather to a favorable providence, then to my
natural Disposition. So soon as my Soul felt her self at Liberty, she gave me
the entertainment of this following Comedy, my Phansy supplying both the Stage
and the Company.

In the first Scene, entered a Troop of Physicians, upon their Mules, with deep
Foot-cloths; marching in no very good Order, sometime fast, sometime slow, and
to say the Truth, most commonly in a huddle. They were all wrinkled and
withered about the Eyes; I suppose with casting so many sour looks upon the
Piss-pots and Close-stools of their Patients: bearded like Goats; and their
Faces so overgrown with Hair, that their Fingers could hardly find the way to
their Mouths. In their left hand they held their Reins, and their Gloves roul'd
up together; and in the right, a Staff a la mode, which they carried rather
for Countenance, then Correction; (for they understood no other Manege than the
Heel) and all along, Head and Body went too, like a Baker upon his Panniers.
Diverse of them I observed, had huge Gold Rings upon their Fingers, and set with
Stones of so large a size, that they could hardly feel a Patients Pulse,
without minding him of his Monument. There were more tha^ a good many of them,
and a world of Puny Practisers at their heels, that came out Graduates, by
conversing rather with the Mules than the Doctors: Well! said I to my self; if
there goes no more than This to the making a Physician, it is no marvel we pay
so dear for their Experience.

After These, followed a long Train of Mountebank Apothecaries laden with
Pestles, and Mortars, Suppositories, Spatulas, Glister-Pipes and Siringes,
ready charged, and as mortal as Gunshot, and several Titled Boxes with
R^medies without, and Poisons within: Ye may observe that when a Patient comes
to die, the Apothecaries Mo^tar rings the Passing Bell, as the Priests R^quiem
finishes the business. An Apothec^ries Shop is (in effect) no other than the
Physicians Armory, that supplies him with Weapons; and (to say the truth) the
Instruments of the Apothecary and the Soldier are much of a quality: What are
their Boxes but Petards? their Syringes, Pistols; and their Pills, but Bullets?
And after all, considering their Purgative Medicines, we may properly enough
call their Shops Purgatory; and why not their Persons Hell? their Patients the
Damned? and their Masters the Devils? These Apothecaries were in Iacquets,
wrought all over with Rs, struck through like wounded hearts, and in the form
of the first Character of their Prescriptions; which (as they tell us)
signifies Recipe (T^ke thou) but we find it to stand for Recipio (I take.) Next
to this Figure, they write Ana, Ana, which is as much as ^o say An Ass, An Ass;
and after this, march the Ounces and the Scruples: an incomparable Cordial to a
dying man; the former to dispatch the Body, and the latte^, to put the Soul
into the highway to the D^vil. To hear them call over their Simples, would
make you swear, they were raising so many Devils. Ther^^s your Opopanax,
Buphthalmus, Ast^p^ylinos, Alectorolophos, Ophios^orod^n, Anemosphorus, etc.

And by all this formidable Bombast, is meant nothing in the world but a few
paltry Roots, as Carrots, Turnips, Skirrets, Radish and the like. But they have
the old Proverb at their fingers ends, He that knows thee will never buy thee;
and therefore every thing must be made a Mystery, to hold their Patients in
ignorance, and keep up the Price of the Market. And were not the very names of
their Medicines sufficient to fright away any Distemper, it is to be feared the
Remedy would prove worse than the Disease. Can any pain in Nature, think ye,
have the confidence to look a Physician in the face, that comes armed with a
Drug made of Man's Grease? though disguised under the name of Mummy, to take
off the Horror and Disgust of it: Or to stay for a dressing with Dr. Whachums
Plaster, that shall fetch up a man's leg to the size of a Mill-post? When I saw
these people Herded with the Physicians, methought the old sluttish Proverb,
that says, There is a great distance between the Pulse and the Arse, was much
to blame for making such a difference in their Dignities, for I find none at
all; but the Physician skips in a trice from the Pulse to the Stool and
Vrinals, according to the Doctrine of Galen, who sends all his Disciples to
those unsavory Oracles: from whose hands the Devil himself, if he were sick,
would not receive so much as a Glister. Oh! these cursed and lawless
Arbitrators and Disposers of our Lives! that without either Conscience or
Religion, divide our Souls and Bodies, by their damned poisonous Potions,
Scarifications, Incisions, Excessive Bleedings, etc. which are but the several
ways of executing their Tyranny and Injustice upon us.

In the tail of These, came the Surgeons, laden with Pincers, Cranes-bills,
Catheters, Desquamatories, Dilaters, Scissers, Saws; and with them, so horrid
an outcry, of Cut, Tear, Open, Saw, Flay, Burn, that my Bones were ready to
creep one into another for fear of an Operation.

The next that came in, I should have taken by their Min, for Devils disguised,
if I had not spyed their Chains of Rotten Teeth, which put me in some hope they
might be Tooth-drawers, and so they proved; which is yet one of the lewdest
Trades in the world; for they are good for nothing but to depopulate our
Mouths, and make us old before our time. Let a man but yawn, and ye shall have
one of these Rogues examining his Grinders, and there is not a sound Tooth in
your head, but he had rather see it at his Girdle, than in the place of its
nativity: Nay, rather than fail, he will pick a quarrel with your Gums. But that
which puts me out of all patience, is to see these Scoundrels ask twice as much
for drawing an old Tooth as would have bought ye a new One.

Certainly (said I to my self) we are now past the worst, unless the Devil
himself come next: And in that instant I heard the Brushing of Guy^ars, and the
Rattling of Citterns, Raking over certain Passacailles and Sarabands. These are
a Kennel of Barbers thought I, or I Will be hanged; and any man that had ever seen
a Barber's shop might have told you as much without a Conjurer, both by the
Music, and by the very Instruments, which are as proper a part of a Barbers
Furniture, as his Comb-Cases and Wash-balls. It was to me a pleasant
entertainment, to see them lathering of Asses heads, of all sorts and sizes,
and their Customers all the while winking and sputtering over their Basins.

Presently after these, appeared a Consort of loud and tedious Talkers, that
tired and deafen'd the Company with their shrill, and restless Gaggle: but as
one told me, these were of several sorts. Some they called Swimmers from the
motion of their Arms in all their Discourses, which was just as if they had
been Padling. Others they called Apes, (and we Mimicks) these were perpetually
making of Mopps, and Mowes, and a thousand Antic Ridiculous Gestures, in
derision and imitation of Others. In the third place, were Make-Bates, and
Sowers of Dissension, and these were still Rolling their Eyes (like a
Bartlemey-Puppet, without so much as moving the Head) and leering over their
Shoulders, to surprise people at unawares in their Familiarities, and
Privacies, and gather matter for Calumny and Detraction. The Liars followed
next; and these seemed to be a jolly contented sort of People, well Fed, and
well Clothed; and having nothing else to trust to, methought it was a strange
Trade to live upon. I need not tell you, that they are never without a full
Audience, since all Fools and Impertinents are of their Congregation.

After these, came a Company of Medlers; a Pragmatical Insolent Generation of
men that will have an Oar in every Boat, and are indeed the Bane of honest
Conversation, and the Troublers of all Companies and Affairs: The most
Prostitute of all Flatterers; and only devoted to their own Profit. I thought
this had been the last Scene, because no more came upon the Stage for a good
while; and indeed I wondered that they came so late themselves, but one of the
Bablers told me (unaskt) that this kind of Serpent carrying his Venom in his
tail, it seemed reasonable, that being the most Poisonous of the whole Gang,
they should bring up the Rear.

I began then to take into thought, what might be the meaning of this Oglio of
People of several Conditions and Humors, met together; but I was quickly
diverted from that Consideration, by the Apparition of a Creature which looked
as if 'twere of the Feminine Gender. It was a Person, of a thin and slender
make; laden with Crowns, Garlands, Scepters, Scythes, Sheep-hooks, Pattins,
Hob-nail'd-shooes, Tiaras, Straw-hats, Miters, Mounmoth Caps, Embroideries,
Skins, Silk, Wool, Gold, Lead, Diamonds, Shells, Pearl, and Pebles: She was
dressed up in all the Colors of the Rainbow; she had one eye shut, the other
open; young on the one side, and old of the other. I thought at first, she had
been a great way off, when indeed she was very near me, and when I took her to
be at my Chamber Door, she was at my Beds head. How to unridle this mystery I
knew not; nor was it possible for me to make out the meaning of an Equipage so
extravagant, and so fantastically put together. It gave me no affright however,
but on the contrary I could not forbear laughing, for it came just then into my
mind that I had formerly seen in Italy a Farce, where the Mimick, pretending to
come from the other world, was just thus Accoutred, and never was any thing
more Nonsensically pleasant. I held as long as I could, and at last, I asked
what she was? she answered me, I am Death. Death! (the very word brought my
Heart into my Mouth) and I beseech you Madam, quoth I (with great Humility and
Respect) whither is your Honor a going? No further (said she) for now I have
found you, I am at my Journey's End. Alas, Alas! and must I Dye then (said I)
No, no, (quoth Death) but I Will take thee Quick along with me: For since so many
of the Dead have been to visit the Living, It is but equal for once, that one
of the Living should Return a Visit to the Dead. Get up then and come along;
and never hang an Arse for the matter: for what you will not do willingly, you
shall do in spite of your Teeth. This put me in a Cold Fit; but without more
delay up I started, and desired leave only to put on my Breeches. No, no, (said
she) no matter for Clothes, no body wears them upon this Road; wherefore come
away, naked as you are, and you will Travel the better. So up I got, without a
word more and followed her; in such a Terror, and Amazement, that I was but in
an ill Condition to take a strict account of my Passage; yet I remember, that
upon the way, I told her; Madam, under Correction, you are no more like the
Deaths that I have seen, then an Apple's like an Oyster. Our Death is pictured
with a Scyth in her hand; and a Carcass of bones, as clean, as if the Crows had
picked it: Yes, yes (said she) turning short upon me, I know that very well:
but in the mean time your Designers, and Painters, are but a Company of
Buzzards. The Bones you talk of, are the Dead, or otherwise the miserable
Remainders of the Living; but let me tell you, that you your selves are your
own Death, and that which you call Death, is but the Period of your Life, as
the first moment of your Birth, is the beginning of your Death: And
effectually, ye Dye Living, and your Bones are no more then what Death has
left, and committed to the Grave. If this were rightly understood, every man
would find a Memento Mori, or a Death's Head in his own Looking-glass; and
consider every house with a Family in it, but as a Sepulcher filled with Dead
Bodies; a Truth which you little dream of, though within your daily View and
Experience. Can you imagine a Death elsewhere, and not in your selves?
Believe't y' are in a shameful mistake; for you your selves are Skeletons
before ye are aware.

But Madam, under Favor, what may all these People be that keep your Ladish^p
Company? and since you are Death (as you say) how comes it, that the Bablers,
and Make-bates* are nearer your Person, and more in your Good Graces, than the
Physicians? Why (says she) there are more People Talked to Death and dispatched
by Bablers, then by all the Pestilential Diseases in the World. And then your
Make-bates, and Medlers kill more then your Physicians, though (to give the
Gentlemen of the Faculty their due) they labor night and day for the
enlargement of our Empire. For you must understand, that though distempered
humors make a man sick, it is the Physician Kills him; and looks to be well
paid for it too: (and it is fit that every man should live by his Trade) so that
when a man is asked, what such or such a one died of; He is not presently to
make answer, that he died of a Fever, Pleurisy, the Plague, Purples, or the
like; but that He died of the Doctor. In one point, however I must needs acquit
the Physician; Ye know that the style of right Honorable, and right
Worshipful, which wa^ heretofore appropriate only to Persons of Eminent degree
and Quality, is now in our days used by all sorts of little people; Nay the
very Barefoot Friars, that live under Vows of Humility and Mortification, are
stung with this Itch of Title and Vainglory. And your ordinary Tradesmen, as
Vintners, Tailors, Masons, and the like, must be all dressed up forsooth in the
Right Worshipful: whereas your Physician does not so much Court Honor of
Appellation (though, if it should rain Dignities, he might be persuaded happily
to venture the wetting) but sits down contentedly with the Honor of disposing
of your Lives and Moneys, without troubling himself about any other sort of
Reputation.

The Entertainment of these Lectures, and discourses made the way seem short
and Pleasant, and we were just now entering into a Place, betwixt Light, and
Dark; and of Horror enough, if Death and I had not by this time been very well
acquainted. Upon one side of the Passage, I saw three moving Figures; Armed,
and of Humane shape; and so alike, that I could not say which was which. Just
Opposite, on the other side, a Hideous Monster, and these Three to One, and One
to Three, in a Fierce, and Obstinate Combat. Here Death made a stop, and
facing about, asked me, if I knew these People. Alas! No (quoth I) Heaven be
praised, I do not, and I shall put it in my Litany that I never may. Now to see
thy Ignorance, cried Death; These are thy old Acquaintance, and thou have
hardly kept any other Company since thou were born. Those Three are, the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil; the Capital Enemies of thy Soul: and they are so like
one another, as well in Quality, as Appearance, that Effectually, whoever has
One, has All. The Proud, and Ambitious man thinks he has got the World, but it
proves the Devil. The Lecher, and the Epicure, persuade themselves that they
have gotten the Flesh, and that is the Devil too; and in fine, thus it fares
with all other kinds of Extravagants. But what is He there, said I, that appears
in so many several shapes? and fights against the other three? That (quoth
Death) is the Devil of Money, who maintains that He himself Alone is Equivalent
to them Three, and that wherever He comes, there is no need of Them. Against the
World, He argues from their own Confession, and Experience: for it passes for
an Oracle; that There Is no World but Money; He that is out of Money, 's out of
the World. Take away a man's Money, and take away his Life. Money answers All
things. Against the second Enemy, he pleads that Money is the Flesh too:
witness the Girls and the Ganimedes it procures, and maintains. And against
the Third, He urges that there is nothing to be done without this Devil of
Money. Love does much but Money does All: And Money will make the Pot boil,
though the Devil piss in the Fire. So that for ought I see, (quoth I) the Devil
of Money has the better end of the staff.

After this, advancing a little further, I saw on One hand, Judgment; and Hell,
on the other (for so Death called them) Upon the sight of Hell, making a stop,
to take a stricter Survey of it, Death asked me, what it was I looked at? I told
her, it was Hell; and I was the more intent upon it, because I thought I had
seen it, somewhere else before. She questioned me, where? I told her, that I
had seen it in the Corruption and Avarice of Wicked Magistrates; In the Pride
and Haughtiness of Grandees; In the Appetites of the Voluptuous; In the lewd
Designs of Ruin, and Revenge; In the Souls of Oppressors; and in the Vanity
of diverse Princes. But he that would see it whole, and Entire, in one subject,
must go to the Hypocrite who is a kind of a Religious Broker, and puts out at
five and forty per Cent. the very Sacraments, and ten Commandments.

I am very glad too (said I) that I have seen Judgment as I find it here, in
it is Purity; for That which we call Judgment in the World, is a mere Mockery:
If it were like This, men would live otherwise than they do. To conclude; if it
be expected that our Judges should govern Themselves and Us by This Judgment,
the world's in an ill Case; for there is but little often there. And to deal
plainly, as matters are, I have no great maw to go home again: for 't is better
being with the Dead, where there is Justice, then with the Living, where there is
None.

Our next step was into a fair and spacious Plain, encompassed with a huge
wall, where he that is once in, must never look to come out again. Stop here
(quoth Death) for we are now come to my Iudgment-Seat, and here it is that I
give Audience. The Walls were hung with Sighs and Groans, Ill-News, Fears,
Doubts, and Surprises. Tears did not there avail, either the Lover or the
Beggar; but Grief and Care were without both Measure and Comfort; and served as
Vermin, to gnaw the Hearts of Emperors, and Princes, feeding upon the
Insolent, and Ambitious; as their proper Nourishment. I saw Envy there dressed up
in a Widdow's Vail, and the very Picture of the Governant of one of your
Noblemen's Houses. She kept a Continual Fast as to the Shambles, Preying only
upon her self; and could not but be a very slender Gentlewoman, upon so spare a
Diet. Nothing came amiss to her Teeth (Good or Bad) which made the whole set of
them Yellow and Rotten, and the reason was, that though she bit, and set her
mark upon the Good, and the Sound, she could never swallow it. Under her, sat
Discord; the Legitimate Issue of her own Bowels. She had formerly conversed
much with married people, but finding no need of her there, away she went to
Colleges and Corporations, where it seems they had more already than they knew
what to do withal: and then she betook her self to Courts, and Palaces, and
Officiated there, as the Devil's Lieutenant. Next to Her, was Ingratitude, and
she out of a certain Paste made up of Pride and Malice, was moulding of New
Devils. I was extreme glad of this Discovery, being of Opinion, till now, that
the Ungrateful had been the Devils Themselves, because I read, that the Angels
that fell were made Devils for their Ingratitude. To be short, the whole Pl^ce
Echoed with Rage and Curses. What a Devil have we here to do, (said I) does it
rain Curses in this Country? With that, a Death at my Elbow asked me, what a
Devil I could expect else, in a place where there were so many Match-makers,
Atturneys, and Common-Barretters; who are a Pack of the most Accursed Wretches
in Nature? Is there any thing more Common in the World, then the Exclamations
of Husbands and Wives? Oh! that Damned Devil of a Pander: A heavy Curse upon
that Bitch of a Bawd that ever brought us together. The Pillory and ten
thousand Gibbets to boot, take that Pick-pocket Attorney, that advised me to
this Lawsuit; h^as ruined me for ever. But pray'e (said I) what do all these
Match-makers and Atturneys here together? Do they come for Audience? Death was
here a little quick upon me, and called me Fool for so Impertinent a Qustei^n.
If th^re were no Match-makers (said she) we should not have the Tenth part of
these Skeletons, and Desperado's. Am not I here the fifth Husband of a woman
yet living in the world, that hopes to send twice as many more after me, and
drink Maudlin at the fifteenth Funeral? You say well (said I) as to the
business of Match-makers; But why so many Petty-foggers I pray'e? Nay then I
perceive (quoth Death) now you have a mind to seize me; for that Rascally sort
of Caterpillars have been my undoing. Had not a man better dye by the Common
Hangman, than by the Hand of an Attorney? to be killed by Falsities, Quirks,
Cavils, Delays, Exceptions, Cheats, Circumventions: Yes, yes, And it must not
be denied, that these Makers of Matches, and Splitters of Causes, are the
Principal support of this Imperial Throne.

At these words, I raised my Eyes, and saw Death seated in her Chair of state,
with abundance of little Deaths crowding about her; As the Death of Love, of
Cold, Hunger, Fear, and Laughter; All, with their several Ensigns and Devices.
The Death of Love, I perceived, had very little Brain, and to keep her self in
Countenance, she kept Company with Pyramus and Thisbe; Hero and Leander, and
some Amadis's and Palmerins d' Oliva; all Embalmed, steeped in good Vinegar,
and well Dried. I saw a great many other sorts of Lovers too, that were
brought, in all Appearance, to their last Agonies, but by the singular Miracle
of self-Interest recovered, to the Tune of Will, if Looking well will not move
her, Looking Ill prevail?

The Death of Cold, was attended by a many Prelates, Bishops, Abbots, and other
Ecclesiastics; who had neither Wives, nor Children, nor indeed any body else
that cared for them, further than for their Fortunes. These, when they come to
a Fit of sickness, are Pillaged even to their sheets and Bedding, before ye can
say a Paternoster. Nay, many times they are stripped, e're they are Laid, and
destroyed for want of Clothes to keep them warm.

The Death of Hunger was encompassed with a Multitude of Avaritious Misers,
that were Cording up of Trunks; Bolting of Doors, and Windows; Locking up of
Cellars, and Garrets; and Nailing down of Trap-doors; Burying of Pots of Money,
and starting at every Breath of Wind they heard. Their Eyes were ready to drop
out of their heads, for want of sleep; their Mouths and Bellies complaining of
their Hands, and their Souls turned into Gold and Silver (the Idols they
adored.)

The Death of Fear, had the most Magnificent Train and Attendance, of all the
rest, being accompanied with a great number of Usurpers, and Tyrants, who
commonly do Justice upon Themselves, for the Injuries they have done to Others:
Their own Consciences doing the Office of Tormentors, and Avenging their
Public Crimes by their Private Sufferings; for they live in a perpetual
Anguish of Thought, with Fears and Jealousies.

The Death of Laughter, was the last of all, and surrounded with a Throng of
people, hasty to Believe, and slow to Repent; Living without fear of Justice,
and Dying without hope of Mercy. These are they that pay all their Debts and
Duties with a Jest. Bid any of them give every man his Due, and Return what he
has either Borrowed, or wrongfully taken, His Answer is, You Would make a man dye
with Laughing. Tell him, my Friend, You are now in years, Your dancing days
are done, and your Body is worn out; what should such a Scarecrow as you are,
do with a Bedfellow? Give over your Bawdy Haunts for shame, and do n't make a
man Glory of a Sin, when you're past the Pleasure of it, and your self upon all
Accounts contemptible into the Bargain. This Fellow (says He) would make a man
break his heart with Laughing. Come, come, say your Prayers, and bethink your
self of Eternity, you have one Foot in the Grave already, and it is high time to
fit your self for the other World. Thou will absolutely kill me with Laughing.
I tell thee I Am as sound as a Roche, and I do not Remember that ever I was
better in my Life. Others there are, that, let a man advise them upon their
Death Beds and even at the last Gasp, to send for a Divine, or to make some
handsome settlement of their Estates. Alas, Alas! they will cry; I have been as
bad as this many a time before, and (with Falstaffe's Hostess) I hope in the
Lord there is no need to think of him yet. These men are lost for ever, before
they can be brought to understand their Danger. This Vision wrought strangely
upon me, and gave me all the Pains and Marquis Imaginable of a true Repentance.
Well, (said I) since so it is, that man has but one life allotted him, and so
many Deaths; but one way into the World, and so many Millions out of it, I will
certainly at my Return make it more my Care than it has been to Live with a
Good Conscience, that I may dye with Comfort.

These last words were scarce out of my Mouth, when the Crier of the Court with
a loud Voice, Called out, The Dead, The Dead; Appear the Dead. And so
immediately, I saw the Earth begin to Move, and gently opening it self, to make
way, first for Heads and Arms, and then by Degrees for the whole Bodies of Men
and Women, that came out, half muffled in their Night-Caps, and ranged
themselves in excellent Order, and with a profound silence. Now (says Death)
let every one speak in his Turn; And in the instant, up comes One of the Dead
to my very Beard, with so much Fury and Menace, in his Face and Action, that I
would have given him half the Teeth in my Head for a Composition. These Devils
of the World (quoth he) what would they be at? my Masters, cannot a poor Wretch
be quiet in his Grave for ye? but ye must be Casting your Scorns upon him, and
charging him with things that upon my Soul, he is as Innocent of as the Child
that is Unborn. What hurt has he done any of you (ye Scoundrels you) to be thus
Abused. And I beseech you, Sir, said I (under your Favorable Correction) who
may you be? for I confess I have not the Honor either to Know or to understand
ye. I am (quoth he) the Unfortunate Tony, that has been in his Grave now this
many a fair year, and yet your wise Worships forsooth have not wit enough to
make your Selves and your Company merry, but Tony must still be one half of
your Entertainment and Discourse. When any man plays the Fool or the
Extravagant, presently He Is a Tony. Who drew this or that Ridiculous Piece?
Tony. Such or such a one was never well taught: No, he had a Tony to his
Master. But let me tell ye, He that shall call your Wisdoms to shrift, and take
a strict account of your words and actions, will upon the Upshot find you all a
Company of Tonys: and in Effect the Greater Impertinents. As for Instance; Did
I ever make Ridiculous Wills (as you do) to oblige others to pray for a man in
his Grave, that never prayed for Himself in his Life? Did I ever rebel against
my Superiors? Or, was I ever so arrant a Coxcomb, as by coloring my Cheeks and
Hair, to imagine that I could reform Nature, and make my Self young again? Can
ye say, that I ever put an Oath to a Lie? or, broke a solemn Promise, as you do
every day that goes over your Heads? Did I ever enslave my self to money? Or,
on the other side, make Ducks and Drakes with it? and squander it away in
Gaming, Revelling, and Whoring? Did my Wife ^ver wear the Breeches? Or, did I
ever marry at all, to be revenged of a false Mistress? Was I ever so very a
fool as to believe any man would be True to me, who had betrayed his Friend?
Or, to venture all my Hopes upon the Wheel of Fortune? Did I ever envy the
Felicity of a Court-life, that sells and spends all for a Glance? What pleasure
did I ever take in the lewd Discourses of Heretics and Libertines? Or, did I
ever List my self in the party, to get the name of a Gifted-Brother? Who ever
saw me Insolent to my Inferiors, or Basely Servile to my betters? Did I ever go
to a Conjurer, or to your Dealers in Nativities, and Horoscopes upon any
Occasion of Loss or Death? Now if you your selves be guilty of all these
Fopperies, and I innocent, I beseech ye where is the Tony? So that you see Tony
is not the Tony you take him for. But (to Crown his other Virtues) he is also
endued with so large a stock of Patience, that whoever needed it, had it for
the asking: Unless it were such as came to borrow money; or in Cases of Women,
that claimed Marriage of him; or Laquais that would be making sport with his
Bauble; and to These, He was as Resolute as John Florio.

While we were upon this Discourse, another of the Dead came marching up to me,
with a Spanish pace and gravity; and giving me a Touch of the Elbow; Look me in
the Face (quoth he with a stern Countenance) and know Sir, that you are not now
to have to do with a Tony. I beseech your Lordship (said I, saving your
Reverence) let me know your Honor, that I may pay my Respects accordingly; for
I must confess, I thought all people here had been, Hail fellow well met? I am
called (quoth he) by mortals, Queen Dick; and whether you know me or not, I Am
sure you will think of me often enough: and if the Devil did not possess ye, you
would let the Dead alone, and content your selves to persecute One Another. Ye
cannot see a High-crown'd Hat, a Threadbare Cloak, a Basket-hilt Sword, or a
Dudgeon Dagger, nay not so much as a Reverend Matron well stricken in years, but
presently ye cry This or That Is of the Mode or Date of Queen Dick. If ye were
not every Mother's Child of ye stark mad, ye would confess that Queen Dick's
were Golden-daies to those ye have had since, and it is an easy matter to prove
what I say. Will ye see a Mother now teaching her Daughter a Lesson of good
Government? Child (says she) you know that modesty is the great Ornament of
your Sex; wherefore be sure, when ye come in Company, that you don't stand
staring the men in the Face, as if ye were looking Babies in their Eyes, but
rather look a little Downward, as a Fashion of Behavior, more suitable to the
Obligations of your Sex. Downward? (says the Girl) I beseech you, Madam, Excuse
me: This was well enough in the Days of Queen Dick, when the poor Creatures
knew no better. Let the Men look downward toward the Clay of which they were
made, but Man was our Original, and it will become us to keep our Eyes upon the
matter from whence we came. If a Father give his Son in Charge, to Worship his
Creator, to say his Prayers Morning and Evening, to give Thanks before and
after Meat, to have a care of Gaming and Swearing. Ye shall have the Son make
Answer, that it is true, this was practiced in the time of Queen Dick; but it is
now quite out of Mode: And in plain English, men are better known now a days
by their Atheism and Blasphemy, than by their Beards.

Hereupon, Queen Dick withdrew, and then appeared a large Glass-bottle, wherein
was Luted up (as I heard) a famous Necromancer, hackt and minced according to
his own Order, to render him Immortal. It was boiling upon a Quick fire, and
the Flesh by little and little began to piece again, and made first an Arm,
then a Thigh, after That a Leg; and at last there was an entire Body, that
raised it self upright in the Bottle. Bless me (thought I!) what is here? A man
made of a Pottage, and brought into the world out of the Belly of a Bottle?
This Vision affrighted me to the very Heart; and while I was yet panting and
trembling, a voice was heard out of the Glass. In what year of our Lord are we.
1636 (quoth I) And welcome, said he; for it is the happy year I have longed for
this many a day. Who is it, I pray'e (quoth I) that I now see and hear in the
belly of this Bottle? I am (said he) the Great Necromancer of Europe; and
certainly you cannot but have heard both of my Operations in General, and of
this particular Design. I have heard talk of you from a Child (quoth I) but all
those stories I took only for old Wives Fables. You are the man then it seems:
I must confess that at first, at a Distance I took this bottle for the Vessel
that the Ingenious Rablais makes mention of; but coming near enough to see what
was in it, I did then imagine it might be some Philosopher by the fire, or some
Apothecary doing Penance for his Errors. In fine, it has cost me many a heavy
step to come hither, and yet to see so great a Rarity I cannot but think my
Time and Pains very well bestowed. The Necromancer called to me then to unstop
the Bottle, and as I was breaking the Clay to open it: Hold, Hold a little, He
cried; and I prithee tell me first how go squares in Spain? What Money? Force?
Credit? The Plate-Fleets go and come (said I) reasonably well; but the
Foreigners that come in for their snips have half spoiled the Trade. The
Genoeses run out as far as the mountains of Potoss, and have almost drained
them dry. My Child (quoth He) That Trade can never be secure and open, so long
as Spain has any Enemy that is Potent at Sea. And for the Genoeses, they will tell
you this is no Injustice at all, but on the Contrary, a new way of quitting old
scores, and justifying his Catholic Majesty for a good Play Master. I am no
Enemy to that Nation, but upon the Account of their Vices and Encrochments; and
I confess, rather than see these Rascals prosper, I Would turn my self into a
Bouillon again, as ye saw me just now; nay, I did not care if 'twere into a
Powder, though I ended my days in a Tobacco-box. Good Sir, (said I) comfort
your self, for these people are as miserable as you would wish them. You know they
are Cavaliers and Signeurs already, and now (forsooth) they have an Itch upon
them to be Princes: A vanity that gnaws them like a Cancer; and by drawing on
great Expenses, breeds a Worm in their Traffic, so that you will find little but
Debt and Extravagance at the foot of the Account. And then the Devils in them
for a Wench, insomuch, that it is well, if they bring both ends together; for
what is gotten upon the Change is spent in the Stews.

This is well (quoth the Necromancer) and I Am glad to hear it. Pray'e tell me
now, what price bears Honor and Honesty in the World? There Is much to be said
(quoth I) upon that point: but in brief, there was never more of it in Talk,
nor less in Effect. Upon my Honesty cries the Tradesman: Upon my Honor, says
his Lordship. And in a word, Every man has it, and Every thing is it, in some
disguise or other: but duly considered, there is no such thing upon the Face of
the Earth. The Thief says it is more Honorable to Take than Beg. He that asks
an Alms, pleads that it is Honester to Beg than Steal. Nay the False Witnesses
and Murderers themselves, stand upon their points, as well as their
Neighbors, and will tell ye that a Man of Honor will rather be buried alive
than Submit: (though they will not always do as they say) Upon the whole
matter, every man sets up a Court of Honor within himself; pronounces every
thing Honorable that serves his Purpose, and laughs at them that think
otherwise. To say the Truth, All things are now Topsy Turvy. A good Faculty in
Lying is a fair step to Preferment; and to Pack a Game at Cards, or help the
frail Dye, is become the Marque, and Glory of a Cavalier. The Spaniards were
heretofore, I confess, a very Brave, and well governed People: But they have
Evil Tongues among them now adays, that say they might even go to School to the
Indians to learn Sobriety, and Virtue. For they are not really Sober, but at
their own Tables, which indeed, is rather Avarice* than Moderation; for when
they Eat or Drink at another man's Cost, there are no greater Gluttons in the
World; and for Fudling, they shall make the best Pot-Companion in Switzerland
knock under the Table.

The Necromancer went on with his Discourse, and asked me what store of Lawyers,
and Atturneys in Spain at present? I told him, that the whole world swarmed
with them, and that there were of several sorts; some, by Profession; Others,
by Intrusion, and Presumption; and some again by Study, but not many of the
last, though indeed sufficient of every kind to make the People pray for the
Egyptian Locusts and Caterpillars in Exchange for that Vermin. Why then (quoth
the Necromancer) if there be such Plagues Abroad, I think I had best even keep
where I am. It is with Justice (said I) as with sick men; In time past, when we
had fewer Doctors (as well of Law as of Physic) we had more Right, and more
Health: but we are now destroyed by Multitudes, and Consultations, which serve
to no Other end than to inflame both the Distemper, and the Reckoning. Justice,
as well as Truth, went naked, In the Days of Old; One single Book of Laws and
Ordinances, was enough for the best Ordered Governments in the world. But the
Justice of our Age, is trickt up with Bills, Parchments, Writs, and Labels; and
furnished with Millions of Codes, Digests, Pandects, Pleadings, and Reports;
And what is their use, but to make wrangling a Science? and to Embroil us in
seditions, Suits, and Endless Trouble and Confusion. We have had more books
published this last Twenty years, than in a Thousand before, and there hardly
passes a Term without a New Author, in four or five Volumes at least under the
Titles of Glosses, Commentaries, Cases, Judgments, etc. And the great strife
is, who writes Most, not Best; so that the whole Bulk, is but a Body without a
Soul, and fitter for a Churchyard than a Study. To say the Truth, These
Lawyers and Sollicitors, are but so many Smoak-Merchants; Sellers of Wind, and
Troublers of the Public Peace. If there were no Atturneys, there would be no
Suits; if no Suits, No Cheats, No Sergeants; No Catchpoles, No Prisons; If no
Prisons, no Judges; No Judges, No Passion; No Passion, No Bribery or
Subornation.

See now what a Train of Mischiefs one wretched Pettyfogger draws after him! If
you go to him for Counsel, he hears your Story, Reads your Case, and tells you
very gravely: Sir, This is a Nice point, and would be well handled; We Will see
what the Law says. And then he runs ye over with his Eye and Finger, a matter
of a Hundred Volums, grumbling all the while, like a Cat that Claws in her Play
'twixt jest and Earnest. At last, down comes the Book, he shows ye the Law,
bids ye leave your Papers, and he will study the Question. But your Cause is very
good (says he) by what I see already, and if you will come again in the Evening,
or to morrow morning, I Will tell ye more. But pardon me, Sir, now I think on it,
I am so full of Business at present, It cannot be till Monday Next, and then
I Am for ye. When ye are to part, and that you come to the Greasing of his Fifth;
(The best Thing in the World both for the Wit, and Memory) Good Lord! Sir (says
he) what do ye Mean? I beseech you Sir; Nay, pray'e Sir, and if he spies you
drawing back, the Paw opens, seizes the Guinneys, and Good morrow Country man;
say thou me so? (quoth the good Fellow in the Glass) stop me up close again as
thou love me then: for the very Air of these Rascals will poison me, if ever
I put my Head out of this Bottle, till the whole Race of them be extinct. In
the mean time, take this for a Rule. He that would thrive by Law, must fee his
Enemies Counsel as well as his own.

But now ye talk of great Cheats; what News of the Venetians? Is Venice yet in
the World or no? In the World do ye say? Yes, marry Is It (said I) and stands
just where it did. Why then (quoth He) I prithee give it to the Devil from me
as a Token of my Love; for it is a Present equal to the severest Revenge.
Nothing can ever destroy that Republic but Conscience; and then you will say it is
like to be Long-lived; for if every man had his own, it would not be left worth
a Groat. To speak freely, it is an od kind of Commonwealth. It Is the very
Arsegut, the Drain and Sink of Monarchies, both in War and Peace. It helps the
Turk to Vex the Christians, and the Christians to Gall the Turk, and maintains
it self to torment Both. The Inhabitants are neither Mores nor Christians, as
appears by a Venetian Captain, in a Combat against a Christian Enemy: Stand
to it my Masters (says he) Ye were Venetians before ye were Christians.

Enough enough, of This, cried the Necromancer, and tell me, how stand the
people affected? what Malcontents and Mutiners? Mutiny (said I) is so
Universal a Disease, that every Kingdom is (in Effect) but a Great Hospital, or
rather a Bedlam (for all men are mad) to entertain the Disaffected. There Is no
stirring for me then (quoth the Necromancer) but pray'e commend me however to
those busy Fools, and tell them, that carry what Face they will, there is Vanity
and Ambition in the Pad. Kings and Princes have in their Nature much of Quick
silver. They are in perpetual Agitation, and without any Repose Press them too
hard, (that is to say beyond the Bounds of Duty and Reason) and they are lost.
Ye may observe, that your Guilders, and great Dealers in Quicksilver, are
generally troubled with the Palsy; and so should all Subjects Tremble that have
to do with Majesty, and better to do it at first, out of Respect, then
afterward, upon Force and Necessity.

But before I fall to pieces again, as you saw me even now (for better so than
worse) I beseech ye, One word more, and it shall be my Last. Who Is King of
Spain now? You know (said I) that Phillip the 3d. is Dead: Right (quoth he) A
Prince of Incomparable Piety, and Virtue (or my stars deceive me) After him,
(said I) came Philip the 4th. If it be so (quoth he) Break, break my Bottle
immediately, and help me out; for I am resolved to try my Fortune in the world
once again, under the Reign of that Glorious Prince. And with that word, he
dash't the Glass to pieces against a Rock, crept out of his Case and away he
ran. I had a good mind to have kept him Company; but as I was just about to
start, Let him go, let him go, cried one of the Dead; (and laid hold of my Arm)
He has Devilish Heels, and you will never overtake him.

So I staid, and what should I see next? but a wondrous Old Man, whose Name
might have been Bucephalus by his Head, and the Hair on his Face might very
well have stuffed a Couple of Cushions: take him together, and you will find his
Picture in the Map, among the Savages. I need not tell ye that I stared upon
him sufficiently; and he taking notice of it, came to me, and told me; Friend
(says he) My Spirit tells me that you are now in Pain to know who I am;
Understand, that my Name is Nostradamus. Are you the Author then (quoth I) of
that Gallimaufry of Prophecyes that is published in your Name? Gallimaufry
say thou? Impudent and Barbarous Rascal that thou art; to despise Mysteries,
that are above thy Reach, and to Revile the Secretary of the Stars, and the
Interpreter of the Destinyes; Who is so Brutal as to doubt the Meaning of these
Lines? From second Causes This I gather,
Naught shall befall us, Good, or Ill,
Either upon the Land, or Water,
But what the Great Disposer will.


Reprobated and besotted Villains that ye are! what greater blessing could
betide the world, then the Accomplishment of this Prophecy? would it not
Establish Justice and Holiness, and suppress all the vile suggestions, and
motions of the Devil? Men would not then any longer set their Hearts upon
Avarice, Cozening and Extortion; and make Money their God; That Vagabond Money,
that is perpetually trotting up and down like a wandering whore, and takes up
most commonly with the unworthy, leaving the Philosophers and Prophets, which
are the very Oracles of the Heavens (such as Nostradamus) to go barefoot. But
let us go on with our Prophecyes, and see if they be so frivolous and dark, as
the world reports them. When the married shall Marry,
Then the Jealous will be sorry.
And though Fools will be talking,
To keep their tongues walking;
No man runs well I find,
But with his Elbows behind.


This gave me such a Fit of Laughing, that it made me cast my nose up into the
Air, like a Stone-horse that had got a Mare in the Wind: Which put the
Astrologer out of all Patience. Buffon, and Dog-whelp, as ye are (quoth he)
There Is a Bone for you to pick; you must be snarling and snapping at every
thing. Will your Teeth serve ye now to fetch out the Marrow of this Prophecy?
Hear then in the Devils name, and be Mannerly. Hear, and Learn I say, and let us
have no more of that Grinning, unless ye have a mind to leave your Beard behind
he. Do you imagine that all that are Married, Marry? No, not the one half of
them. When you are Married, the Priest has done his part; but after that, to
Marry, is to do the Duty of a Husband. Alack! How many Married men live as if
they were single; and how many Batchelors on the other side, as if they were
Married! after the Mode of the Times. And Wedlock, to diverse Couples, is no
other than a more sociable state of Virginity. Here Is one half of my Prophecy
expounded already, now for the Rest. Let me see you run a little for
Experiment, and try if you carry your Elbows before or behind. You Will tell me
perhaps, that this is ridiculous, because every body knows it. A pleasant
shift: As if Truth were the worse for being Plain. The things indeed that you
deliver for Truths, are for the most part mere Fooleries and Mistakes; and it
were a hard matter to put Truth in such a Dress as would please ye. What have
ye to say now, either against my Prophecy or my Argument? not a Syllable I
warrant ye, and yet somewhat there is to be said, for There Is no Rule without
an Exception. Does not the Physician carry his Elbow before him, when he puts
back his hand to take his Patients Money? And away he is gone in a Trice, so
soon as He has made his Purchase. But to proceed, here is another of my
Prophecies for ye, Many Women shall be Mothers,
And their Babbies,
Their N'own Daddies.


What say ye to this now? are there not many Husbands do ye think (if the Truth
were known) that father more Children than their own? Believe me (Friend) A man
had need have good security upon a Woman's Belly, for Children are commonly made
in the Dark, and it is no easy matter to know the Workman, especially having
nothing but the woman's bare word for it. This is meant of the Court of
Assistance; And whoever Interprets my Prophesies to the Prejudice of any Person
of Honor, abuses me. You little think what a world of our Gay folks in their
Coaches and six, with Lacquies at their Heels by the Dozens, will be found at
the last Day, to be only the Bastards of some Pages, Gentlemen-ushers, or
Valets de Chamber of the Family; nay perchance the Physician may have had his
hand in the wrong Box, and in case of necessity, good Use has been made of a
Lusty Coachman. Little do you think (I say) how many Noble Families upon that
Grand Discovery, will be found Extinct for want of Issue.

I am now convinced (said I to the Mathematician) of the Excellency of your
Predictions; and I perceive (since you have been pleased to be your own
Interpreter) that they have more weight in them, than we were aware of. Ye
shall have one more (quoth he) and I have done. This Year, if I Have any skill
in the Weather,
Shall many a one take Wing with a Feather.


I dare say that your wit will serve ye now to Imagine, that I Am talking of
Rooks and Iack-daws; but I say, No. I speak of Lawyers, Attorneys, Clerks,
Scriveners, and their Fellows, that with the Dash of a Pen, can defeat their
Clients of their Estates, and fly away with them when they have done.

Upon these words Nostradamus Vanished, and some body plucking me behind, I
turned my face upon the most meager, melancholic Wretch that ever was seen,
and covered all in white. For pitty's sake (says he) and as you are a good
Christian, do but deliver me from the Persecution of these Impertinents and
Bablers that are now tormenting me, and I Will be your Slave for ever (casting
himself at my Feet in the same Moment, and crying like a Child.) And what art
thou (quoth I) for a miserable Creature? I am (says he) an Ancient, and an
Honest man, although defamed with a thousand Reproaches and Slanders: And in
fine, some call me Another, and others Somebody, and doubtless ye cannot but
have heard of me. As Somebody says, cries one, that has nothing to say for
himself; and yet till this Instant, I never so much as opened my mouth. The
Latins call me Quidam, and make good use of me to fill up Lines, and stop
Gaps. When you go back again into the World, I pray'e do me the Favor to own
that you have seen me, and to justify me for one that never did, and never
will either speak or write any thing, whatever some Tatling Idiots may pretend.
When they bring me into Quarrels and Brawles, I am called forsooth, A certain
Person: In their Intrigues, I know not who: and in the Pulpit, A certain
Author: and all this, to make a Mystery of my Name, and lay all their Fooleries
at my Door. Wherefore I beseech ye help me; which I promised to do. And so this
Vision withdrew to make Place for another,

And That was the most frightful piece of Antiquity that ever Eye beheld in the
shape of an Old Woman. She came nodding tow^rds me, and in a Hollow, Rattling
Tone (for she spoke more with her Chops, than her Tongue) Pray'e (says she) ^s
there not some body come lately hither from the other World? This Apparition,
thought I, is undoubtedly one of the Devils Scare-Crows. Her Eyes were so sunk
in their Sockets, that they looked like a pair of Dice in the bottom of a couple
of Red-boxes. Her Cheeks and the Soles of her Feet, were of the same
Complexion. Her mouth was pale, and open too; the better to receive the
Distillations of her Nose. Her Chin was covered with a kind of Goose-Down, as
Toothless as a Lamprey; and the Flaps of her Cheeks were like an Apes Bags; Her
Head danced, and her Voice at every word kept time to it. Her Body was veiled,
or rather wrapped up in a shroud of Cre'pe. She had a Crutch in one hand, which
served her for a Supporter; and a Rosary in the other, of such a length, that as
she stood stooping over it, a man would have thought she had been fishing for
Deaths Heads. When I had done gaping upon This Epitome of past-ages; Hola!
Grannum (quoth I, good lustily in her Ear, taking for granted that she was
deaf) what is your Pleasure with me? with that she gave a Grunt and being much
in wrath to be called Grannum, clapped a fair pair of Spectacles upon her Nose,
and pinking through them; I am, quoth she, neither Deaf, nor Grannum; but may
be called by my Name as well as my Neighbors (giving to understand, that Women
will take it ill to be called Old, even in their very Graves. As she spoke, she
came still nearer me, with her Eyes dropping, and the smell about her perfectly
of a Dead Body. I begged her Pardon for what was past, and for the future her
Name, that I might be sure to keep my self within the Bounds of Respect. I am
called (says she) Douegna, or Madam the Gouvernante. How Is that? quoth I, in a
great Amazement. Have ye any of those Cattle in this Country? Let the
Inhabitants pray heartily* for Peace then; and all little enough to keep them
quiet. But to see my mistake now. I thought the Women had dyed, when they came
to be Gouvernantes, and that for the punishment of a wicked World, the
Gouvernantes had been Immortal. But I am now better informed, and very glad
truly to meet with a Person I have heard so much talk of. For with us, Who but
Madam the Gouvernante, at every turn? Do ye see that Mumping Hag, cries One?
Come here ye Damned Jade cries Another. That Old Bawd, says a Third, has
forgotten, I warrant ye, that ever she was a Whore, and now see if we do not
remember ye: You do so, and I Am in your debt for your Remembrance, The Great
Devil be your Pay-masters, ye Son of a Whore, you; Are there no more
Gouvernantes than my self? Sure there are, and ye may have your Choice, without
Affronting me. Well, Well, (said I) have a little Patience, and at my Return,
I Will try if I can put things in better Order. But in the mean time, what
business have you here? her Reverence upon this was a little Qualified, and
told me, that she had now been eight hundred years in Hell, upon a Design to
erect an Order of the Gouvernantes; but the right Worshipful the
Devil-Commissioners, are not as yet come to any Re^olution upon the Point. For
say they, if your Gouvernantes should come once to settle here, there would
need no other Tormentors, and we should be but so many Iacks out of Office. And
besides, we should be perpetually at Daggers drawing about the Brands and
Candles-Ends which they would still be filching, and laying out of the way; and
for us to have our Fuel to seek, would be very Inconvenient. I have been in
Purgatory too (she said) upon the same Project, but there so soon as ever they
set eye on me, all the Souls cried out Unanimously, Libera Nos, etc. As for
Heaven That Is no place for Quarrels, Slanders, Disquiets, Heart-burnings, and
consequently None for Me. The Dea^ (...) none of my Friends neither, (...)
grumble, and bid me let (...) as they do me; and beg (...) world again if I
please, and there (they tell me) I may play the Gouvernante in saecula
saeculorum. But truly I had rather be here at my Ease, than spend my Life
crumpling, and brooding over a Carpet at a bedside, like a thing of Clouts, to
secure the Poultry of the Family from strange Cocks, which would now and then
have a Brush with a Virgin Pullet, but for the Care of the Gouvernantes. And
yet it is she, good woman, bears all the blame, in Case of any Miscarriage: The
Gouvernante was presently of the Plot, she had a Feeling in the Cause, a Finger
in the Pie. And it is she in fine that must answer for all. Let but a Sock, and
old Handkercher, the Greasy Lining of a Masque, or any such Frippery piece of
business be missing; Ask the Gouvernante for This, or for That. And in short,
they take us certainly for so many Storks, and Ducks, to gather up (...) the
filth about the house. The (...) look upon us as Spies and (...) Cousin
forsooth, and 'tothers (...) not come to the house, for (...) ^ouvernante. And
indeed I have made many of them Cross themselves, that took me for a Ghost. Our
Masters they curse us too, for Embroyling the Family. So that I have rather
Chosen to take up here, betwixt the Dead and the Living, than to return again
to my Charge of a Douegna, the very sound of the Name being more Terrible than
a Gibbet. As appears by one that was lately Travailing from Madrid, to
Vailladolid, and asking where he might lodge that night. Answer was made at a
small Village called Douegnas. But is there no other place (quoth he) within
some reasonable Distance, either short or beyond it. They told him no, unless
it were at a Gallows. That shall be my Quarter then (quoth he) for a thousand
Gibbets are not so bad to me as one Douegnas. Now ye see how we are abused
(quoth the Gouvernante) I hope you will do us some Right, when it lies in your
Power.

She would have talked me to Death, if I had not given her the slip upon the
removing of her Spectacles; but I could not escape so neither, for looking about
me for a Guide to carry me home again, I was arrested by one of the Dead; a
good proper Fellow, only he had a pair of Rams-horns on his head, and I was
about to salute him for Aries in the Zodiac: but when I saw him plant himself,
just before me, with his best Leg forward, stretching out his Arms, Clutching
his Fists, and looking as Sour as if He would have Eaten me without Mustard;
Doubtless, (said I) the Devil is Dead and This is He. No, No, cried a
by-stander, This is a man: Why then (said I) he is Drunk, I perceive, and
Quarrelsome in his Ale, for here is no body has touched him. With that as he was
just ready to fall on, I stood to my Guard, and we were armed at all points
alike, only he had the Ods of the Headpiece. Now, Sirrah, (says he) have at
ye, slave that you are to make a Trade of Defaming Persons of Honor. By the
Death that Commands here, I Will have my Revenge, and turn your skin over your
Ears: This Insolent Language stirred my Choler I confess, and so I called to
him; Come, come on, Sirrah; A little nearer yet, and if ye have a mind to be
twice killed, I Will do your business; who the Devil brought this Cornuto hither
to trouble me? The word was no sooner out, but we were immediately at it, Tooth
and Nail, and if his Horns had not been flatted to his head, I might have had
the worst on it. But the whole Ring presently came in to part us, and did me a
singular kindness in it, for my Adversary had a Fork, and I had none. As they
were staving and Tayling, you might have had more manners (cried one) than to
give such Language to your Betters, and to call Don Diego Moreno, Cuckold. And
is this That Diego Moreno then, said I,? Rascal that he is to charge me with
abusing persons of Honor. A Scoundrel (said I) that it is a shame for Death to
be seen in's Company, and was never fit for any thing in his whole life, but to
furnish matter for a Farce. And that is my Grievance, Gentlemen, (quoth Don
Diego) for which with your Leave he shall give me satisfaction. I do not stand
upon the matter of being a Cuckold, for there is many a Brave fellow lives in
Cuckolds-Row. But why does he not name others, as well as me? As if the Horn
grew upon no bodies head but mine: I Am sure there are Others that a Thousand
times better deserve it. I hope, he cannot say that ever I gored any of my
Superiors; or that my being Cornuted has raised the Price of Post-horns,
Lanthorns, or Pocket-Ink-horns. Are not shooing-horns, and Knife-handles as
cheap now as ever? Why must I walk the stage then more than my Neighbors?
Beyond question there never lived a more peaceable Wretch upon the face of the
Earth, all things considered, than my self. Never was man freer from Ielousy,
or more careful to step aside at the Time of Visit: for I was ever against the
spoiling of sport, when I could make None my self. I confess I was not so
charitable to the poor as I might have been; The truth often is, I watched them
as a Cat would do a Mouse, for I did not love them. But then in Requital, I
could have out-snorted the seven sleepers, when any of the better sort came to
have a word in private with my Wife. The short on it is, We agreed blessedly
well together, she and I; for I did whatever she would have me: and she would
say a Thousand and a Thousand times: Long live my poor Diego, the best
Conditioned, the most complaisant Husband in the World; whatever I do is well
done, and he never so much as opens his mouth Good or Bad. But by her leave
that was little to my Credit, and the Jade when she said it, was beside the
Cushion. For many and many a Time have I said, This is Well, and That Is Ill.
When there came any Poets to our house, Fiddlers or Morrice-Dancers, I would
say, This is not well. But when the Rich Merchants came; Oh very good, would I
say, This is as well, as well can be. Sometime we had the hap to be visited by
some Pennyless Courtier, or Low Country Officer perchance; then should I take
her aside, and Rattle her to some Tune: Sweetheart, would I say, Pray'e what
have we to do with these Frippery Fellows, and Damme Boys, shake them off, I Would
advise ye, and take this for a warning. But when any came that had to do with
the Mint, or Chequer, and spent freely, (for lightly come, lightly go) I marry,
my Dear (quoth I) there is nothing to be lost by keeping such Company. And what
hurt in all this now? Nay, on the Contrary, my poor Wife enjoyed her self
happily under the Protection of my shadow, and being a Femme Couverte, not an
Officer durst come near her. Why should then this Buffon of a Poetaster make me
still the Ridiculous Entertainment of all his Interludes and Farces, and the
Fool in the Play? By your Favor (quoth I) we are not yet upon even terms; And
before we part, you shall know what it is to provoke a Poet. If thou were but
now alive, I Would write the to Death, as Archilocus did Lycambes. And I Am resolved
to put the History of thy life in a Satyr, as sharp as Vinegar, and give it
the Name of The Life and Death of Don Diego Moreno; It shall go hard, (quoth
he) but I Will prevent That, and so We fell to it again, Hand and Foot, till at
length the very Fancy of a Scuffle waked me, and I found my self as weary, as
if it had been a Real Combat. I began then to reflect upon the Particulars of
my Dream, and to Consider what Advantage I might draw from it: for the Dead are
past fooling, and Those are the soundest Counsels, which we receive from such
as advise us without either Passion or Interest.

The end of the second Vision.
THE THIRD VISION OF THE LAST JUDGMENT.
HOmer makes Jupiter the Author, or Inspirer of Dreams; especially the Dreams
of Princes and Governors; and if the matter of them be pious and important.
And it is likewise the Judgment of the Learned Propertius, that Good Dreams
come from above, have their weight, and ought not to be slighted, And truly I
am much of his mind, in the Case of a Dream I had the other Night. As I was
reading a Discourse touching the End of the World, I fell asleep over the Book,
and Dreamt of The Last Judgment. (A thing which in the House of a Poet is
scarce admitted so much as in a Dream.) This Fancy minded me of a Passage in
Claudian; That all Creatures dream at Night of what they have heard and seen in
the Day: as the Hound dreams of Hunting the Hare.

Methought I saw a very handsome Youth towering in the Air, and sounding of a
Trumpet; but the forcing of his Breath did indeed take off much of his Beauty.
The very Marbles, I perceived, and the Dead obeyed his Call; for in the same
moment, the Earth began to open, and set the Bones at Liberty, to seek their
Fellows. The First that appeared, were Swordmen; As Generals of Armies,
Captains, Lieutenants* Common-Souldiers; who supposing that it had sounded a
Charge, came out of their Graves, methought, with the same Briskness and
Resolution, as if they had been going to an Assault or a Combat. The Misers put
their Heads out, all Pale and Trembling, for fear of a Plunder. The Cavaliers
and Good Fellows believed they had been going to a Horse-Race, or a
Hunting-match. And in fine, though they all heard the Trumpet, there was not
any Creature knew the meaning of it (for I could read their Thoughts by their
Looks and Gestures.) After This, there appeared a great many Souls; whereof
some came up to their Bodies, though with much Difficulty and Horror: Others
stood wondering at a Distance, not daring to come near so hideous and frightful
a Spectacle. This wanted an Arm, That an Eye, The Other a Head. Upon the whole,
though I could not but smile at the Prospect of so strange a variety of
Figures; yet was it not without just matter of Admiration at the All-powerful
Providence, to see Order drawn out of Confusion, and every part restored to the
right Owner. I Dreamt my self then in a Churchyard; and there, methought,
diverse that were loath to appear, were changing of Heads; and an Attorney would
have Demurrer upon Pretense that He had got a Soul was none of his Own, and
that his Body and Soul were not fellows.

At length, when the whole Congregation came to understand that This was the
Day of Judgment, it was worth the while, to observe what shifting and shuffling
there was among the Wicked. The Epicure and Whore-master would not own his
Eyes, nor the Slanderer his Tongue, because they would be sure to appear in
Evidence against them. The Pick-Pockets ran away as hard as they could drive
from their own Fingers. There was one that had been Embalmed in Egypt, and
staying for his Tripes, an Old Usurer asked him, if the Bags were to rise with
the Bodies? I could have laughed at this Question, but I was presently taken up
with a Crowd of Cut-purses, running full speed from their own Ears (that were
offered them again) for fear of the sad Stories they expected to hear. I saw
all this from a Convenient Standing; and in the Instant, There was an Outcry at
my Feet, Withdraw, Withdraw. The word was no sooner given, but down I came, and
immediately a great many Handsome Ladies put forth their Heads, and called me
Clown, for not paying them that Respect and Ceremony which belonged to their
Quality (now you must know that the Women stand upon their Pantoffles, even in
H^ll it self:) They seemed at first very Gay and Frolic; and truly, well
enough pleased to be seen Naked, for they were clea^-skin'd and well-made. But
when they came to understand that this was the great Day of Account; Their
Consciences took Check, and all the Jollity was dashed in a moment: Whereupon
they took to the Valley, miserably Listless and o^t of Humor: There was One
among the rest, that had had seven Husbands, and promised every one of them
never to marry again, for she could never love any thing else she was sure:
This Lady was casting about for Fetches, and Excuses, and what answer she
should make to that Point. Another that had been as Common as Ratcliff Highway,
would neither Lead nor Drive, and stood Huming and Hawing a good while,
pretending she had forgot her Night-Geer, and such Fooleries; but spite of her
heart, she was brought at last within sight of the Throne; where she found a
world of her old Acquaintance that she had carried part of their way to Hell;
who had no sooner set Eye on her, but they fell a Pointing and Hooting, that
she took up her Heels and Herded her self in a Troop of Sergeants. After This,
I saw a many People driving a Physician along the bank of a River, and these
were only such as He had unnecessarily dispatched before their time. They
followed him with Cries of, Justice, Justice, and forced him on toward the
Iudgment-Seat, where they arrived in the end with much ado. While This passed,
I heard, methought, upon my left hand a Paddling in the Water, as if one had
been Swimming: and what should this be, but a Judge in the middle of a River
washing and rinsing his hands, over and over. I asked him the meaning of it; and
he told me, that in his life time he had been often daubed in the Fist, to make
business slip the better, and he would willingly get out the Grease before he
came to hold up his hand at the Bar. There followed next a Multitude of
Vintners and Taylers, under the Guard of a Legion of Devils, armed with Rods,
Whips, Cudgels, and other Instruments of Correction: and These Counterfeited
themselves Deaf, and were very loath to leave their Graves, for fear of a worse
lodging. As they were passing on, up started a little Lawyer and asked whither
they were going; They made answer, that they were going to give an account of
their Works. With that the Lawyer threw himself flat upon his Belly in his hole
again: if I am to go downward at last (says he) I am thus much onward of my
way. The Vintner sweat as he walked, 'till one drop followed another; That Is
well done cried a Devil at's Elbow, to purge out thy water, that we may have
none in our Wine. There was a Tailor wrapped up in Sarcenets, crook-finger'd and
Baker-leg'd, spoke not one word all the way he went, but Alas! Alas! how can
any man be a Thief that dies for want of Bread? But his Companions gave him a
Rebuke for Discrediting his Trade. The next that appeared were a Band of
High-way-men, following upon the Heels one of another, in great Distrust and
Jealousy of Thieves among themselves. These were fetched up by a Party of
Devils in the turning of a Hand and lodged with the Taylers; for (said one of
the Company) your High-way-man is but a Wild Tailor. They were a little
Quarrelsome at first, but in the Conclusion, they went down into the Valley, and
Kennell'd quietly together. After these came Folly with her Gang of Poets,
Fiddlers, Lovers, and Fencers: the People of all the World, that Dream the least
of a Day of Reckoning; These were disposed of among the Hangmen, Jews, Scribes,
and Philosophers. There were also a great many Sollicitors wondering among
themselves, that they should have so much Conscience when they were Dead, and
none at all Living. In fine, the Word was given, Silence.

The Throne being erected, and the great Day come: a Day of Comfort to the
Good, and of Terror to the Wicked. The Sun and the Stars waited on the
Footstool; the Wind was still; the Water quiet; the Earth in suspense and
Anguish for fear of her Children: And in brief, the whole Creation was in
Anxiety and Disorder. The Righteous they were employed in Prayers and
Thanksgivings; and the Ungodly in framing of Shifts and Evasions, to Extenuate
their Pains. The Guardian Angels were at hand, on the one side to acquit
themselves of their Duties and Commissions. And on the other side, were the
Devils hunting for more matters of Aggravation and Charge against Offenders.
The Ten Commandments had the Guard of a Narrow-Gate, which was so strait, that
the most mortified body could not pass it, without leaving a good part of his
skin behind him.

On one Hand, there were in Multitudes; Disgraces, Misfortunes, Plagues,
Griefs, and Troubles; All in a Clamor against the Physicians. The Plague
Confessed indeed, that she had struck many; but 'twas the Doctor did their
business. Melancholy and Disgrace said the like; and Misfortunes of all sorts
made open Protestation, that they never brought any man to his Grave, without
the Help and Advice of a Doctor. So that the Gentlemen of the Faculty were
called to Account for those they had killed. They took their Places upon a
Scaffold, with Pen, Ink, and Paper about them; and still as the Dead were
called, some or other of them answered to the Name, and declar^d the Year and
Day when such a P^tient passed through his Hand.

They began the Inquiry at Adam, who, methought, was severely chidden about an
Apple. Alas! (cried Judas that was by) if that were such a fault, what will
become of me that sold and betrayed my Lord and Master? Next came the
Patriarchs, and then the Apostles, who took their Places by St. Peter. It was
worth the Noting, that at this Day there was no Distinction between Kings and
Beggars, before the Iudgment-Seat. Herod and Pilate, so soon as they put out
their Heads, found it was like to go hard with Them. My Judgment is Just (quoth
Pilate.) Alack! (cried Herod) What am I to trust to? Heaven is no place for me,
and in Limbo I should fall among the Innocents I have murdered; so that without
more ado I must even take up my Lodging in Hell: The Common Receptacle of
notorious Malefactors.

There came in immediately upon this, a kind of a sour rough-hewn fellow; Look
ye (says he) stretching out his Arm, here are my Letters. The Company wondered
at the Humor, and asked the Porter what he was; which he himself over-hearing,
I am (quoth he) a Master of the Noble Science of Defense: and plucking out
several sealed Parchments, These (said he) are the Attestations of my Exploits.
At which word, all his Testimonials fell out of his Hand, and a Couple of
Devils would fain have whipped them up, to have brought them in Evidence against
him at his Trial; but the Fencer was too Nimble for Them, and took them Up
himself. At which time, an Angel offered him his Hand to help him in; but He,
for fear of an Attaque, leapt a step backward, and with great agility, alonging
withal, Now (says he) if ye think fit, I Will give ye a Taste of my skill. The
Company fell a laughing, and This Sentence was past upon him; That since by his
Rules of Art He had occasioned so many Duels and Murders, He should Himself go
to the Devil by a Perpendicular Line. He pleaded for Himself, that He was no
Mathematician, and knew no such Line: but while the word was in his Mouth a
Devil came up to him, gave him a turn and a half, and down he Tumbled.

After Him, came the Treasurers, and with such a Cry following them, for what
they had Cheated and Stolen; that some said, the Thieves were coming; Others
said No; And the Company was divided upon it; They were much troubled at the
word, Thieves, and desired the Benefit of Counsel to plead their Cause. And
very good Reason (said one of the Devils) Here Is a Discarded Apostle that has
Executed both Offices, Let them take him, Where Is Judas? When the Treasurers
heard that, They turned aside, and by chance, spied in a Devil's Hand, a Huge
Roll of Accusations ready drawn into a formal Charge against them. With That,
One of the bold^st among them: Away, Away (cried he) with these Informations;
We Will rather come in and Compound, though i^ were for Ten or Twenty Thousand
years in Purgatory. Ha! Ha! (quoth the Devil, a cunning Snap that drew up the
Charge) If ye are upon those Terms, ye are hard put to it. Whereupon the
Treasurers, being brought to a forced Put, were even glad to make the best of a
bad bargain, and follow the Fencer*

These were no sooner gone, but in came an unlucky Pastry-man; They asked him,
if he would be tried. That Is even as't hitts; (said he) At that Word, the Devil
that managed the Cause against him, pressed his Charge, and laid it Home to him,
that He had put off Catts for Hares; and filled his Pyes, with Bones instead of
Flesh; and not only so, but that he had sold Horseflesh, Dogs and Foxes for
Beef and Mutton. Upon the Issue, it was proved against him, that Noah never had
so many Animals in his Ark as this poor fellow had put in his Pyes, (for we
read of no Rats and Mice there) so that he even gave up his Cause, and went
away to see if his Oven were hot. Next, came the Philosophers with their
Syllogisms, and it was no ill Entertainment, to hear them Chop Logic, and put
all their Expostulations, in Mood and Figure. But the Pleasantest people in the
World, were the Poets; who insisted upon it, that they were to be tried by
Jupiter: And to the Charge of Worshipping false Gods, their Answer was, that
through Them they worshiped the True. One, and were rather mistaken in the
Name, than in the Worship. Virgil had much to say for himself, for his
Sicelides Musae; But Orpheus interrupted him; who being the Father of the
Poets, desired to be heard for them all. What, He? (cried one of the Devils)
Yes; for teaching that Boys were better Bed-fellows than Wenches; But the
Women had combed his Coxcomb for him, if they could have Caught him. Away with
him to Hell Once again then they cried; and let him get out now if He can. So
they all filled off, and Orpheus was their Guide, because he had been there once
before. So soon as the Poets were gone, there knocked at the Gate a Rich
Penurious Chuffe; but 'twas told him, that the Ten Commandments kept it, and
that he had not kept them. It is Impossible (quoth he) under favor, to prove
that ever I broke any One of them. And so He went to Justify himself from Point
to Point: He had done This and That; and He had never done That, nor The Other;
but in the End, he was delivered over to be ^ewarded according to his Works.
And then came on, a Company of House-breakers, and Robbers: so Dextrous, some
of them* that they saved themselves from the very Ladder. The Scriveners, and
Atturneys, observing That; Ah! thought they; if we could but pass for Thieves
now! And yet they set a Face good enough upon the Business too. And then Judas,
and Mahomet, taking Notice of their Confidence, began to hope well of
Themselves; for (said they) We are well enough, if any of these fellows come
off, whereupon they advanced boldly, with a Resolution to take their Trial:
Which set the Devils all a laughing. The Guardian-Angels of the Scriveners, and
Atturneys, moved that the Evangelists might be of their Counsel; which the
Devils opposed; for (said they) we shall insist only upon matter of Fact, and
leave them without any possibility of Reply, or Excuse. We might indeed content
our selves with the bare proof of what they are; for it is Crime enough that
they are Scriveners, and Atturneys. With That, the Scriveners denied their
Trade, alleging that they were Secretaries; and the Atturneys called themselves
Sollicitors. All was said, in Effect, that the Case would bear; but the best
part of their Plea was Church Membership. And in fine, after several
Replications, and Rejoynders, they were all sent to Old Nick; save only Two or
Three, that found Mercy. Well (cried one of the Scriveners) This it is to keep
ill Company. The Devils called out then, to clear the Bar, and said they should
have occasion for the Scriveners Themselves, to enter Protestations in the
Quality of Public Notaries, against Lawless and Disorderly people: but the
poor Wretches it seems, could not hear on that Ear. To say the Truth, the
Christians were much more troublesome, than the Pagans, which the Devils took
exceedingly Ill; but they had This to say for themselves, that they were
Christened when they were Children, so that 'twas none of their Fault, and
their Parents must answer for it. Judas, and Mahom^t took such Courage, when
they saw two or three of the Scriveners, and Atturneys saved, that they were
just upon the point of Chal^^^ging their Clergy; but they were prevented by the
Doctor I told ye of, who was set first to the Bar, in Company with an
Apothecary, and a Barber, when a Certain Devil, with a great Bundle of
Evidences in his hand, informed the Court, that the greatest part of the Dead
there present, were sent thither by the Doctor then at the Bar, in Confederacy
with his Apothecary, and Barber, to whom they were to acknowledge their
Obligation for that fair Assembly. An Angel then interposing for the Defendent,
recommended the Apothecary for a Charitable Person, and one that Physick'd the
Poor for nothing; No matter for that, (cried the Devil); for I have him in my
Books, and am able to prove, that he has killed more people with two little
Boxes, then the King of Spain has done with two thousand Barrels of Powder, in
the Low-Country-Wars. All his Medicines are corrupted, and his Compositions
hold a perfect Intelligence with the Plague: He has utterly unpeopled a Couple
of his Neighbor Villages, in a matter of three weeks time. The Doctor, he let
fly upon the 'Pothecary too, and said, He would maintain against the whole
College, that his Prescriptions were according to the Dispensatory: And if an
Apothecary would play the Knave, or the Fool, and put in This, for That, he
could not help it. So that without any more words, The 'Pothecary was put to
the Summer-salt, and the Doctor and Barber, were brought off, at the
Intercession of St. Cosmus, and St. Damian. After these, came a Dapper Lawyer,
with a Tongue steeped in Oil, and a great Master of his Words, and Actions; A
most Exquisite Flatterer, and no man better skilled in the Art of moving the
Passions than himself; or more ready at bolting a Lucky President at a dead
lift; or at making the best of a Bad Cause; for he had all the shifts and
starting-holes in the Law at his Fingers Ends: but all this would not serve,
for the Verdict went against him, and He was Ordered to pay Costs. In that
Instant, there was a Discovery made of a fellow that hid himself in a Corner,
and looked like a Spy. They asked him, what he was? He made Answer, An Empirick;
what (said a Devil) my Old Friend Pontaeus: Alas! Alas! Thou had ten thousand
time^ better be in Covent Garden now, or at Charing Cross; for upon my word
thou't have nothing to do here, unless, perhaps, for an Ointment for a Burn, or
so; And so Pontaeus went his way. The next that appeared, were a Company of
Vintn^rs, who were accused for Adulterating, and mingling Water with their
Wines. Their Plea was, that in Compensation they had furnished the Hospitals
with Communion-Wine that was Right, upon Free Cost; but this Excuse signified
as little, as that of the Tailors there present, who suggested, that they had
Clothed so many Friars, Gratis; and so they were dispatched away together.
After These, followed a Number of Banquiers, that had turned Bankrupt, to
cosen their Creditors; who finding there several of their old Correspondents,
that they had reduced to a Morsel of Bread, began to treat of Composition: but
One of the Devils presently cried out, All the Rest have had enough to do to
answer for themselves; but these people are to Reckon for other men's scores,
as well as their own. And hereupon, they were forthwith sent away to Pluto with
Lette^s of Exchange; but as it happened at That time, the Devil was out of Cash.

After this, entered a Spanish Cavalier, as Upright, as Justice it self. He was
a matter of a Quarter of an hour, in his Legs, and Reverences, to the Company.
We could see no Head He had, for the Prodigious starcht Band he wore, that
st^od staring up like a Turkey-Cock's ^ayl, and Covered it. In fine, It was so
Fantastic a Figure, that the Porter stood staring at it, and ask't if it were
a Man, or No? It is a Man (quoth the Spaniard) upon the Honor of a Cavalier,
and his name is Don Pedro Rhodomontadoso, etc. He was so long a telling his
Name, and Titles, that one of the Devils burst out a laughing in the Middle of
his Pedigree, and demanded, What he would be at. Glory; (quoth he) which they
taking in the worse sense, for Pride, sent him away immediately to Lucifer. He
was a little severe upon his Guides, for disordering his Mustachoes, but they
helped him presently to a pair of Beard-Irons to set Him Right, and all was
well again.

In the next place, came a fellow, weeping, and wayling; but my Masters, (says
he) my Cause is never the worse for my Crying, for if I would stand upon my
Merits, I could tell ye that I have kept as good Company, and had as much to do
with the Saints, as another Body. What have we here (cried one) Dioclesian, or
Nero? for They had enough to do with the Saints, though 'twere but to persecute
Them. But upon the Upshot, what was this poor Creature, but a small Officer,
that swept the Church, and dusted the Images and Pictures. His Charge, was for
stealing the Oil out of the Lamps, and leaving all in the Dark; pretending that
the Owls, and Iack-daws had drunk it up. He had a Trick too of Clothing
himself out of the Church-habits, which he got new-dy'd; And of Crumming his
Porrege with Consecrated Bread, that he stole every Sunday. What He said for
Himself, I know not: but he had his Mittimus, and took the Left Hand way at
parting.

With that, a voice was heard, Make way there, Clear the Passage: And this was
for a Bevy of handsome, buxsome Bona Roba's, in their Caps and Feathers, that
came dancing, laughing, and singing of Ballads and Lampoons, and as merry as
the Day was long. But They quickly changed their Note, for so soon as ever they
saw the Hideous Looks of the Devils, they fell into Violent Fits of the Mother;
Beating their Breasts, and Tearing their Hair, with all theHorror and Fury
Imaginable. There was an Angel offered in their Favor, that they had been
great Frequenters of Our Lady's Chapel. Yes, yes (cried a Devil) less of her
Chapel, and more of herVirtue, would have done well. There was a Notable
Whipster, among the rest, that confessed, the Devil had reason. And then her
Trial came on, for making a Cloak of a Sacrament; and only Marrying, that she
might play the Whore with Privilege, and never want a Father for her Bastards.
It was her fortune alone to be condemned; and going along, well, she cried! If
I had thought, 'twould have come to This, I should never have troubled my self
with so many Masses*

And now, after long waiting, came Judas and Mahomet upon the Stage, and to
them Jack of Leyden: Up comes an Officer, and asked which of the Three was
Judas? I am He, quoth Jack of Leyden. Nay, but I am Judas cried Mahomet.
They Are a Couple of Lying Rascals, says Judas himself, for I am the man: only
the Rogues make use of my Name to save their Credit. It Is True I sold my Master
Once, and the World has ever since been the better for it: But these Villains
sell Him and Themselves too, every hour of the Day, and there follows nothing
but Misery and Confusion. So they were all Three packt away to their Disciples.

The Angel that kept the Book, found that the Sergeants and Remembrancers were
to come on next; whereupon they were called, and appeared: but the Court was
not much troubled with them, for they confessed Guilty at first word, and so were
tied up without any more ado.

The next that appeared was an Astrologer, laden with Almanacks, Globes,
Astrolabes, etc. making Proclamation as loud as He could bawl, that there must
needs be a gross Mistake in the Reckoning, for Saturn had not finished his
Course, and the world could not be yet at an End. One of the Devil^ that saw
how he came provided, and looked upon him as his own already: A Provident Slave
(quoth he) I warrant him, to bring his firing along with him. But This I must
needs tell ye, (says he to the Mathematician) It Is a strange thing, ye should
create so many Heavens in your Life, and go to the Devil for want of one after
your Death. Nay, for Going, (cried the Astrologer) ye shall excuse me; but if
you will Carry me, Well and Good. And immediately Order was given to carry him
away and Pay the Porter.

Hereupon methought, the Court rose, the Throne Vanished; the Shadows and
Darkness withdrew; the Air sweetened; the Earth was covered with Flowers; the
Heavens Clear: And then I waked; not a little satisfied to find that after all
this, I was still in my Bed, and among the Living. The Use I made of my Dream
was this: I betook my self presently to my Prayers, with a firm Resolution of
changing my life, and putting my Soul into such a Frame of Piety and Obedience,
that I might attend the coming of the Great Day with Peace and Comfort.

The end of the third Vision.
THE FOURTH VISION OF LOVING FOOLS.
ABout four a Clock, in a Cold Frosty Morning, when it was much better being in
a Warm Bed, with a good Bedfellow, then upon a Biere in the Churchyard; as I
lay advising with my Pillow, Tumbling and Tossing a Thousand Love-Toyes in my
Head, I past from one Phansy to another, till at last, I f^ll into a slumber;
and there appeared the Genius of Disabuse; Laying before me all the Follies,
and Vanities of Love; and supporting her Opinions, with great Authorities, and
Reasons. I was carried then (methought I knew not how) into a fair Meadow: A
Meadow, pleasant and agreeable infinitely beyond the very Fictions of your
half-witted Poets, with all their far-fetch't Gildings, and Enamellings (for a
Paper of Verses is worth nothing with them, unless they force Nature for it, and
Riffle both the Indies. This Delicious Field was watered with two Riv'lets; the
One, Bitter; the Other, Sweet; and yet they mingled their streams with a pretty
kind of Murmur, Equal perhaps to the best Music in the World. The use of these
Waters was, (as I observed) to temper the Darts of Love; for while I was upon
the Prospect of the Place, I saw several of Cupid's little Officers, and
subjects, dipping of Arrows there, for their Entertainment, and Ease. Upon
this, I Phansy'd my self in one of the Gardens of Cyprus, and that I saw the
very Hive, where the Be lived, that stung my Young Master, and occasioned that
Excellent Ode which Anacreon has written upon the Subject. The next thing I
cast my Eye upon, was a Palace, in the Midst of the Meadow; a rare piece, as
well for the Structure, as Design. The Porches, were of the Doric Order,
excellently wrought; And the Pedestals, Bases, Columns, Cornishes, Capitals,
Architraves, Freezes (and in short the whole Front of the Fabric) was
Beautified with Imaginary Trophies, and Triumphs of Love, in Half Relief, which
as they were intermixed with other Fantastic works and Conceits, carried the
face of several little Histories, and gave a great Ornament to the Building.
Over the Porch, there was in Golden Letters, upon black Marble, This
Inscription. This is called Fools Paradise,
From the Loving Fools that dwell in it,
Where the great Fools rule the Less,
The Rest Obey, and all do well in it.


The Finishing, and Materials were pleasant to Admiration. The Portal,
spacious; the Doors, always open, and the House free to all Comers, which were
very many; the Porter's place was supplied by a Woman; Exquisitely handsome,
both for Face and Person; Tall; Delicately shaped, and set off with great
Advantages of Dress, and Jewels. She was made up in fine, of Charms, and her
Name (as I understood) was Beauty. She would let any man in to see the House
for a Look; and that was all I paid for my Passage. In the first Court, I found
a many of Both Sexes, but so altered in habit, and Countenance, that they could
scarce know one another. They were sad, Pensive; and their Complexions teinted
with a yellow Paleness (which Ovid calls Cupid's Livery) There was no talk of
being True to Friends; Loyal to Superiors; and Dutiful to Parents: But Kindred
did the Office of Procurers; and Procurers were called Cousins. Wives loved
their Husbands She-Friends, and Husbands did as much for Them, in loving their
Gallants.

While I was upon the Contemplation of these Encounters of Affection, their
appeared a strange Extravagant figure, but in the likeness of a Humane
Creature. It was neither perfectly Man, nor perfectly Woman, but had indeed a
Resemblance of Both. This Person I perceived was Ever busy, up and down, going
and coming; beset all over with Eyes and Ears, and had one of the Craftiest
distrustful Looks (methought) that ever I saw. And withal (as I observed) no
small Authority in the Place, which made me enquire after this Creature's Name,
and Office. My Name (quoth she) for now it proved to be a Woman) is Ielousy,
and methinks, you and I should be better acquainted, for how come you here
else? However, for your satisfaction; you are to understand that the greater
part of the Distempered people you see here, are of my bringing; and yet I am
not their Physician, but their Tormentor; and serve only to aggravate, and
Embitter their Misfortunes. If you would know any thing further of the House,
never ask me, for it is Forty to One I shall tell you a Lie; I have not told you
half the Truth even of my self; and to deal plainly with you, I am made up of
Inventions, Artifice, and Imposture: But the Good Old man that walks there, is
the Major Domo, and will t^ll you all, if you will but bear with his slow way
of Discourse.

Thereupon I went to the Good Man, whom I knew presently to be Time: and
desired him ^o let me look into the several Quarters and Lodgings of the House,
for there were some Fools of my Acquaintance there I Would fain Visit; He told me
that he was at present so busy about making of Candles, Cockbroths, and
Gellies for his Patients, that he could not stir; but yet he directed me where
I might find all those I inquired for, and gave me the freedom of the House to
walk at pleasure.

I past out of the First Court, into the Maids-Quarter, which was the very
strongest part of the whole Building; and so't had need; for diverse of the
Young Wenches were so Extravagant and Furious, that no other place would have
held them. (The Wives and Widows were in another Room apart.) Here ye should
have One, sobbing and raging with Jealousy of a Rival. There Another, Stark mad
for a Husband; and inwardly bleeding because she durst not discover it. A Third
was writing of Letters all Riddle and Mystery, Mending and Marring, till at
last the Paper had more blots than whole words in it. Some were practicing in
the Glass the Gracious Smile, the Roll of the Eye, the Velvet Lip, etc. Others
again were in a Diet of Oatmeal, Clay, Chalk, Cole, Hard Wax, and the like.
Some were conditioning with their Servants for a Ball, or a Serenade, that the
whole Town might ring of the Address. Yes, yes, they cried, You can go to the
Park with This Lady, and to a Play with That Lady, and to Banstead with The Other
Lady, and spend whole Nights at Best or Ombre with my Lady Pen-Tweezel; but by
my Troth, I think you are ashamed to be seen in my Company. Some I saw upon the
very point of Sealing and Delivering. I am Thine (cries one) and Thine Alone, or
let all the Devils in Hell, etc. But be sure you be Constant. If I he not (says
he) let my Soul, etc. and the silly Jade believes him. In one Corner ye should
have them praying for Husbands, that they might the better love at Random: In
another, nothing would please them but to be Marry'd-Mens Wives, and this
Disease was looked upon as a little Desperate. Some again stood ready furnished
with Love Letters and Tickets to be cast out at the Window, or thrust under the
Door, and These were looked upon not only as Fools but Beasts.

I had seen as much already as I desired, for I had learnt of Old, that He that
keeps such Company, seldom comes off without a scratcht face: but if he misses
a Mistress, he gets a Wife, and stands condemned to a Repentance during Life,
without Redemption, unless One of the Two dies. For Women in the Case are worse
than Pirates; a Gally-Slave may compound for his Freedom, but there is no thought
of Ransom in Case of Wedlock. I had a good mind to a little Chat with some of
them, but (thought I) they will Fancy I Am in Love wi^h them. And so I even
marched off into the Married Quarter.

Where there was such Ranting, Damning, and Tearing, as if Hell had been broke
l^os^. And what was all This? but a number of women that had been locked up and
shackl'd by their Husbands, to keep them in Obedience, and had now broken their
Prisons, and their Chains, and were grown ten times madder than before. Some I
saw Caressing and Cokesing their Husbands, in the very moment they designed to
betray them. Others were picking their Husbands Pockets to pay now and then for
a By-Blow. Some again were upon a Religious point, and all upon the Humor
(forsooth) of Pilgrimages and Lectures; when alas! they had no other business
with the Altars or Churches, than a Sacrifice to Venus, or a Love-meeting.
Diverse there were that went to the Bath; but Bathing was the least part of
their Errand. Others to Confession, that mistook their Martyr for their
Confessor: Some to be revenged of Ielous Husbands, were resolving to do the
thing they feared; and pay them in their Coin. Others were for making sure
aforehand by way of Advance; for that is the Revenge, they say, that is as sweet
as Muscadine and Eggs. One was Melancholy for a Delay; Another for a Defeat; a
Third is preparing to make her Market at a Play. There was One among the rest,
was never out of her Coach; and asking her the Reason, she told me, she loved
^o be ^olted. In this Crowd of Women, you mu^t know that there were no Wives of
Ambassadors, Soldiers, or Merchants that were abroad upon Commission; f^r such
were considered in effect as single Women, and not allowed as members of this
Commonwealth.

The next Quarter was that of the Grave and Wise; the Right Reverend Widows;
Women in appearance of Marvelous severity and reserve, and yet every One of
them had her weak side, and ye might read her Folly and Distemper through her
Disguise. One of them I saw crying with one Eye for the loss of one Husband,
and laughing with the other upon him that was to come next. Another, with the
Ephesian Matron, was making the best of a bad Game, and solacing her self with
her Gallant, before her Husband was thorough cold in the mouth; considering,
that he that died half an hour ago, is as dead as William the Conqueror. There
were several others passing to and again, quite out of their mourning, that
looked so demurely (I warrant ye) as if Butter would not have melted in their
mouths, and yet Apostate Widows (as I was told) and there they were kept as
strictly, as if they had been in the Spanish Inquisition. Some were laying
wagers, whose mourning was most a-la-mode, and best made; or whose Peak or Veil
became her Best: and setting themselves off with a Thousand tricks of Ornament
and Dress. The Widows I observed that were marching off, with the marque out
of their mouths, were hugely concerned to be thought Young, and still talking
of Masks, Balls, Fiddles, Treats; Chanting and Iigging to every tune they
heard, and all upon the Hoyty-Toyty like mad wenches of fifteen. The Younger,
on the other side, made use of their time and took pleasure while 'twas to be
had. There were too of the Religious strain; a people much at their Beads, and
in private; and These were there in the Quality of Love-Hereticks, or
Platonicks, and under the Penance of perpetual Abstinence from the Flesh they
loved best (which is the most Mortifying Lent of all Other) Some, that had
skill in Perspective, were before the Glass with their Boxes of Patch and Paint
about them; Shadowing, Drawing out, Refreshing, and in short, Covering and
Palliating, all the Imperfections of Feature and Complexion, every one after
her own Humor. Now these women were absolutely insufferable, for they were
most of them Old and Headstrong, having got the better of their Husbands, so
that they would be taking upon them to domineer here, as they had done at home;
and indeed, they found the Master of the College enough to do.

When I had tired my self with this Variety of Folly and Madness, I went to the
Devotes; where I found a great many women and girls that had Cloystered up
themselves from the Conversation of the World; and yet were not a jot soberer
than their Fellows. These one would have thought might have been easily cured,
but many of them were in for their Lives, in despite of Either Counsel or
Physic. The Room where they were was Barricado'd with strong Bars of Iron; and
yet when the Toy took them, They Would make now and then a Sally: for when the Fit
was upon them, they would own no Superior but Love, come what would on it in the
Event. The greater part of these good People, were writing of Tickets and
Dispatches, which had still the sign of the Cross at the Top, and Satan at the
Bottom, concluding with This, or some such Postscript; I commend this Paper to
your Discretion. The Fools of This Province would be Twatling Night and Day;
and if it happened that any one of them had talked her self a weary, (which was
very rare) she would presently take upon her very gravely to admonish the Rest,
and read a Lecture of Silence to the Company. There were some that for want of
better Entertainment fell in Love with one another; but these were looked upon
as a sort of Fops and Ninnys, and therefore the more favorably used; but
they would have been of another mind, if they had known the Cause of their
Distemper.

The Root of all these several Extravagancies was Idleness, which (according to
Petrarch's Observation) never fails to make way for wantonness. There was One
among the Rest, that had more Letters of Exchange upon the Credit of her
insatiable desires, than a whole Regiment of Banquiers. Some of them were sick
of their Old Visiter, and called for a Freshman. Others, by Intervals, I
perceived had their wits about them, and contented themselves discreetly with
the Physician of the House. In short, It even pitied my heart to see so many
poor people in so sad a Condition, and without any hope of Relief, as I
gathered from him that had them in care: for they were still Puddering and
Royling their Bodies; and if they got a little Ease for the present, they would be
down again, as soon as they had taken their Medicine.

From thence, I went to the single women (such as made Profession never to
marry) which were the least Outrageous, and discomposed of all; for they had a
thousand ways to Lay the Devil as well as to Raise him. Some of them lived
like common Highway men, by Robbing Peter to Pay Paul; and stripping honest
men to cloth Rascals, which is (under favor) but a lewd kind of Charity.
Others there were, that were absolutely out of their seven senses, and as Mad
as March-Hares for This Wit, and the other Poet; that never failed to pay them
again in Rimes, and Madrigals, with Ruby Lips; Pearly Teeth: so that to read
their Ver^es, a man would swear the whole woman to be directly Petrified. Of
Saphir fair, or Crystal clear,
Is the Forehead of my Dear, etc.


I saw One in Consultation with a Cunning man to know her Fortune; Another,
dealing with a Conjurer for a Philtre, or Drink to make her Beloved. A Third
was dawbing and patching up an Old ruin'd-Face, to make it fresh and young
again: but she might as well have been washing of a Blackmoor to make him
White. In fine, a world there were, that with their borrowed Hair, Teeth, Eyes,
Eyebrows, looked like fine folks at a Distance, but would have been left as
Ridiculous, as AEsop's Crow, if every Bird had fetched away his own Feather.
'Deliver me (thought I, smiling and shaking my head) if This be Woman.

And so I step't into the Men's Quarter which was but next door, and only a
Thick Wall between. Their great Misery was that they were deaf to good advice,
obstinately hating, and despising both Physic, and Physician: for if they
would have either quitted, or changed, they might have been cured. But they
chose rather to dye, and though they saw their Error, would not mend it. Which
minded me of the Old Rhyme: Where Love's in the Case,
The Doctor's an Ass.


These Fools-male were all in the same Chamber; and one might perfectly read
their Humor, and Distemper, in their Looks and Gestures. Oh! how many a gay
Lad did I see there, in his Point Band, and Embroidered Vest, that had not a
whole Shirt to his Back! How many Huffes and Highboyes, that had nothing else
in their Mouths, but the Lives and Fortunes they would spend in their sweet Ladies
service! that would yet have run five miles on your Errand, to have been
treated but at a Three-penny Ordinary? How many a poor Devil that wanted Bread,
and was yet troubled with the Rebellion of the Flesh! Some there were, that
spent much time in setting their Perruques, Ordering the Mustache, and dressing
up the very face of Lucifer himself for a Beauty: (The Woman's Privilege, and
in truth an Encrochment, to their prejudice) There were Others, that made it
their Glory to pass for Hectors; Sons of Priam; Brothers of the Blade; and
Talked of nothing but Attacques, Combats, Reverses, Stramazons, Stoccados: not
considering that a Naked Weapon is present Death to a Timorous Woman. Some were
taking the Round of their Ladies Lodgings, at Midnight, and went to bed again
as wise as they rose. Others fell in Love by Contagion, and merely conversing
with the Infected. Some again went Post from Church to Chapel, every Holy Day,
to hunt for a Mistress; and so turned a Day of Rest into a Day of Labor. Ye
might see others skipping continually from house to house, like the Knight upon
a Chess-bord, without ever catching the (Queen or) Dame. Some, like crafty
Beggars made their Case worse then 'twas: And Others though 'twere n'ere so
bad, durst not so much as open their Mouths. Really it grieved me for the poor
Mutes, and I wished with all my Heart, their Mistresses had been Witches, that
they might have known their Meaning by their Mumping; but they were lost to all
Counsel, so that there was no advising them. There was another sort of
Elevated, and Conceited Lovers: and These forsooth were not to be satisfied
without the Seven Liberal Sciences, and the Four Cardinal Virtues, in the shape
of a Woman; and their Case was Desperate. The next I observed, were a
Generation of Modest Fools, that past there under the Notion of people
Diffident of Themselves. They were generally men of good Underderstanding, but
for the most part Younger Brothers, of low fortunes, and such as for want of
wherewithal to go to the Price of higher Amors, were fain to take up with
Ordinary Stuff, that brought them nothing in the End, but Beggary, and
Repentance. The Husbands, I perceived, were horribly furious, although in
Manacles, and Shackles. Some of them left their own Wives, and fell upon their
Neighbors. Others to keep the good Women in Awe and Obedience, would be taking
upon them, and playing the Tyrants, but upon the Upshot they found their
Mistake, and that though they came on as fierce as Lions, they went off as Tame
as Muttons. Some were making Friendships with their Wives She-Cousins: and
agreeing upon a Cross-Gossipping whoever should have the first Child.

The Widdowers, that had bit of the Bridl^, past from place to place, where
they staid more or less, according to their Entertainment, and so were in
effect, as good as married; for as long, or as little a while as Themselves
pleased. These lived single, and spent their time in Visiting, first One
Friend, then Another. Here they fell in Love; There they kindled a Ielousy,
which they contracted Themselves in one place, and cured it in another. But the
Miracle was, that they all knew, and confessed themselves a Company of Mad Fools,
and yet continued so. Those that had skill in Music, and could either Sing or
Fiddle, made use of their Gifts, to put the silly Wenches that were but half
Mop'd before, directly out of their Wits. They that were Poetical, were
perpetually hammering upon the Subjects of Cruelty, and Disappointment. One
tells his Good Fortune to another, that requi^es him with the story of his Bad.
They that had set their Hearts upon Girls, were beating the streets all day, to
find what Avenues to a Lady's lodgings at night. Some were tampering and
Caressing the Chambermaid, as the ready way to the Mistress. Others chose
rather to put it to the Push, and attempt the Lady Her self. Some were
Examining their Pockets, and taking a View of their Furniture; which consisted
much in Love Letters, delicately sealed up with perfumed Wax, upon Raw silk;
and a Thousand pretty Devices within; All wrapped up in Riddle, and Cipher.
Abundance of Hair Bracelets, Lockets, Pomanders, Knots of Ribband, and the
like. There were others, that were called the Husband's Friends, who were ready
upon all Occasions to do This, and to do That Kindness for the Husband. Their
Purse, Credit, Coach and Horses, were all at his service: And in the mean time,
who but They to Gallant the Wife? To the Park, the Gardens, a Treat, or a
Comedy: where forty to one, by the Greatest good luck in the World, they
stumble upon an Aunt, an old Housekeeper of the Family, or some such Reverend
Goer-between, that is a well-willer to the Mathematics; she takes the hint,
performs the Good Office, and the Work is done.

Now there were two sorts of Fools for the Widows; The one was Beloved; and
the Other not. The latter were content to be a kind of Voluntary slaves, for
the compassing their Ends: but the other, were the Happier; for they were ever
at perfect Liberty to do their Pleasure, unless some Friend or Child of the
House perchance came in, in the Mischievous Nick, and then in case of a little
color more than Ordinary, or a tumbled Handkercher, 'twas but changing the
Scene and struggling for a paper of Verses or some such business to keep all in
Countenance. Some made their A^^aults both with Love, and Money, and they
seldom failed, for they came doubly armed; and your Spanish Pistols are a sort
of Battery hardly to be resisted.

I came now to reflect upon what I had seen, and as I was walking (in that
Meditation) toward another lodging, I found my self (ere I was aware) in the
first Court again; where I entered, and in it I observed new Wonders: I saw
that the Number of the Mad fools increased every moment; Although Time (I
perceived) did all that was possible to recover them. There was Ielousy
tormenting even those that were most confident of the Faith of what they loved.
There was Memory rubbing of Old sores. There was Understanding, locked up in a
dark Cellar: and Reason with both her Eyes out. I made a little pause, the
better to observe these Varieties, and Disguises. And when I had looked my self
a weary, I turned about and spied a Door; but so Narrow that it was hardly
passable; And yet straight as it was, diverse there were that Ingratitude, and
Infidelity had set at Liberty; and made a shift to get through. Upon which
Opportunity of Returning, I made what haste I could to be One of the first at
the Door, and in that Instant, my Man drew the Curtain of my Bed, and told me,
the Morning was far gone. Whereupon I waked, and recollecting my self, found
all was but a Dream. The very Phansy however of having spent so much time in
the Company of Fools, and Madmen, gave me some Disorder, but with this Comfort,
that both sleeping and waking, I had experimented Passionate Love to be nothing
else then a mere Phrensy, and Folly.

The end of the fourth Vision.
THE FIFTH VISION OF THE WORLD.
IT is utterly Impossible for any thing in this World to fix our Appetites, and
Desires, but they are still flitting and restless like Pilgrims; delighted and
nourish't with Variety: which shows how much we are mistaken in the Value and
Quality of the things we covet. And hence it is, that what we pursue with the
greatest delight, and Passion Imaginable, yields us nothing but Satiety, and
Repentance in the Possession; yet such is the Power of these Appetites of ours,
that when they call, and command; we follow, and Obey; though we find in the
End, that what we took for a Beauty upon the Chase, proves but a Carcass in the
Quarry; and we are sick on it as soon as we have it. Now the World, that knows
our Palate, and Inclination, never fails to feed the Humor, and to flatter,
and entertain us, with all sorts of Change, and Novelty; as the most certain
Method of gaining upon our Affections.

One would have thought, that these Considerations might have put sober
Thoughts and Resolutions in my Head, but it was my fate to be taken off, in the
very Middle of my Morality and Speculations; and carried away from my self by
Vanity, and Weakness, into the wide world, where I was for a while after, not
much unsatisfied with my Condition. As I past from one place to another,
several that saw me (I perceived) did but make sport with me: for the further I
went, the more I was at a loss in that Labyrinth of Delusions. One while, I was
in with the Swordmen and Bravoes; up to the Ears in Challenges, and Quarrels;
and never without an Arm in a Scarf, or a broken Head. Another Fit; I was never
well, but either at the Fleece-Tavern, or Bear at Bridg-foot, stuffing my Guts
with Food, and Tipple, till the Hoops were ready to burst. Beside twenty other
Entertainments that I found, every jott as Extravagant as these, which to my
great Trouble and Admiration, left me not so much as one moment of Repose.

As I was in one of my unquiet, and pensive Moods; some body called after me
and plucked me by the Cloak: which proved to be A person of a Venerable age;
His Clothes miserably poor and Tattered; and his Face, just as if He had been
Trampled upon in the Streets, which did not yet hinder, but that he had still
the Air and Appearance of one that deserved much Honor and Respect. Good
Father, (said I to him) why should you envy me my Enjoyments? Pray'e let me
alone, and do not trouble your self with me, or my doings. You're past the
pleasure of Life your self, and cannot endure to see other people merry, that
have the world before them. Consider of it; you are now upon the point of
leaving the world, and I am but newly come into it. But it is the Trick of all
Old men to be carping at the Actions of their Iuniors. Son (said the old man,
smiling) I shall neither hinder, nor envy thy Delights, but in pure pity I
would fain reclaim Thee. Do thou know the Price of a Day; an hour; or a
Minute? Did ever examine the value of Time? If thou had, thou would
employ it better; and not cast away so many blessed Opportunities upon Trifles;
and so Easily, and Insensibly, part with so inestimable a Treasure. What Is
become of thy past hours? have they made thee a Promise, to come back again at
a Call when thou have need of them? Or, can thou show me which way they
went? No, No; They are gone without Recovery; and in their Flight, methinks,
Time seems to turn his Head, and laugh over his shoulder, in Derision of those
that made no better use of him, when they had him. Do thou not know, that
all the Minutes of our life, are but as so many Links of a Chain, that has
Death at the End on it? and every Moment brings thee nearer thy Expected End,
which perchance, while the word is speaking, may be at thy very door: And
doubtless at thy rate of Living, it will be upon thee before thou art aware.
How stupid is He, that Dies while he Lives, for fear of Dying! How wicked is He
that Lives, as if He should never Dye; and only fears Death when he comes to
feel it! which is too late for comfort, either to Body, or Soul: And He is
certainly none of the Wisest that spends all his days in Lewdness, and
Debauchery; without considering* that of his whole Life, any Minute might have
been his last.

My Good Father (said I) I am beholding to you for your Excellent Discourses,
for they have delivered me out of the Power of a Thousand Frivolous and Vain
Affections, that had taken possession of me. But who are You, I pray'e? And
what is your Business here? My Poverty and These Rags, quoth he, are enough to
tell ye that I am an honest man; a Friend to Truth, and one that will not be
Mealy-mouthed, when he may speak it to Purpose. Some call me the Plain-Dealer;
Others, the Vndeceiver General. You see me all in Tatters, Wounds, Scars,
Bruises. And what is all This, but the Requital the World gives me, for my Good
Counsel, and Kind Visits? And yet after all this endeavor to get shut of me;
they call themselves my Friends: though they Curse me to the Pit of Hell, as
soon as ever I come near them; and had rather be hanged, then spend one Quarter
of an hour in my Company. If thou have a Mind to see the World I talk of, come
along with me, and I Will carry thee into a place* where thou shall have a full
Prospect of it; and without any Inconvenience, see all that is in it; or in the
People that dwell in it; and look it through and through. What Is the Name of
this place? quoth I. It is called, said he, The Hypocrites Walk; and it crosses
the World from one Pole to the other. It is large, and Populous; for I believe
there is not any man alive, but has either a House or a Chamber in it. Some live
in it for altogether; Others take it only in Passage: for there are Hypocrites
of several sorts; but all Mortals have, more or less, a Tang of the Leaven.
That fellow there in the Corner, came but to'ther day from the Plow-Tayl, and
would now fain be a Gentleman. But had not he better pay his Debts, and walk
alone, then break his Promises to keep a Laquay? There Is another Rascal that
would fain be a Lord; and would venture a Voyage to Venice for the Title, but
that He Is better at building Castles in the Air, then upon the Water. In the
mean time, he puts on a Nobleman's Face, and Garb; he swears and Drinks like a
Lord, and keeps his Hounds and Whores, which it is feared in the end, will
devour their Master. Mark now that piece of Gravity, and Form; He walks ye see,
as if he moved by Clock-work; His words are few, and Low; He makes all his
Answers by a Shrug, or a Nod. This is the Hypocrite of a Minister of State; who
with all his Counterfeit of Wisdom, is one of the veriest Noddies in Nature.

Face about now, and mind those Decrepit Sots there, that can scarce lift a Leg
over a Threshold, and yet they must be Dying their Hair, Coloring their
Beards, and playing the young fools again, with a Thousand Hobbyhorse Tricks,
and Antic Dresses. On the other side; Ye have a Compa^y of Silly Boys, taking
upon them to govern the world, under a Vizor of Wisdom, and Experience. What
Lord is That (said I) in the Rich Clothes there, and the fine Laces? That Lord
(quoth he) is a Tailor, in his Holy Day Clothes; and if He were now upon his
Shop-bord, his own Scissers and Needles would hardly know him: And you must
understand, that Hypocrisy is so Epidemical a Disease, that it has laid hold of
the Trades themselves, as well as the Masters. The Cobbler must be saluted, Mr.
Translater. The Groom names himself Gentleman of the Horse; The fellow that
carries Guts to the Bears, writes, One of his Majesty's Officers. The Hangman
calls himself a Minister of Justice. The Mountebank, an Able man. A Common
Whore passes for a Courtisan. The B^wd acts the Puritan. Gaming Ordinaries are
called Academies; and Bawdy-houses, Places of Entertainment. The Page styles
himself the Child of Honor; and the Footboy calls himself My Lady's Page. And
every Pick-Thank names himself a Courtier. The Cuckold-maker passes for a Fine
Gentleman; and the Cuckold himself, for the best natured Husband in the World:
And a very Ass, commences Master-Doctor. Hocus Pocus Tricks are called Slight
of Hand; Lust, Friendship; Usury, Thrift* Cheating is but Gallantry; Lying
wears the Name of Invention; Malice goes for Quickness of Apprehension;
Cowardice, Meekness of Nature; and Rashness carries the Countenance of Valor.
In fine, this is all but Hypocrisy, and Knavery in a Disguise; for Nothing is
called by the right Name. Now there are beside these, certain General
Appellations taken up, which by long Usage, are almost grown into Prescription.
Every little Whore takes upon her to be a Great Lady. Every Gown-man, to be a
Counselor. Every Huffe to be a Soldat; Every Gay thing to be a Cavalier; Every
Parish-Clerk to be a Doctor; and Every writing-Clerk in the Office must be
called Mr Secretary.

So that the whole world, take it where you will, is but a mere Iuggle; and you
will find that Wrath, Gluttony, Pride, Avarice, Luxury, Murder, and a Thousand
other Heinous sins, have all of them Hypocrisy for their Source, and thither
They Will return again. It would be well (said I) if you could prove what you say;
but I can hardly see, how so great a Diversity of Waters should proceed from
one and the same Fountain. I do not wonder (quoth he) at your Distrust, for you
are mistaken in very good Company; to Phansy a Contrariety in many things,
which are, in effect, so much alike. It is agreed upon, both by Philosophers,
and Divines, that all Sins are Evil; and you must allow, that the Will
Embraces, or pursues, no Evil but under the Resemblance of Good: Nor does the
Sin lie in the Representation, or Knowledge of what is Evil, but in the Consent
to it. Which Consent it self is sinful, although without any Subsequent Act:
It Is true the Execution serves afterward for an Aggravation, and ought to be
considered under many Differences, and Distinctions. But in fine; Evident it
is, that the Will entertains no Ill, but under the shape of some Good. What do
ye think now of the Hypocrite, that cuts your Thro^t, in his Arms, and Murders
you, under pretense of Kindness? What is the Hope of an Hypocrite? says Job. He
neither has, nor can have any: For he is Wicked as he is an Hypocrite; and even
his best Actions are worth nothing, because they are not what they seem to be.
So that of all Sinners, he has the most to answer for. Other Offenders sin only
against God. But the Hypocrite sins with Him, as well as against Him, making
use of his Holy Name as a Cloak and Countenance for his Wickedness. For which
reason, our Blessed Savior, after many Affirmative Precepts delivered to his
Disciples, for their Instruction; gave only This Negative. Be not sad as the
Hypocrites: which lays them open in few words; And he might as well have said,
Be not Hypocrites and ye shall not be Wicked.

We were now come to the Place the Old Man told me of, where I sound all
according to my Expectation, and took the higher ground, that I might have the
better Prospect of what past. The first remarkable thing I saw was a long
Funeral Train of Kindred, and Guests, following the Corpse of a Deceased Lady, in
Company wi^h the Disconsolate Widdower; who marched with his Chin upon his
Breast; a sad and a heavy pace; muffled up in a Mourning Hood, enough to have
stiffled him, with at least Ten yards of Cloth upon his Body, and no less in
his Train. Alack, Alack! cried I, that ever I should live to see so dismal a
Spectacle! Oh Blessed Woman! How did this Husband love Thee in thy Lifetime,
that follows thee with this Infinite Faith and Affection, even to thy Grave!
And happy the Hu^band doubtless, in a Wife that deserved this Kindness! and in
so many tender Friends, and Relations, to take part with him in his Sorrows. My
Good Father, let me entreat you to observe this doleful Encounter. With that
(shaking his Head and smiling) My Son, quoth he, Thou shall by and by perceive,
that all is Nothing in the world but Vanity, Imposture, and Constraint; and I
will show thee the Difference between Things Themselves, and their Appearances.
To see this Abundance of Torches, with the Magnificence of the Ceremony and
Att^ndance, One would think there should be some mighty matter in the business:
but let me assure thee, that all this Pudder comes to no more, then much ado
about Nothing. The Woman was Nothing (effectually) even while she lived: The
Body now in the Coffin, is somewhat a less Nothing; and the Funeral Honors,
which are now paid her, come to just Nothing too. But the Dead it seems must
have their Vanities, and their Holy days as well as the Living. Alas! What Is a
Carcass? but the most Odious sort of Putrefaction? A Corrupted Earth; fit
neither for Fruit, nor Tillage. And then for the sad Looks of the Mourners;
They are only troubled at the Invitation; and would not care a pin, if the
Invi^er, and Body too were both at the Devil. And That you might see by their
Behavior, and Discourses; for when they should have been Praying for the Dead,
they were prating of her Pedigree, and Her last Will and Testament. I Am not so
near a kin (says one) but I might have been spared; and I had twenty other
things to do. Another should have met Company at a Tavern; A Third, at a Play.
A fourth mutters that he is not placed according to his Quality. Another cries
out, A Pox o^ your meetings where there is nothing stirring but Worms-meat. Let
me tell ye further, that the Widdower Himself is not grieved as you Imagine for
the Dead Wife; but for the Damned Expense, in Blacks and Scutcheons, Tapers,
and Mourners; and that she was not fairly laid to Rest, without all this Ado:
for He persuades himself, that she might have found the way to her Grave
without a Candle. And since she was to Dye, it is his opinion, that she should
have made quicker work on it: For a Good Wife, is like a Good Christian, to put
her Conscience in order betimes, and get her gone; without lingering in the
Hands of Doctors, 'Pothecaries, and Surgeons, to murder her Husband too, Or (to
save Charges) she might have had the discretion to have died of the Plague,
which would have stav'd off Company. This is the Second Wife, he has already
turned over, and (to give the Man his Due) He has had the wit to s^cure
him^^elf of a Third, while This lay on her D^^th-bed. So that this Case is no
more then Chopping of a Cold Wife for a Warm one, and He Will recover this
Affliction, I warrant ye.

The Good man, methought, spoke wonders; and being thoroughly convinced of the
danger of trusting to Appearances, I took up a Resolution, never to conclude
upon any thing, though never so plausible, without due Examination, and
Inquiry. With that, the Funeral Vanished, leaving Us behind; and for a
farewell, This Sentence. I am gone before; you are to follow; and in the mean
time, to accompany others to their Graves, as you have done Me; and as I, when
time was, have attended many others, with as little Care, and Devotion as your
selves.

We were taken off from this Meditation, by a Noise we heard in a house behind
Us; where we had no sooner set foot over the Threshold, but we were entertained
with a Consort of Six Voices, that were Set and Tuned to the Sighs and Groans
of a Woman newly become a Widow. The Passion was Acted to the Life; but the
Dead little the better for it. They would be ever and anon, Clapping, and
Wringing of their Hands; Groaning, and Sighing, as if their Hearts would break.
The Hangings, Pictures, and Furniture were all taken down, and removed; The
Rooms hung with Black, And in one of them lay the poor Disconsolate, upon a
Couch with her Condoling Friends about her. It was as Dark as Pitch, and so
much the Better, for the Parts they had to play; for there was no discovering
of the Horrid Faces, and Strains they made, to fetch up their Artificial Tears,
and Lamentations. Madam (says one) Tears are but thrown away; and really the
Grief to see your Ladyship in this Condition, has made me as lost a woman to
all thought of Comfort as your self: I beseech you Madam, cheer up; (^ryes
another, with almost as many Sighs as words) your Husband's even happy that he
is out of this miserable world. He was a Good man, and now He finds the sweet
on it. Patience, Patience; Dear Madam, (cries a Third) It Is the will of Heaven,
and there is no Contending. Do talk of Patience (says she) and no Contending?
Wret^hed Creature that I am! to outlive that Dear man! Oh that Dear Husband of
Mine! Oh that I should ever live to see this Day! And then she fell to
blubbering, Sobbing and Raving a thousand times worse then before. Alas, Alas,
who will trouble himself with a poor Widow! I have never a friend left to look
after me; what shall become of me!

At this pause, came in the Chorus, with their Nose-Instruments; and there was
such Blowing, Snobbing, Sniveling and throwing Snot about, that there was no
enduring the House. And all this, you must know, served them to a double
purpose; that is to say; for Physic and for Complement: for it past for the
Condoling Office, and purged their Heads of ill Humors all under one. I could
not choose but compassionate the poor Widow; a Creature forsaken of all the
world; and I told my Guide as much; and that a Charity (as I thought) would be
well bestowed upon her. The Holy Writ calls them Mutes; according to the Import
of the Hebrew: in regard that they have no body to speak for them. And if at
any time they take heart to speak for themselves, They had even as good hold
their tongues, for no body minds them. Is there any thing more frequently given
in Charge throughout the whole Bible, then to Protect the Fatherless, and
Defend the Cause of the Widow? as the highest and most Necessary point of
Christian Charity; in regard that they have neither Power, nor Right to defend
themselves. Does not Job in the Depth of his Misery, and Disgraces, make Choice
to clear himself toward the Widow, upon his Expostulations with the Almighty?
[If I have caused the Eyes of the Widow to fail] (or consumed the Eyes of the
Widow; after the Hebrew) so that it seems to me, beside the general Duty of
Charity, We are also bound by the Laws of Honor, and Generosity, to assist
them: for the poor Souls are fain to plead with their Eyes; and Beg with their
Eyes, for want of Either Hands or Tongues to help themselves. Indeed you must
pardon me (My good Father said I) if I cannot hold any longer from bearing a
part in this Mournful Consort, upon this sad Occasion. And is This (quoth the
old man) the fruit of your boasted Divinity? to sink into Weakness and Tears,
when you have the greatest Need of your Resolution, and Prudence. Have but a
little Patience, and I Will unfold you this Mystery; though (let me tell ye) It Is
one of the hardest things in Nature, to make any man as wise as he should be,
that conceits himself wise enough already. If this Accident of the Widow had
not happened, we had had none of the fine things, that have been ^tarted
upon it: for it is Occasion that awakens both our Virtue, and Philosophy; And
it is not enough to know the Mine where the Treasure lies; unless a man has the
skill of Drawing it out, and making the best of what he has in his Possession.
What are you the better, for all the Advantages of Wit, and Learning, without
the faculty of reducing what you know, into apt and proper Applications?

Observe me now, and I will show you, that this Widow that looks as if she had
nothing in her Mouth, but The Service for the Dead, and only Hallelujahs in her
Soul; that This Mortified ^iece of Formality, has green Thoughts, un^^r her
black-Vail; and brisk Imaginations about her, in despite of her Calamity, and
Misfortune. The Chamber you see (...) dark; and their faces are muffled up in
their Funeral Dresses. And what of all This? when the whole Course of their
mourning is but a Thorough-Cheat. Their Weeping signifies Nothing more, then
Crying, at so much an hour; for their Tears are Hackney'd out, and when they
have wept out their stage, they take up, and are quiet. If you would relieve
them, leave them to Themselves; and as soon as your Back is turned, you shall
have them Singing, and Dancing* and as merry as Greeks: for take away the
Spectators; their Hypocrisy is at an End, and the play is done: And now the
Confidents Game begins. Come, Come, Madam, 'faith we must be Merry; (cries one)
we are to live by the Living, and not by the Dead. For a Bonny Young Widow as
you are, to lie whimpering away your Opportunities, and lose so many brave
Matches! There Is, You know who, I dare swear, has a Months Mind to you; By my
Troth I would you were in Bed together, and I Would be hanged, if you did not find
one warm Bedfellow worth twenty Cold ones. Really, Madam (cries a second) she
gives you good Counsel; and if I were in your Place, I Would follow it, and make
use of my Time. It Is but One Lost, and Ten found. Pray'e tell me, Madam, If I
may be so bold; what is your Opinion of that Cavalier that was here Yesterday?
Certainly He has a great Deal of Wit; and methinks, he is a very handsome,
proper Gentleman. Well! If that man has not a strange Passion for you, I Will
never believe my Eyes again for his sake; and, in good faith, if all parties
were agreed, I would you were even well in his Arms the night before to morrow.
Were it not a burning shame to let such a Beauty lie fallow? This sets the
Widow a Pinking, and Simpering like a Frumety-Kettle; at length she makes up
the pretty little Mouth, and says, it is somewhat of the soonest to talk of
those affairs; but let it be as Heaven pleases. However, Madam, I am much
beholden to you for your Friendly Advice. You have here the very bottom of her
Sorrow: she has taken a second Husband into her Heart, before her first was in
his ^rave. I should have told you, that (...) right Widow, Eats, and Drinks
^ore the first day of her Widdow-hood, ^^en in any other of her whole life: for
^here appears not a Visitant; but pre^ently out comes the Groaning Cake; a ^old
baked meat, or some Restorative ^orsel or Other, to comfort the Afflicted; and
the Cordial Bottles must not be forgotten neither, for Sorrow's Dry. So ^o't
they fall, and at every Bit or Gulp, ^he Lady Relict, fetches ye up a heavy
Sigh, pretends to chew false, and makes ^rotestation that for her part, she can
^aste nothing; she has quite lost her Digestion; and has such an oppression ^n
her stomach, that she dares not eat any more, for fear of over-charging Nature.
And (in truth says she) how ^an it be otherwise; since (Unhappy ^reature that I
am!) He is gone that gave the Relish to all my Enjoyments: But there is no
Recalling him from the Grave, and so, no remedy but Patience. By this time, you
see, (quoth the Old Man) whether your Exclamations were ^easonable, or no.

The w^rds were h^rdly out of his Mouth, when hearing an uproar amon^ the
Rabble in the Street, we looked ou^ to see what was the matter. And ther^ we
saw a Catchpole, without either Hat^ or Band, out of Breath, and his face al^
bloody, crying out Help, Help, in the King's name; stop Thief, stop Thief: and
all the while, running as hard as he could drive after a Thief that made away
from him, as if the Devil had been at his Breech. After him, cam^ an Attorney,
all dirty; a world of papers in his hand; an Inkhorn at his Girdle; and a Crowd
of Nasty people about him; and down He sat himself just before us, to write
somewhat upon his Knee. Bless me (thought I) how a Cause prospers in the Hand
of one of these fellows, for he had filled his Paper in a Trice. These
Catchpoles (said I) had need to be well paid, for the Hazards they run to
secure us in our Lives and Fortunes; and indeed they deserve it. Look how the
poor Wretch is Torn, Bruised and Battered, and all this for the Good and
Benefit of the Public.

Soft and fair, quoth the old man; I think thou would never leave Talking, if
I did not stop thy Mouth sometime. You must know, that He that made the Escape,
and the Catchpole are a Couple of Ancient Friends, and Pot-Companions. Now the
Catchpole quarrels the Thief for not giving him a snip in the last Booty; and
the Thief, after a great struggle, and a good lusty Rubber at Cuffs, has made a
shift to save himself. You Will say the Rogue had need of Good heels, to outrun
this Gallows-Beagle; for there is hardly any Beast will outstrip a Bailiff that
runs upon the View of a Quarry. So that there is not the least thought of a
public Good in the Catchpoles Action; but merely a prosecution of his own
Profit, and a spite to see himself Choused. Now if the Catchpole I confess,
without any Private Interest, had made this Attempt upon the Thief, (being his
Friend) to bring him to Justice; It had been well: And yet, take this along
with you: It is as Natural to let slip a Sergeant at a Pick-pocket, as a
Greyhound at a Hare. The Whip; The Pillory; The Axe, and the Halter make up the
best part of the Catchpole's Revenue. These people are of all sorts the most
odious to the world; and if men in Revenge would resolve to be Virtuous, though
but for a year or two, they might starve them all. It is in fine an unlucky
Employment, and Catchpoles, as well the Devils themselves have the Wages of
Tormenters.

I hope, said I to my Guide, that the Atturneys shall have your good word too.
Yes, yes, ye need not doubt it (said the old man) for your Atturny, and your
Catchpole always hunt in Couples. The Atturny draws the Information, and has
all his forms ready, so that it is no more then, but to fill up the Blanks, and
away to the Iayl with the Delinquent: if there be any thing to be gotten it is
not a halfpenny matter, whether the party be guilty, or Innocent: Give but an
Atturny, Pen, Ink, and Paper, and let him alone for Witnesses. In case of an
Examination, he has the Grace not to insist too much upon plain and Naked
Truth; but to set down only what makes for his purpose, and then when they come
to signing, to read over in the Depone^ts sense (for his Memory is good) what
he has written in his own: And by this Means, the Cause goes on as He pleases.
To prevent this Villainy it we^e well, if the Examiners were as well sworn to
write the Truth, as the Witnesses are to speak it. And yet there are some
honest men of all sorts, but among the Atturneys; the very Calling, does by the
honest Catchpoles, Marshal's men, and their Fellows, as the Sea by the Dead: It
may Entertain them for a while, but in a very short space it spews them up
again.

The Good man would have proceeded, if He had not been taken off, by the
Rattling of a Guilt-Coach, wherein was a Courtier, that was blown up as big, as
Pride, and Vanity could make him. He sat stiff, and Upright, as if He had
swallowed a stake; and made it his Glory to show himself in that posture. It
would have hurt his Eyes, to have exchanged a Glance with any thing that was
Vulgar, and therefore He was very sparing of his Looks. He had a deep
lac'd-band on, that was right Spanish; which He wore Erect, and stiff
starch't, that a man would have thought He had Carried his Head in a
paper-Lanthorn. He was a great Studier of Set-faces; and much affected with
looking Politic, and Big. But, for his Arms, and Body, He had utterly lost, or
forgotten the use of them: For He could neither Bow, nor move his Hat to any
man that saluted him: No, nor so much as turn from One side to the Other; but
sat as if He had been Box'd up, like a Bartlemy-Baby. After this Magnificent
Statue, followed a swarm of Gaudy Butterfly-Laquais: And his Lordships Company
in the Coach, was a Buffon, and a Parasite. Oh blessed Prince! (said I) to live
at this rate of Ease, and splendour, and to have the world at Will! What a
Glorious Train is that! Beyond all doubt, there never was a great Fortune
better bestowed. With that, the old man took me up, and told me; that the
Judgment I had made upon this Occasion, from one end to the other, was all
Dotage, and Mistake; save only, when I said he had the world at Will: And in
that (says he) you have reason; for what is the World, but Labor, Vanity, and
Folly; which is likewise the Composition, and Entertainment of this Cavalier.

As for the Train that follows him; let it be Examined, and my Life for yours,
you shall find more Creditors in it, then Servants: There are Banquiers,
Iewellers, Scriveners, Brokers, Mercers, Drapers, Tailors, Vintners; and these
are properly the Stays, and Supporters of this Animated Machine. The Money,
Meat, Drink, Robes, Liveries, Wages; All comes out of their Pockets; They have
his Honor for their Security; and must content themselves with Promises, and
fair Words for full satisfaction, unless they had rather have a Footman with a
Cudgel for their Play Master. And after all, i^ this Gallant were taken to
shrift, or that a man could enter into the Secrets of his Conscience, I dare
undertake, it would appear, that He that digs in a Mine for his Bread, lives
ten thousand times more at Ease, then the other; with Beating of his Brains,
Night and Day for new shifts, Tricks and Projects to keep himself above water.

Observe his Companions now: his Fool, and his Flatterer. They are too hard for
him ye see; and Eat, Drink, and make Merry at his Expense. What greater Misery,
or shame in the World, then for a Man to make a Friendship with such Rascals,
and to spend his Time, and Estate, in so Brutal, and Insipid a Society! It
costs him more (beside his Credit) to maintain that Couple of Coxcombs, then
would have bought him the Conversation of as many Grave, and learned
Philosophers. But will ye now see the Bottom of this Scandalous and
Dishonorable Kindness? My Lord (says the Buffon) you were most infallibly wrapped
in your Mother's Smock; for let me be -- if ye have not set all the Ladies
about the Court, Agog. The very Truth is (cries the Parasite) all the rest of
the Nobility look like Corn-Cutters to you; and indeed, wherever you come you
have still the Eyes of the whole Company upon you. Go to, Go to, Gentlemen
(^ays my Lord) you must not flatter your Friends. This is more your Courtesy
then my Desert; and I have an Obligation to you for your Kindness. After this
Manner, these Asses Knab and Curry one Another, and play the Fools by Turns.

The old Man had his words yet between his Teeth, when there past just by us a
Lady of Pleasure, of so Excellent a shape, and Garb, that it was Impossible to
see her without a Passion for her, and no less impossible to look upon any
thing else, so long as she was to be seen. They that had seen her once, were to
see her no more, for she turned her face still to New-Comers. Her Motion was
graceful, and Free. One while she would stare ye full in the Eyes, under color of
opening her Hood, to set it in better Order. By and by, she would steal a look at
ye with one Eye, and a side face, from the Corner of her Vizor; like a Witch
that is afraid to be discovered, when she comes from a Catterwall. And then out
comes the Delicate Hand, and discovers the more Delicious Neck, and Breasts, to
adjust the Handkercher or the Scarf; or to remove some other Grievance that
made her Ladyship uneasy. Her Hair was most arti^icially disposed into Careless
Rings; And the best Red and White in Nature was in her Cheeks; if that of her
Lips and Teeth did not Exceed it. In a word, all she looked upon was her own;
and This was the Vision for my Money, from all the Rest. As she was marching
off, I could not choose but take up a Resolution to follow her. But my old man
laid a Block in the way, and stopped me at the very starting; which was an
Affront, to a Man that was both in Love, and in Haste, that might very well
stir his Choler. My Officious Friend (said I) He that does not love a Woman,
sucked a Sow. And questionless, He must be either Blind or Barbarous, that is
Proof against the Charms of so Divine a Beauty. Nor would any but a Sot, let
slip the blessed Opportunity of so fair an Encounter. A Handsome Woman? why,
what was she made for, but to be Loved? And He that has Her, has all that is
Lovely, or Desirable in Nature. For my own part, I would renounce the World
for the fellow of her, and never desire any thing either beyond her, or beside
her. What Lightning does she carry in her Eyes* What Charms, and Chains in her
Looks, and Motions, for the very Souls of her Beholders! Was ever any thing so
clear as her forehead? Or so black as her Eyebrows? One would swear, that her
Complexion had taken a Tincture of Vermilion, and Milk: and that Nature had
brought her into the World with Pearl, and Rubies in her Mouth. To speak all in
little, she is the Masterpiece of the Creation, worthy of Infinite Praise, and
Equal to our largest Desires.

Here the Old man cut me short, and bad me make an end of my Discourse, for
thou art, said He, a Man of much wonder, and small Experience, and delivered
over to the Spirit of Folly, and Blindness. Thou have thy Eyes in thy Head, and
yet not Brain Enough to know either why they were given Thee, or How to Use
them. Understand then that the Office of the Eye is to see, but it is the
Privilege of the Soul, to distinguish, and Choose: whereas you either do the
Contrary, or else Nothing, which is worse. He that trusts his Eyes, exposes his
Mind to a Thousand Torments and Confusions: He shall take Clouds, for
Mountains; Straight for Crooked; One Color for Another, by reason of an Undue
distance, or an indisposed Medium. We are not able sometimes to say what way a
River runs, till we throw in a Twig, or a straw to find out the Current. And
what will you s^y now, if this Prodigious Beauty, your New Mistress, prove as
Gross a Cheat, and Imposture, as any of the Rest? She went to Bed last night as
Ugly as a Witch; and yet this Morning she comes forth in your Opinion as
Glorious as an Angel. The Truth of it is, she Hires all by the Day; and if you
did but see this Puppet taken to pieces, you would find her little else but
Paint, and Plaster. To begin her Anatomy at the Head. You must know that the
Hair she wears, is borrowed of a Tire-woman, for her own was blown off by an
Unlucky Wind from the Coast of Naples. Or if she has any left, she keeps it
private, as a Memorial of her Antiquity. She is beholden to the Pencil, for her
Eyebrows, and Complexion. And upon the whole mat^er, she is but an old
Picture, refresh't. But the wonder is, to see a Picture, with Life, and Motion;
unless perchance she has got the Necromancer's Receipt, that made himself Young
again in his Glass-Bottle. For all that you see of her that is Good, comes from
Distilled Waters, Essences, Powders, and the like; and to see the Washing of
her Face would fright the Devil. She abounds in Pomanders, Sweet waters,
Spanish-Pockets, Perfum'd-Drawers; and all little Enough to qualify the
Poisonous Whiffs she sends from her Toes, and Armpits, which would otherwise
out-stink Ten thousand Pole-Cats. She cannot choose but Kiss well, for her Lips
are perpetually bathed in Oil, and Grease. And he that Embraces her, shall find
the better half of her, the Tailors, and only a stuffing of Cotton and Canvas,
to supply the Defects of her Body. When she goes to Bed, she puts off one half
of her Person with her Shoes. What do ye think of your adored Beauty now? or
have your Eyes betrayed ye? Well, well; confess your Error and mend it: and
know that (without more Descant upon this woman) it is the Design, and Glory of
most of the Sex to lead Silly Men Captive. Nay take the best of them, and what
with the Trouble of getting them, and the Difficulty of pleasing them, he that
comes off best, will find himself a Loser at the foot of the Account. I could
recommend you here to other Remedies of Love, inseparable from the very Sex,
but what I have said already, I hope, will be sufficient.

The end of the fifth Vision.
THE SIXTH VISION OF HELL.
BEing one Autumn, at a Friend's house in the Country, (which was indeed a most
delicious Retreat) I took a walk one Moonlight into the Park; where all my
past Visions came fresh into my Head again, and I was well enough pleased with
the Meditation. At length, the Humor ^ook me to leave the Path, and go further
into the wood: what Impulse carried me to this, I know not. Whether I was moved
by my good Angel, or some higher Power, but so it was* that in half a quarter
of an hour, I found my self a great way from home, and in a place where 'twas
no longer Night; with the Pleasantest Prospect round about me that ever I saw
since I was born. The Air was calm, and Temperate; and it was no small
Advantage to the Beauty of the Place, that it was both Innocent, and Silent. On
the one hand, I was entertained with the Murmurs of Crystal Rivolets; On the
Other, with the whispering of the Trees; The Birds singing all the while either
in Emulation, or Requital of the Other Harmonies. And now, to show the
Instability of our Affections, and Desires, I was grown weary even of
Tranquillity it self, and in this most agreeable Solitude, began to long for
Company.

When in the very Instant, (to my great wonder) I discovered two Paths, issuing
from One, and the same Beginning; but dividing themselves forwards, more and
more, by Degrees, as if they liked not One Another's Company. That on the right
Hand was Narrow, almost beyond Imagination; and being very little frequented,
it was so overgrown with Thorns and Brambles; and so stony withal, that a man
had all the Trouble in the world to get into it. One might see however, the
Prints and Marks of several Passengers, that had rubbed through, though with
Exceeding Difficulty; for they had left pieces of Heads, Arms, Legs, Feet, and
many of them their whole skins behind them. Some we saw yet upon the way,
pressing forward, without ever so much as looking back; and these were all of
them Pale-faced, Lean, Thin, and Miserably Mortified. There was no passing for
Horsemen; and I was told, that St. Paul himself left his Horse, when He went
into it. And indeed, there was not the footing of any Beast to be seen. Neither
Horse, nor Mule; Nor the Track of any Coach, or Charret. Nor could I learn that
any had past that way in the memory of man. While I was bethinking my self of
what I had seen, I spied at length, a Beggar, that was Resting himself a little
to take Breath; and I asked him what Inns or Lodging they had upon that Road?
His Answer was that there was no stopping there, till they came to their
Journey's End. For This (said he) is the way to Paradise, and what should they
do with Inns or Taverns, where there are so few Passengers? Do not you know
that in the Course of Nature, to Dye, is to be Born; to Live, is to Travel; and
the world is but a great Inn, after which, it is but one stage Either to Pain
or Glory. And with these words he Marched forward, and bad me God b'w'y';
telling me withal, that it was time lost to linger in the way of Virtue, and
not safe to entertain such Dialogues, as tend rather to Curiosity, then
Instruction. And so he pursued his Journey, stumbling, tearing his Flesh, and
Sighing, and Groaning at every step; and weeping as if he thought to soften the
stones with his Tears. This is no way for me, thought I to my self; and no
Company Neither; for they are a sort of Beggarly, Morose people, and will never
agree with my Humor. So I drew back and struck off into the left hand way.

And there I found Company Enough, and Room for more. What a world of Brave
Cavaliers! Guilt Coaches, Rich Liveries, and handsome, Lively Lasses, as
Glorious as the Sun! Some were Singing, and Laughing; Others tickling One
another, and Toying; Some again, at their Cheese-Cakes and China-Orenges; Or
appointing a Set at Cards: so that taking all together, I durst have sworn I
had been at the Park. This minded me of the Old saying, Tell me thy Company,
and I Will tell thee thy Manners: and to save the Credit of my Education, I put my
self into the Noble Mode, and Jogged on. And there was I at the first Dash up
to the Ears, in Balls, Plays, Mascarades, Collations, Dalliances, Amors, and
as full of Joy as my Heart could hold.

It was not here, as upon the other Rode, where folks went barefoot, and Naked,
for want of Shoo-makers, and Tailors: for here were Enough, and to spare; Beside
Mercers, Drapers, Iewellers, Bodyes-makers, Perruque-makers, Milleners, and a
French Ordinary at every other Door. You cannot imagine the Pleasure I took in
my New Acquaintance; And yet there was now and then, some Justling and Disorder
upon the way; Chiefly between the Physicians upon their Mules, and the Infantry
of the Lawyers, that marched in great Bodies before the Judges; and contested
for Place. But the Physicians carried it, in favor of their Charter, which
gives them Privilege, to Study, Practice, and Teach the Art of Poisoning; and
to read Lectures of it in the Universities. While this point of Honor was in
dispute, I perceived diverse crossing from one way to the Other, and changing of
parties. Some of them stumbled, and Recovered; Others fell down right. But the
pleasantest Gambole of all, was that of the Vintners. A whole Litter of them
tumbled into a Pit together, one over another, but finding they were out of
their Element, they got up again as fast as they could. Those that were in the
right hand way, which was the way of Paradise, or Virtue, advanced very
heavily, and made us Excellent sport. Prithee look what a Friday-face that
fellow makes! cries one; Hang him, Prick-Ear'd Cur, says another; Dam' me cries
a Third, if the Rogue be not Drunk with Holy water; If the Devil h^d raked
Hell, he could not have found such a Pack of Ill-lookt Rascals, says Another.
Some of them stopped their Ears, and went on without minding us. Others we put
out of Countenance, and they came over to us. And a Third sort came out of pure
Love to our Company.

After this, I observed a great many People a far off in a By-path: with as
much Contrition, and Devotion, in their Looks, and Gestures as ever I saw in
Men. They walked shaking their Heads, and lifting up their hands to Heaven; and
they had most of them large Ears, and to my thinking Geneva-Bibles. These
thought I, are a People of singular Integrity, and strictness of Life, above
their Fellows; but coming nearer, we found them to be Hypocrites; and that
though they would none of our Company upon the Road, They would not fail to meet us
at our Iourney's End. Fasting, Repentance, Prayer, Mortification, and other
Holy Duties, which are the Exercise of Good Christians, in Order to their
Salvation, are but a Kind of Probation to these men, to fit them for the Devil.
They were followed by a Number of Devotes, and Holy Sisters; that Kiss't the
Skirts of their Garments all the way they went, but whether out of Zeal,
Spiritual, or Natural, is hard to say; and undoubtedly, some Women's Kisses are
worse then Iudass^es. For though his Kiss was Treacherous in the Intention, it
was right yet in the Application: but This was one Judas Kissing Another, which
makes me think there was more of the Flesh, then of the Spirit in the Case.
Some would be drawing a Thread now and then out of the Holyman's Garment, to
make a Relic of. Others would cut out large Snips, as if they had a Mind to
see them Naked* Some again desired they would remember them in their Prayers;
which was just as much as if they had commended themselves to the Devil by a
Third Person. Some Prayed for good Matches for their Daughters; Others, begged
Children for themselves: And sure the Husband that allows his Wife to ask
Children abroad, will be so Civil as to take them Home, when they are given
him. In fine, these Hypocrites may for a while perchance impose upon the world,
and Delude the Multitude; but no Mask, or Disguise is proof against the
all-piercing Eye of the Almighty. There are I must confess many Religious, and
Godly men, for whose Persons and Prayers, I have a great Esteem. But these are
not of the Hypocrites Humor, to build their Hopes, and Ambition upon Popular
applause, and with a Counterfeit Humility, to proclaim their Weakness, and
Unworthiness; their Failings; Yea and their Transgressions in the Market place;
All which is indeed but a True Jest; for they are really what they say, though
they would not be thought so.

These went apart, and were looked upon to be neither Fish, nor Flesh; nor Good
Red-Herring. They wore the Name of Christians; but they had neither the wit,
nor the honesty of Pagans. For they content themselves with the Pleasures of
this Life, because they know no better. But the Hypocrite, that is instructed
both in the Life Temporal, and Eternal, lives without either Comfort in the
One, or Hope in the Other; and takes more pains to be damned, then a Good
Christian does to Compass his Salvation. In short, we went on our way in
Discourses. The Rich followed their Wealth, and the poor the Rich; begging
there, what Providence had denied them. The Stubborn, and Obstinate went away
by Themselves, for they would hear no Body that was wiser then themselves, but
ran hudling on, and pressed still to be foremost. The Magistrates drew after
them, all the Sollicitors, and Atturneys. Corrupt Judges were carried away by
Passion, and Avarice. And Vain, and Ambitious Princes, trayl'd along with them,
Principalities, and Commonwealths. There were a world of Clergy upon this Rode
too. And I saw one full Regiment of Soldiers there, which would have been
brave Fellows indeed, if they had but been half so good at Praying, and
Fighting, as they were at Swearing. Their whole discourse was of their
Adventures, How Narrowly they came off at such an Assault; What wounds they
received upon the other Breach; and then what a Destruction they made at such a
time, of Mutton, and Poultry. But all they said, came in at one Ear, and went
out at the other. Do' n't you remember, Sirrah, says one, how we clawed it away
at such a Place! Yes, ye Damned Rogue you, cries the other, when you were so
drunk you took your Aunt for the Bawd. These and such as these were the Only
Exploits they could truly brag of.

While they were upon these Glorious Rhodomontades, certain generous Spirits
from the Right Hand way, that knew what they were, by the Boxes of Pass-ports,
Testimonials, and Recommendations they wore at their Girdles, cried out to
them, as if it had been to an Attacque: Fall on, Fall on, my Lads, and Follow
me. This, This is the Path of Honor, and if you were not Poultrons you would
not quit it for fear of a Hard March, or an ill Lodging. Courage Camerades; and
be assured, that this Combat well fought, makes all your Fortunes, and Crowns
ye for ever. Here, ye shall be sure both of Pay, and Reward, without casting
the Issue of all your Hazzards, and Hopes upon the Empty Promises of Princes.
How long will ye pursue this Trade of Blood and Rapine? And Ac^us^om your Ears,
and tongues to the Tragical outcries of, Burn; No Quarter; Kill, or Dye. It is
not pay, or Pillage, but Virtue that is a Brave man's Recompense. Trust to her,
and she will not deceive ye. If it be the War, ye Love, Come to Us; Bear Arms on
the right side, and we will find you work. Do not you know, that Man's Life is a
Warfare? That the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, are Three Vigilant Enemies?
And that it is as much as his Soul is worth, to put himself, but for one Minute
out of his Guard. Princes tell ye, that your Bloods, and your Lives are Theirs,
and that to shed the One, and lose the Other, in their Service, is no
Obligation, but a Duty. You are still however to look to the Cause; Wherefore
turn head, and come along with us, and be happy. The Soldiers heard all this
with Exceeding Patience, and Attention: But the Brand of Cowardice had such an
effect upon them, that without any more ado, like men of Honor, they presently
quitted the Rode; Drew; and as bold as Lions, charged headlong into a Tavern.

After this, we saw a great Troop of Women upon the Highway to Hell, with
their Bags; and their fellows, at their Heels, ever, and anon, hunching, and
Justling one Another. On the other side; A number of Good people, that were
almost at the End of their Journey, came over into the wrong Rode; for the
Right Hand way, growing Easier, and Wider toward the End, and that on the left
hand, on the Contrary, Narrower, they thought they had been out of their way,
and so came in to Us; As many of Ours, went over to Them, upon the same
Mistake. Among the Rest, I saw a great Lady, without either Coach, Sedan, or
any living Creature with her, foot it all the way to Hell: which was to me so
great a wonder, considering how she had lived in the world, that I presently
looked about for a Public Notary, to make an Entry of it. The Woman was in a
most Miserable Pickle; and I did not know what design she might Drive on, under
that Disguise; but finding never a Notary, or Register at hand, though I mist
my Particular Aim, yet I was well Enough pleased with it, for I took it then
for Granted that I was in my Ready way to Heaven. But when I came afterward to
reflect upon the Crosses, Afflictions and Mortifications, that lie in the way
to Paradise: And to Consider, that there was Nothing of That upon this Rode.
But on the Contrary, Laughing, Singing, Frollicking, and all manner of Iollity:
This I must confess, gave me a Qualm, and made me a little doubtful whither I
was going.

But I was quickly delivered of that Doubt, by a Gang of Married Men, that we
overtook, with their Wives in their Hands, in Evidence of their Mortifications:
My Wife's my Witness (cries one) that every day since I married her has been a
Fasting day to me; To Pamper her with Cock-Broth, and Iellyes. And my Wife
knows how I have humbled my Body, by Nakedness; for I have hardly allowed my
self a Rag to my Backside; or a Shoe to my Foot, to maintain her in her Coach,
Pages, Gowns, Petty-Coats, and Jewels. So that upon the matter, I pe^ceive an
Unlucky hit with a Wife, gives a Man as much Right to the Catalogue of Ma^tyrs,
as if He h^d ended his Days at the stake.

The Misery these poor Wretches endured, made me think my self in the Right
again; till I heard a Cry behind me, Make Way there; Make Way for the
'Pothcearies. Bless me, thought I, If They be here we are certainly going to
the Devil. And so it proved, for we were just then come to a little Door, that
was made like a Mouse-Trap, where 'twas Easy to get in, but there was no
getting out again.

It was a strange thing, that scarce any body so much as Dreamed of Hell, all
the way we went; and yet every body knew where they were, as soon as they came
there: and cried out with one Voice, Miserable Creatures! we are Damned, we are
Damned. That Word made my Heart Ache; And is it come to that then? said I. I
began then with Tears in my Eyes, to Reflect upon what I had left in the World,
As my Relations, Friends, Ladies, Mistre^^es, and in ^ine, all my Old
Acquaintance: When with a Heavy Sigh, looking behind m^, I saw the greater part
of them Po^^ing af^^r me. It gave me, me thoug^t, some Comfort, that I should
have so good Company; vainly imagining that even Hell it self might be Capable
of some Relief.

Going further on; I was gotten into a Crowd of Tailors, that stood up sneaking
in a Corner, for fear of the Devils. At the first Door, there was Seven Devils,
taking the Names of those that Came in: and they ask't me mine, and my Quality,
and so they let me pass. But examining the Tailors; These fellows (cried one of
the Devils) come in such shoals, as if Hell were made only for Tailors. How
many are they? (says another) Answer was made, about a Hundred. About a
Hundred? They must be more then a Hundred, says the other, if they be Tailors;
for they never come under a Thousand, or Twelve hundred st^ong. And we have so
many here already I do not know where we shall 'stow them. Say the word, my
Masters, shall's let them in or no? the poor Prick-Lice were damn'dly startled
at that, for fear they should not get in: but in the End, they had the Favor
to be admitted. Certainly, said I, these folks are but in an ill Condition,
when it is a Menace for the Devils themselves to refuse to receive them:
Thereupon, a Huge, overgrown, Club-footed, Crump-shoulder'd Devil, threw them
all into a Deep Hole. Seeing such a Monster of a Devil, I ask't him, how He
came to be so deformed. And He told me, He had spoiled his Back with Carrying
of Tailors: for said he, I have been formerly made use of as a Sumpter to fetch
them; but now of late they save me that Labor, and come so fast of themselves,
that it is one Devils work to dispose of them. While the word was yet speaking,
there came Another Glut of them, and I was fain to make way, that the Devil
might have Room to work in, who pil'd them up, and told me they made the best
Fuel in Hell.

I passed forward then into a little Dark Ally, where it made me start to hear
one call me by my Name, and with much ado I perceived a fellow there all wrapped
up in Smoke, and Flame. Alas! Sir s^ys he; Have you forgotten your old
Bookseller in Pope's Head-Alley? I cry thee M^rcy, quoth I, What? art thou
here? Yes, Yes, Sir (says he) it is even too True. I never dreamed it would have
come to This. He thought I must needs pity him, when I knew him: but truly I
reflected rather upon the Justice of his Punishment. For in a word, his Shop
was the very Mint of Heresy, Schism, and Sedition. I put on a Face of
Compassion however, to give him a little Ease, which He took hold of, and
vented his Complaint. Well Sir (says He) I would my Father had made me a
Hangman, when He made me a Stationer; for we are called to Account for Other
Men's works, as well as for our Own. And one thing that is cast in our Dish, is
the selling of Translations, so Dog-cheap, that every Sot knows now as much, as
would formerly have made a Passable Doctor, and every Nasty Groom, and Roguy
Lacquay is grown as familiar with Homer, Virgil, Ovid, as if 'twere Robin the
Devil; The seven Champions; or a piece of George Withers. He would have talked
on, if a Devil had not stopped his Mouth with a Whiffe from a roll of his own
Papers, and Choked him with the smoke on it. The Pestilent Fume would have
dispatched me too, if I had not got presently out of the Reach on it. But I went
my way, saying this to my self; If the Bookseller be thus Criminal, what will
become of the Author?

I was diverted from this Meditation, by the ruful Groans, of a great many
Souls that were under the Lash; and the Devil Tyrannizing over them with Whips,
and Scourges. I ask't what they were; and it was told me, that there was a Plot
among the Hackney-Coach-men to exhibit an Information against the Devils, for
taking the Whip out of their Hands, and setting up a Trade they had never
served to, (which is Contrary to Quinto Elizabethae.) Well, said I: But why are
they tormented here? With That, an old Sowr-look't Coachman took the Answer
out of the Devil's Mouth, and told me; that it was because they came to Hell a
Horseback, which they pretended, was a Privilege that did not belong to Rogues
of their Quality. Speak Truth, and be hanged, cried the Devil; and make an
honest Confession here. Say, Sirrah, How many Bawdy Voyages h^ve you made to
Hackney? How many Nights have you stood Pimping at Marybone? How many Whores,
and Knaves have you Brought together? And how many Lies have you told, to keep
all Private, since you first set up this Scandalous Trade? There was a
Coachman by, that had served a Judge, and thought 'twas no more for his old
Master to fetch a Rascal out of Hell, then out of Newgate; which made this
fellow stand upon his Points, and ask the Devil, how he durst give that
Language to so Honorable a Profession: for (says he) who wear^ better Clothes
then your Coachmen? Are not we in our Velvets, Embroyderies, and Laces? and as
Glorious as so many Phaeto^s? Have not our Mast^rs reason to be good to us,
when their Necks are at stake, and their Lives at our Mercy? Nay, we govern
those, many times, that Govern Kingdoms; And a Prince is almost in as much
Danger of his Coachman as of his Physician. And There are, that understand it
too, and Themselves, and Vs^; and that will not stick to trust their Coach-men
as far as they would do their Confessors. There Is no Absurdity in the
Comparison; for if They know some of their Privacies, we know more; yes, and
perhaps more then We Will speak of. What have we here to do? cried a Devil that
was ready to break his heart with Laughing. A Coachman, in his Tropes, and
Figures? An Orator instead of a Waggoner? The slave has broke his Bridle, and
got his Head at Liberty, and now he will never have done. No, why should he?
(says another that had served a great Lady more ways then One) Is this the
best Entertainment you can afford your Servants? your daily Drudges? I Am sure
we bring you good Commodity, well pack't; well Conditioned; well perfumed;
Right, Neat, and Clean: Not like your City-war^+- that comes dirty to you, up
to the Hocks; and yet every Daggle-Tayl'd Wench, and Skip-Kennel, shall be
better used then We. Ah! The Ingratitude of this Place! If we had done as much
for somebody else, as we have done for you, we should not have been now to
seek, for our Wages. When you have nothing else to say, you tell me that I am
punished for carrying the Sick, the Gowty, the Lame, to Church; to Mass; or
some straggling Virgins, back again to their Cloister: Which is a Damned Lie;
for I am able to prove, that all my Trading lay at the Play Houses,
Bawdy-houses, Taverns, Balls, Collations: Or else at the Tour a la Mode, where
there was still appointed some after-meeting, to treat of certain affairs, that
highly Import the Interest, and Welfare of your Dominions. I have indeed
carried my Mistress sometimes to the Church-Door, but it signified no more then
if I had carried her to a Conventicle; for all her Business there, was to meet
her Gallant, and to agree when they should meet next; according to the way of
Devotion now in Mode. To conclude; It is most certain, that I never took any
Creature (knowingly) into my Coach, that had so much as a Good Thought. And it
was so well known to us, that it was all one, to ask, If a Lady were a Maid;
or, if she had ever been in my Coach. If it appeared she had; He that married
her, knew beforehand, what he had to trust to. And after all this, ye have
made us a fair Requital. With That, the Devil fell a Laughing, and with five or
six Twingeing Jerks, half flayed the poor Coachman; so that I was even glad to
Retire; in pity partly to the Coachman, and partly to my self; for the
Currying of a Coachman, is little better then the turning up of a Dunghill.

My next Adventure was into a Deep Vault, where I began immediately to shudder,
and my Teeth chatter'd in my Head. I ask't the Meaning of it; and there came up
to me a Devil, with Kib'd Heels, and his Toes all Mortified; and told me that
That Quarter was allotted to the Buffons and Drolls, which are a people (says
he) of so starved a Conceit, and so cold a Discourse, that we are fain to
Chain, and Lock them up, for fear they should spoil the Temper of our Fire. I
ask't if a man might see them. The Devil told me yes, and showed me One of the
lewdest Kennels in Hell. And there were they at it, pe^king at One Another, and
nothing but the same fooleries over and over again, that they had practiced
upon Earth. Among the Buffons, I saw diverse that pas^'d here in the World for
Men of Honesty, and Honor: which were in, as the Devil told me, for Flattery,
and were a sort of Buffon, that goes betwixt the Bark and the Tree. But, why
are they condemned? said I. The other Buffons are condemned (quoth the Devil)
for want of Favor; and These, for having too much, and abusing it. You must
know, they come upon us, still at Unawares; and yet they find all things in
Readiness; the Cloth laid, and the Bed made, as if they were at home. To say
the Truth, we have some sort of Kindness for them; for they save us a great
deal of Trouble, in Tormenting one another.

Do you see him there? That, was a wicked, and a Partial Judge; and all he has
to say for himself, is, that he remembers the Time when he could have broke the
Neck of two Honest Causes, and He put them only out of Joint. That good fellow
there, was a careless Husband, and him we lodge too with the Buffons. He sold
his Wives Portion, Wife and all, to please his Companions; and turned both into
an Annuity. That Lady there (though a great One) is fain to take up too with
the Buffons, for they are both of a Humor: What They do with their Talk, she
does with her Body, and seasons it to all Appetites. In a word, you shall find
Buffons in all Conditions; and in effect, there are nigh as many, as there are
men and Women: For the whole world is given to Ieering, Slandering,
Backbiting, and there are more Natural Buffons, then Artificial.

At my going out of the Vault, I saw a matter of a Thousand Devils, following a
Drove of Pastry-men, and Breaking their Heads as they passed along, with Iron
Peels. Alack! cried one of them, that was yet in a whole Skin, it is hard the
Sin of the Flesh should be laid to our charge, that never had to do with Women.
Impudent, Nasty Rascals (quoth a Devil) who has deserved Hell, if they have
not? How many thousand men have these slovens poisoned, with the Grease of
their Heads, and Tails, instead of Mutton-Sewet? with Snot-Pies for Marrow;
and Flies for Currants? How many Stomach^ have they turned into Laystals with
the D^gs-Flesh; Horseflesh and other Carrion that they have put into them? And
do these Rogues complain (in the Devil's Name) of their sufferings? Leave your
Bawling, Ye Whelps, (says he) and know, that the Pain you endure, is nothing to
that of your Tormenters. And for your Part (says he, with a fowr Look) because
you are a stranger, you may go about your Business; but we have a Crow to pluck
with these fellows, before we part.

I went next, down a pair of stairs into a huge Cellar, where I saw men burning
in unquenchable Fire; and one of them Roaring, Cried out, I never over sold; I
never sold, but at Conscionable Rates, why am I punished thus? I durst have
sworn it had been Judas, but going Nearer him, to see if He had a Red-head, I
found him to be a Merchant of my Acquaintance, that died not long since. How
now, old Martin, (said I) art thou there? He was dogged, because I did not call
him Sir, and made no Answer. I saw his Grief, and told him how much He was to
blame, to cherish that Vanity even in Hell, that had brought him thither. And
what do ye think on it now (said I) Had not you better have traded in Blacks
then Christians? Had not you better have contented your self with a Little,
honestly got, then run the Hazard of your Soul for an Estate; and have gone to
Heaven a foot, rather then to the Devil on Horseback? My Friend was as Mute as
a Fish; whether out of Anger, Shame, or Grief, I know not. And then a Devil in
Office took up the Discourse. These Pick-Pocket Rogues, (says he) Did they
think to govern the World with their own Weights and Measures, in Sec^la
Seculorum. Methinks, the Blinking, and false lights of their shops, should have
Minded them of their Quarter in the Other World, aforehand. And it is all a
Case, with Iewellers, Goldsmiths, and Other Trades, that serve only to Flatter
and Bolster up the World in Luxury, and Folly. But if people would be wise,
these Youths should have little Enough to do. For what is their Cloth of Gold,
and Silver, their Silks, their Diamond, and Pearl, (which they sell at their
own Price) but matter of mere Wantonness, and Superfluity? These are they that
inveigle ye into all sorts of Extravagant Expenses, and so ruin ye Insensibly,
under color of Kindness, and Credit. For they set every thing at double the
Rate; and if you keep not touch at your Day, your Persons are imprisoned; your
Goods Seized; and your Estates Extended. And they that hel'pt to make you
Princes before, are now the forwardest to put you into the Condition of Beggars.

The Devil would have talked on, if I had given him the hearing, but there was
such a Laugh set up on one side of me, as if they would all have split; and I
went to see what the Matter was; for 'twas a strange thing, me thought, to hear
them so merry in Hell. The Business was, there were two men upon a Scaffold, in
Gentile habits, gaping as loud as they could Bawl. One of them had a great
Parchment in his Hand, displayed, with Diverse Labels hanging at it, and several
Seals. I thought at first i^ might have been Execution-day, and took the
Writing for a Pardon, or R^prieve. At every word they spoke, a matter of Seven
or Eight Thousand Devils burst out a Laughing, as they would have cracked their
Sides. And This again made me think, it might be some Iack-pudding, or
Mounte-bank, showing his Tricks, or his Attestations; with his Congregation of
fools about him. But nearer hand, I found my Mistake; and that the Devils Mirth
made the Gentlemen angry. At last, I perceived that this great Earnestness of
theirs was only to make out their Pedigree, and get themselves past for
Gentlemen; the Parchment being a Testimonial from the Heralds Office, to that
Purpose. My Father (says he with the writing in's Hand) bore Arms for his
Majesty in many Honorable Occasions, of Watching, and Warding; and has made
many a Tall Fellow speak to the Constable, at all hours of the Night. My Uncle
was the first man that ever was of the Order of the black-Guard: And we have
had five Brave Commanders of our Family, by my Father's side, that have served
the State in the Quality of Marshal's-men, and Turn-Keys, and given his Majesty
a fair Account of all the Prisoners committed to their Charge. And by my
Mother's side, it will not be denied, but that I am honorably descended; For
my Grandmother was never without ^ Dozen Chamber-maids, and Nurses in Family.
It may be 'twas her Trade (quoth the Devil) to procure Services, and Servants,
and consequently to deal in that Commodity. Well, Well, (said the Cavalier) she
was what she was; and I Am sure I tell you Nothing but Truth. Her Husband wore a
Sword, by his Place, for he was a Deputy-Marshal; and to prove my self a Man of
Honor, I have it here in Black and White, under the Seal of the Office. Why
must I then be quartered among a Pack of Rascals? My Gentleman Friend; (quoth
the Devil) your Grandfather wore a Sword, as He was Usher to a Fencing School;
and we know very well what his Son, and Grandchild can pretend to. But let that
pass; you have led a Wicked and infamous Life, and sp^nt your time, in Whoring,
Drinking, Blaspheming, and in Lewd Company; and do you tell us now of the
Privileges of your Nobility? Your Testimonials; and the Seal of the Office? A
Fart for your Privileges, Testimonials, Office and all. There is no Honor, but
Virtue. And if your Children, though they had a Scoundrel to their Father,
should come to do honorable and worthy things, we should look upon them as
Persons Sacred, and not dare to Meddle with them. But Talking is Time lost; You
were ever a Couple of Pitiful fellows, and your Tayls scarce worth the
Scalding. Have at ye, (says he) and at that word, with a huge Iron Bar He gave
him such a Salute over the Buttocks, that He took two or three turns in the
Air, Heels over Head, and dropped at last into the Common-shore; where never any
man as yet found the Bottom.

When his Companion had seen him Cut that Caper; This Usage (says he) may be
well enough for a Parchment Gentleman: but for a Cavalier of my Extraction, and
Profession, I suppose you will Treat him with somewhat more of Civility, and
Respect. Cavalier (quoth the Devil) if you have brought no better Plea along
with you, then the Antiquity of your House, you may even follow your Camerade,
for ought I know, for we find very few ancient Families, that had not some
Oppressor or Usurper, for their Founder; and they are commonly continued by the
same means, they were begun. How many are there of our Titular Nobility, that
write Noble, purely upon the Account of their Violence, and Injustice? Their
Subjects, and Tenants, what with Impositions, hard services, and Racked Rents,
are they not Worse then slaves? If they happen to have any thing Extraordinary,
as a pleasant Fruit; A Handsome Colt; a Good Cow; and that the Landlord, or his
Sweet Lady take a liking to it, they must either submit to part with it Gratis,
or else take their Pay in foul Language, or Bastinadoes. And it is well if they
'scape so: For many times when the sign's in Gemini; their Wives and Daughters
go to Pot, without any regard of Laws either Sacred or Profane. What Damned
Blasphemies and Imprecations do they make use of, to get Credit with a Mistress
or a Creditor, Upon a Faithless Promise! How intolerable is their Pride, and
Insolence, even toward many Considerable Officers, both in Church and State!
for They behave themselves as if all people below their Quality and Rank in the
World, were but as so many Brutes, or Worse. As if Humane Blood were not all of
a Color: As if Nature had not brought them into the world the Common way, or
Molded them of the same Materials with the Meanest Wretches upon the Earth.
And then for such as have Military Charges, and Commands; How many Great
Officers are there, that without any Consideration of their Own, or Their
Princes Honor, fall to spoil and Pillage? Cousening the State with false
Musters, and the Soldiers of their Pay; and giving them, instead of their Due
from the Prince, a Liberty of taking what is not their due from the People;
forcing them to take the Bread out of the poor Laborers Mouths, to fill their
own Bellies, and protecting them when they have done, in the most Execrable
Outrages Imaginable. And when the poor Soldier comes at last to be dismissed, or
disbanded; Lame, Sick, Beggarly, Naked almost, and Enraged; with Nothing left
him to trust to, but the highway to keep him from starving. What Mischief is
there in the world, that these men are not the Cause of? How many good Families
are utterly ruined, and at this day in the Hospital, for trusting to their
Oaths and Promises! and becoming bound for them, for vast sums of Money to
maintain them in Tipple, and Whores, and in all sorts of Luxury, and Riot? This
Rhetorical Devil would have said a Thousand times more, but that his Companions
called him off, and told him they had business elsewhere. The Cavalier hearing
that, my Friend, (said he) your Morals are very good, but yet with your Favor,
all men are not alike. There Is never a Barrel better Herring, (said the Devil)
You are all of ye tainted with Original Sin, and if you had been any better
then your fellows, you had never been sent hither. But if you are indeed so
Noble, as you say, you're worth the Burning, if 'twere but for your Ashes. And
that you may have no Cause of Complaint, you shall see, We Will treat you like a
person of your Condition. And in that Instant, Two Devils presented themselves;
the one of them Bridled, and Sadled; and the other, doing the Office of the
Squire; holding the Stirrup, with his left hand, and giving the Gentleman a
Lift into the Saddle with the Other. Which was no sooner done, but away he went
like an Arrow out of a Bow. I ask't the Devil then into what Country he
carried him. And he told me, Not far: for 'twas only matter of Decorum, to send
the Nobility to Hell, a Horseback. Look on that side now, says he, and so I
did; and There I saw the poor Cavalier in a huge Furnace, with the first
Inventers of Nobility, and Arms: As Cain; Cham; Nimrod; Esau; Romulus; Tarquin;
Nero; Caligula; Domitian; Heliogabalus; and (...) world of other Brave fellows,
that had made themselves famous by Usurpation, and Blood. The Place was a
little too hot for me, and so I retired, meditating on what I had heard; and
not a little satisfied with the Discourse of so learned a Devil. Till that
time, I took the Devil for a Notorious Liar; but I find now that He can speak
the Truth too, when he pleases; and I would not for all I am worth, but have
heard him Preach.

When I was thus far, my Curiosity carried me still farther; and within Twenty
Yards, I eame to a huge Muddy, Stinking Lake, near 'twice as big as that of
Geneva; and heard in it so strange a Noise, that I was almost out of my Wits, to
know what it was. They told me that the Lake was stored with Douegna's, or
Governantes, which are turned into a kind of Frogs in Hell, and perpetually
Driveling, Sputtering, and Croaking. Me thought, The Conversion was apt enough;
for they are Neither Fish, nor Flesh, no more then Frogs; And Only the lower
Parts of them are Man's-Meat, but their Heads are Enough to turn a very good
Stomach. I could not but Laugh, to see how they Gaped, and stretched out their
Legs as they swam, and still as we came Near, They Would Scud away and Dive.

This was no place to stay in, there was so Noisome a Vapor; and so I struck
off, upon the Left Hand; where I saw a Number of old men, beating their
Breasts, and Tearing their Faces; with bitter Groans, and Lamentations. It made
my Heart ache to see them, and I ask't what they were: Answer was made, that I
was now in The Quarter of the Fathers that damned themselves, to raise their
Posterity; which were called by some, The Unadvised. Wretch that I am! (cried
one of them) The greatest Penitent that ever lived, never suffered the
Mortification I have endured; I have Watched; I have Fasted; I have scarce had
any Clothes to my Back* My whole Life has been a Restless Course of Torment,
both of Body, and Mind* and all This, to get Money for my Children; that I
might see them well Married; Buy them Places at Court, or procure them some
other Preferment in the World: starving my self in the Conclusion, rather then
I would lessen the Provision, I had made for my Posterity. And yet
Notwithstanding this my fatherly care, I was scarce sooner Dead, then
forgotten: and my Next Heir buried me without Tears, or Mourning; and indeed
without so much as paying of Legacies, or praying for my Soul: as if they had
already received certain Intelligence of my Damnation. And to aggravate my
Sorrows, The Prodigals are now Squandering, and consuming that Estate in
Gaming, Whoring, and Debauches, which I had scraped together by so much
Industry, Vexation and Oppression, and for which I suffer at this Instant such
Insupportable Torments. This should have been thought on before (cried a Devil)
for sure you have heard of the Old saying. Happy is the Child whose Father goes
to the Devil. At which word, the Old Misers brake out into fresh Rage, and
Lamentation, Tearing their Flesh, with Tooth and Nayl, in so ruful a manner,
that I was no longer able to endure the Spectacle.

A Little further, there was a Dark, Hideous Prison, where I heard the
Clattering of Chains; the Crackling of Flames; the Slapping of Whips; and a
confused outcry of Complaints. I ask't what Quarter this was; and they told me
it was the Quarter of the Oh that I had's! What are those said I? Answer was
made, that they were a Company of Brutish Sots, so absolutely delivered up to
Vice, that they were damned insensibly, and in Hell before they were aware.
They are now reflecting upon their Miscarriages, and Omissions, and perpetually
crying out; Oh that I had Examined my Conscience! Oh that I had frequented the
Sacraments! Oh that I had humbled my self with Fasting, and Prayer! Oh that I
had served God as I ought! Oh that I had Visited the Sick* and Relieved the
Poor! Oh that I had set a Watch before the Door of my Lips!

I left these late Repentants, (as it appeared) in Exchange for worse, which
were shut up in a Base Court, and the Nastiest that ever I saw. These were such
as had ever in their Mouths. God is Merciful, and will pardon me. How can this
be, (said I) that these people should be Damned? When Condemnation is an Act of
Justice, not of Mercy; I perceive you are simple, (quoth the Devil) for half
these you see here, are condemned with the Mercy of God in their Mouths. And to
Explain my self, Consider I pray'e, how many Sinners are there, that go on in
their Ways, in spite of Reproof, and Good Counsel: and still this is their
Answer; God is Merciful, and will not damn a Soul for so small a Matter. But
let them talk of Mercy as they please; so long as they persist in a Wicked
Life, we are like to have their Company at last. By your Argument (said I)
there is no trusting to Divine Mercy. You mistake me (quoth the Devil) for every
good Thought, and Work, flows from that Mercy. But This I say: He that
perseveres in his Wickedness, and makes use of the Name of Mercy, only for a
Countenance to his Impieties, does but Mock the Almighty, and has no Title to
that Mercy. For it is vain to expect Mercy from above, without doing any thing
in order to it. It properly belongs to the Righteous, and the Penitent; and
they that have the most of it upon the Tongue, have commonly the least thought
of it in their Hearts: And it is a great Aggravation of Guilt, to Sin the more,
in Confidence of an Abounding Mercy. It is True that many are received to
Mercy, that are utterly Unworthy of it, which is no wonder, since No man of
himself can deserve it: But men are so Negligent of seeking it betimes, that
they put that off, to the last, which should have been the first part of their
business; and many times their Life is at End, before they begin their
Repentance. I did not think so Damned a Doctor could have made so good a
Sermon. And there I left him.

I came next, to a Noisome Dark hole, and there I saw a Company of Dyers, all
in Dirt, and Smoke, intermixed with the Devils, and so alike, that it would have
posed the subtlest Inquisitor in Spain, to have said, which were the Devils,
and which the Dyers.

There stood at my Elbow, a strange kind of Mungrel Devil, begot betwixt a
Black, and a White; with a Head so bestuck with Little Horns, that it looked at
a Distance like a Hedg-hog. I took the Boldness to ask him, where they
quartered the Sodomites, the Old Women and the Cuckolds. As for the Cuckolds,
(said He) they are all over Hell, without any Certain Quarter, or Station; and
in Truth, it is no easy matter to know a Cuckold from a Devil, for (like kind
Husbands) they wear their Wives favors still, and the very same Headpieces in
Hell, that they wore living in the world. As to the Sodomites, we have no more
to do with them, then needs must; but upon all Occasions, we either Fly, or
Face them: for if ever we come to give them a Broadside, It Is ten to one but
we get a Hit betwixt Wind and Water; and yet we fence with our Tayls, as well
as we can, and they get now and then a Flap over the Mouth into the Bargain.
And for the Old women, we make them stand off; for we take as little pleasure
in them, as you do: And yet the Jades will be persecuting us with their
Passions; and ye shall have a Bawd of five and fifty, do ye all the Gamboles of
a Girl of fifteen. And yet after all this, There Is not an old Woman in Hell;
for let her be as old as Paul's; Bald, Blind, Toothless, Wrinckled, Decrepit:
This is not long of her Age, she will tell you; but a Terrible Fit of sickness
last year, that fetched off her Hair, and brought her so low, that she has not
yet recovered her flesh again. She lost her Eyes by a Hot Rheum: and utterly
spoiled her Teeth with Cracking of Peach-stones, and Eating of Sweetmeats,
when she was a Maid. And when the Weight of her Years has almost brought both
Ends together, It Is nothing she will tell ye but a Crick she has got in her Back:
And though she might recover her Youth again, by confessing her Age, she will
never acknowledge it.

My next encounter was, a Number of People making their moan, that they had
been taken away by sudden Death. That Is an Impudent Lie (cried a Devil) saving
this Gentleman's presence) for no man dies suddenly. Death surprises no man,
but gives all men sufficient warning, and Notice. I was much taken with the
Devil's Civility, and Discourse; which he pursued after this manner. Do ye
complain (says He) of sudden Death? that have carried Death about ye, ever
since you were Born; That have been entertained with daily Spectacles of
Carcasses and Funerals; That have heard so many Sermons upon the subject; and
read so many good Books upon the Frailty of Life, and the Certainty of Death.
Do ye not know that every Moment ye live, brings ye nearer to your End? Your
Clothes wear out; Your Woods, and your Houses decay; and yet ye look that your
Bodies should be Immortal. What are the Common Accidents and Diseases of Life,
but so many warnings to provide your self for a Remove? Ye have Death at the
Table, in your Daily Food, and Nourishment; for your Life is maintained by the
Death of ^ther Creatures. And you have the ^^vely picture of it, every Night
for your Bedfellow. With what Face then can you Charge your Misfortunes upon
sudden Death? that have spent your whole Life, both at Bed, and at Board, among
so many Remembrances of your Mortality. No, No; change your style, and
hereafter confess your selves to have been Careless and Incredulous. You Dye,
t^in^ing you are not to Dye yet; and forgetting that Death grows upon you, and
goes along with ye from one End of your Life to the Other, without
Distinguishing of Persons, or Ages; Sex, or Quality: and whether it finds ye
Well, or Ill-doing; As the Tree falls, so it Lies.

Turning toward my left Hand, I saw a great many Souls that were put up in
Gally-pots, with Assa foetida, Galbanum, and a Company of Nasty Oils that
served them for Syrrup. What a Damned stink is here (Cried I, stopping my Nose)
We are now come undoubtedly to the Devil's house of Office; No, No, (said their
Tormenter) which was a kind of a Yellowish Complexion'd Devil) It Is a
Confection of Apothecaries. A sort of people, that are commonly Damned for
Compounding the Medici^^^ by which their Patients hope to be saved. To give
them their due; These are your only True, and Chemical Philosophers; and worth
a thousand of Raymund Lullius, Hermes, Geber, Ruspicella, Avicen, and their
Fellows; It Is true, they have written fine things of the Transmutation of
Metals; but did they ever make any Gold? Or if they did, We have lost the
Secret. Whereas your Apothecaries, out of a Little Puddle-water; a Bundle of
Rotten sticks; a Box of Flies; Nay out of Toads, Vipers, and a Sir Reverence it
self, will fetch ye Gold ready Minted, and fit for the Market; which is more
then all your Philosophical Projecters ever pretended to. There is no Herb so
Poisonous, (let it be Hemlock) nor any stone so dry, (suppose the Pumice it
self) but they will draw silver out of it. And then for words, it is Impossible to
make up any word out of the four and twenty Letters, but they will show ye a Drug,
or a Plant of the Name; and turn the Alphabet into as good Money as any's in
your Pocket. Ask them for an Eye-Tooth of a Flying Toad; they will tell ye, yes,
ye may have of it, in powder; Or if you had rather have the Infusion of a Tench
of the Mountains, in a little Eeles Milk, it is all one to them. If there be but
any Money stirring, you shall have what you will, though there be to such thing
in Nature. S^ that it looks as if all ^he Plants, and stones of the Creation,
had their several powers and Virtues given them, only for the Apothecaries
sakes; and as if Words themselves had been only made for their Advantage. Ye
call them Apothecaries; but instead of That, I pray'e call them Arm^r^rs; and
their Shops, Arsenals; Are not their Medicines as Certain Death, as Swords,
Daggers, or Muskets? while their Patients are Purged and Blouded into the
other World, without any regard either to Distemper, Measure, or Season.

If you will now see the Pleasantest sight you have seen yet, walk up but these
two steps, and you shall see a Jury (or Conspiracy) of Barber-Surgeons, sitting
upon life and Death. You must think that any Divertisement there was welcome,
so that I went up, and found it in Truth a very pleasant Spectacle. These
Barbers were most of them Chained by the Middle; their Han^s at Liberty; and
Every one of them, a Cittern about his Neck; and upon his knees a Chess-board:
and still as he reached to have a Touch at the Citte^^, the Instrument
Vanished; and so did the Chess-board, when he thought to have a Game at
Draughts; which is directly Tantalizing the poor Rogues, for a Cittern is as
Natural to a Barber, as Milk to a Calf. Some of them were washing of Asses
Brains, and putting them in again; and scouring of Negroes to make them White.

When I had laughed my Fill at these fooleries, my next Discovery was, of a
great many people, Grumbling and Muttering, that There was no Body looked after
them; No not so much as to torment them; as if Their Tayls were not as well
worth the Toasting, as their Neighbors. Answer was made, that being a kind of
Devils themselves, they might put in for some sort of Authority in the Place,
and Execute the Office of Tormenters. This made me ask what they were. And a
Devil told me (with Respect) that they were a Company of Ungracious,
Left Handed Wretches, that could do Nothing aright. And their Grievance was
that they were Quartered by Themselves; but not knowing whether they were Men
or No; or indeed what else to make of them, we did not know how to Match them,
or in what Company to put them. In the world they are looked upon as Ill Omens;
And let any man meet one of them, upon a Journey in a Morning, Fasting; it is
the same thing as if a Hare had cross't the way upon him; He presently turns
head in a Discontent, and goes to bed again. Ye know that Scaevola, when he
found his Mistake, in killing Another, for Porsenna (the Secretary, for the
Prince) burned his Right Hand in Revenge of the Miscarriage: Now the severity
of the Vengeance, was not so much the Maiming or the Cripling of Himself, but
the Condemning of himself to be for ever Left Handed. And so it is with a
Malefactor that suffers Justice; The Shame, and Punishment, does not lie so
much in the Loss of his Right Hand, as that the other is Left. And it was the
Curse of an old Bawd, to a fellow that had vexed her, That He might go to the
Devil by the stroke of a Left Handed Man. If the Poets speak Truth, (as 'twere
a Wonder if they should not) The Left is the Unlucky side; and there never came
any Good from it. And for my last argument against these Creatures; The Goats,
and Reprobates stand upon the Left Hand: And Left Handed men are, in Effect, a
sort of Creature that is made to do Mischief; Nay whether I should ^all them
Men, or no, I know not.

Hereupon, a Devil becken'd me to come softly to him; and so I did, without a
word speaking or the least Noise in the World. Now (says he) if you will see the
Daily Exercise of Ill-favored Women, look through that Lattice-Window. And
there I saw such a Kennel of Ugly Bitches, you would have blessed your self.
Some, with their faces so pounced, and speckled, as if they had been scarify'd,
and newly past the Cupping-Glass; with a world of little Plasters, long,
round, square; and briefly, cut out into such Variety, that it would have posed
a good Mathematician to have found out another Figure; And you would have sworn
that they had been either at Cats-play, or Cuffs. Others, were scraping their
faces with pieces of Glass; tearing up their Eyebrows by the Roots, like Mad:
And some that had none to tear, were fetching out of their black Boxes, such as
they could get, or make. Others were powd'ring, and curling their false Locks;
or fast'ning their new Ivory Teeth, in the place of their old Ebony Ones. Some
were Chewing Lemon-pill, or Cinnamon, to countenance a foul Breath; And raising
themselves upon their Ciopines, that their View might be the fairer, and their
fall the Deeper. Others were quarrelling with their Looking-Glasses, for
showing them such Hags-faces: and cursing the state of Venice for Entertaining
no Better workmen. Some were stuffing out their Bodies, like Pack-saddles, to
cover secret Deformities: And some again had so many Hoods over their faces, to
conceal the Ruins, that I could hardly discern what they were; And These past
for Penitents. Others, with their pots of Hogs Grease, and Pomatum, were
sleeking, and polishing their faces, and indeed their foreheads were bright,
and shining, though there were neither Suns, nor Stars in That Firmament: Some
there were (in Fine) that would have fetched a man's Guts up at's mouth, to see
them with their Masks of After-Births; and with their Menstruous Slibber
Slobbers, dawbing one another to take away the Heats, and Bubos. Nasty and
Abominable! I cried. Well (quoth the Devil) you see now how far a Woman's Wit,
and Invention will carry her to her own Destruction. I could not speak one word
for Astonishment at so horrid a spectacle; till I had a little recollected my
self: and then (said I) If I may deal freely without Offense; I dare Defy all
the Devils in Hell, to outdo these Women. But pray'e let us be gone, for the
sight of them, makes my very Heart ache.

Turn about then, (said the Devil) and there was a fellow sitting in a Chair,
all alone; never a Devil near him; No Fire, or Frost; No Heat, or Cold; or any
thing else; that I could perceive, to torment him; and yet crying and Roaring
out the most hideously of any thing I had yet heard in Hell: Tearing his Flesh;
and Beating his Body, like a Bedlam; and his Heart, all the while, Bleeding at
his Eyes. Good Lord, thought I, what ails this Wretch, to yell out thus when no
Body Hurts him* So I went up to Him; Friend (said I) what is the meaning of all
this Fury, and Transport? for, so far as I can see, there is nothing to trouble
you. No, No, (says he with a Horrid Outcry, and with all the Extravagances of
a Man in Rage, and Despair) you do not see my Tormentors; but the all-searching
Eye of the Almighty, sees my Pains, as well as my Transgressions; and with a
severe, and Implacable Justice, has condemned me to suffer Punishments
answerable to my Crimes. (Which Words He uttered with redoubled Clamours) My
Executioners are in my Soul, and all the Plagues of Hell in my Conscience. My
Memory serves me instead of a Cruel Devil. The Remembrance of the Good I should
have done, and Omitted; And of the Ill, I should not have done, and did. The
Remembrance of the wholesome Counsels I have rejected, and of the Ill example I
have given. And for the Aggravation of my Misery; where my Memory leaves
afflicting me, my Understanding begins: showing me the Glories, and Beatitudes
I have lost, which others enjoy, who have gained Heaven, with less Anxiety, and
Pain then I have endured, to compass my Damnation. Now am I perpetually
meditating on the Comforts, Beauties, Felicities, and Raptures of Paradise,
only to inflame, and exasperate my Despair in Hell: begging in Vain, but for
one moments Interval of Ease, without obtaining any; for my Will is also as
Inexorable, as either my Memory, or my Understanding. And These (my Friend of
the other world) are the Three Faculties of my Soul, which Divine Justice, for
my Sins, has converted into three Tormentors, that Torture me without Noise;
Into Three Flames, that burn me without consuming. And if I chance at any time
to have the least Remission, or Respite; The Worm of my Conscience gnaws my
Soul, and finds it, to an Insatiable Hunger, an Immortal Aliment, and
Entertainment. At that word, turning toward me with a Hellish Yell; Mortal
(says he) learn, and be assured from me, that all those that either bury or
misemploy their Talents, ^arry a Hell within Themselves, and are Damned even
above ground; and so He returned to his Usual Clamours. Upon this, I left him,
miserably sad and pensive. Well, thought I, what a weight of sin lies upon this
Creatures Conscience! Whereupon the Devil observing me in a Muse, told me in my
Ear, that this Fellow had been an Atheist, and believed neither God, nor Devil.
Deliver me then, said I, from that Vnsanctify'd Wisdom, that serves us only for
our further Condemnation.

I was gone but a step or two aside, and I saw a world of people running after
Burning Chariots, with a great many Souls in them, and the Devils tearing them
with Pincers: and before them, marched Certain Officers, making Proclamation of
their Sentence, which with much ado I got near enough to hear, and it was to
this effect. Divine Justice has appointed this Punishment to the Scandalous,
for giving Ill Examples to their Neighbors. And at the same time, several of
the Damned laid their sins to their Charge, and cried out, that 'twas long of
Them they were thus Tormented. So that the Scandalous were punished both for
their own Sins, and for the Offenses of those they had misled to their
Destruction. And these are they of whom it is said, that They had better never
have been born.

My very Soul was full of Anguish, to see so many Doleful Spectacles; and yet I
could not but smile, to see the Vintners every where up and down Hell, as free,
as if they had been in their Taverns, and only Prisoners upon Parole. I ask't
how they came by that Privilege; and a Devil told me, there was no need of
shackling them, or so much as shutting them up; for there was no fear of their
making a 'scape, that took so much pains in the World, and made it their whole
Business to come thither. Only, says he; if we can keep them from throwing
Water in the Fire, as they do in their Wines, we are well Enough. But if you
would see somewhat worth the while, leave these fellows, and follow me; and
I Will show ye Judas and his Brethren, the Stewards, and Purse-bearers: so I did
as he bad me, and he brought me to Judas, and his Companions, who had no Faces,
diverse of them, and most of them no Foreheads.

I was well enough pleased to see him, and to be better informed; for I had
ever Phansy'd him to be a kind of an Olive-colour'd Tawny Complexion'd fellow,
without a Beard; and an Eunuch into the Bargain: which perhaps (nay probably)
He was; for nothing but a Capon, a Thing un-man'd, could ever have been guilty
of so sordid, and Treacherous a Villainy, as to sell, and betray his Master,
with a Kiss; and after That, so Cowardly, as to hang himself in Despair, when
he had done. I do believe, however, what the Church says of him: That He had a
Carrot Beard, and a Red Head; but it may be his Beard was burned, and as he
appeared to me in Hell, I could not but take him for an Eunuch, which to deal
freely, is my Opinion of all the Devils, for they have no Hair; and they are
for the most part all wrinkled, and Baker-legg'd.

Judas was beset with a Great many Money-Mongers, and Purse-bearers, that were
telling him stories of the pranks they had played, and the Tricks they had put
upon their Masters, after his Example. Coming up to them, I perceived that
their Punishment was like that of Titius, who had a Vultur continually gnawing
upon his Liver; for there were a Number of Ravenous Birds perpetually preying
upon them, and tearing off their Flesh; which grew again as fast as they
devoured it; a Devil in the mean time crying out, and the Damned filling the
whole place with Clamor and Horror; Judas, with his Purse, and his Pot by his
side, bearing a large part in the Outcry, and Torment. I had a huge mind (me
thought,) to have a word or two with Judas; and so I went to him with this
Greeting: Thou Perfidious, Impudent, Impious Traitor, (said I) to sell thy Lord
and Master at so base a Price, like an Avaricious Rascal. If men, (said he)
were not ungrateful, they would rather pity, or Commend me, for an Action so
much to their Advantage, and done in Order to their Redemption. The Misery is
Mine that am to have no part my self, in the Benefit I have procured to others.
Some Heretics there are, (I must confess to my Comfort) that adore me for it.
But do you take me for the only Judas? No, No. There have been many since the
Death of my Master, and there are at this Day, more wicked, and ungrateful, Ten
thousand times then my self; that buy the Lord of Life, as well as sell him,
scourging and Crucifying him daily with more Spite, and Ignominy then the Jews.
The Truth is, I had an Itch to be fingering of Money, and Bartering, from my
Entrance into the Apostleship. I began, you know, with the Pot of Ointment,
which I would fain have sold, under color of a Relief to the Poor. And I went
on* to the selling of my Master, wherein I did the World a greater good then I
intended, to my own irreparable ruin. My Repentance, now signifies Nothing. To
conclude, I am the only Steward that is condemned for Selling; All the rest are
damned for Buying: And I must entreat you, to have a better Opinion of me; for
if you will look but a little lower here, you will find people a Thousand times worse
then my self. Withdraw draw then (said I) for I have had talk enough with Judas.

I went down then, some few steps, as Judas directed me; and There, I saw a
world of Devils upon the March, with Rods, and Stirrup-leathers in their Hands,
lashing a Company of handsome Lasses, stark naked, and driving them out of Hell
(which me thought was pity, and if I had had some of them in a Corner, I should
have treated them better) With the Stirrup-Leathers, they disciplined a Litter
of Bawds. I could not Imagine why These; of all others, should be expelled the
place, and ask't the Question. Oh, says a Devil, These are our Factresses in
the world, and the best we have, so that we send them back again to bring more
Grist to the Mill: And indeed, if it were not for Women, Hell would be but
thinly peopled; for what with the Art, the Beauty, and the Allurements of the
Young Wenches; and the Sage Advice and Counsel of the Bawds, they do us very
great services. Nay; for fear any of our Good Friends should tire upon the
Rode, they send them to us on Horseback, or bring them themselves, even to the
very Gates, lest they should miss their way.

Pursuing my journey, I saw, a good way before me, a large Building, that looked
(me thought) like some Enchanted Castle, or the Picture of Ill-Luck: It was all
ruinous, the Chimneys down, the Planchers all to pieces, only the Bars of the
Windows standing: The Doors all bedaw'd with dirt, and patcht up with
Barrel-Heads, where they had been broken. The Glass gone, and here and there a
Quarrel supplied with Paper. I made no doubt at first but the house was
forsaken; but coming nearer, I found it otherwise, by a horrible confusion of
tongues and noises within it. As I came just up to the Door; one opened it, and
I saw in the house many Devils, Thieves, and Whores. One of the craftiest Jades
in the Pack, placed her self presently upon the Threshold, and made her address
to my Guide and me. Gentlemen, says she, how comes it to pass, I pray'e, that
people are damned both for giving and taking? The Thief is condemned for taking
away from another; and we are condemned for giving what is our own. I do not
find, truly, any injustice in our Trade; and if it be lawful to give every one
their own, and out of their own; why are we condemned? We found it a nice
point, and sent the Wench to Counsel learned in the Law, for a resolution in
the Case. Her mentioning of Thieves made me inquire after the Scriveners and
Notaries. Is it possible (said I) that you should have none of them here? for I
do not remember that I have seen so much as one of them upon the way; and yet I
had occasion for a Scrivener, and made a search for one. I do believe indeed
(quoth the Devil) that you have not found any of them upon the Road. How then?
(said I) what, are they all saved? No, no (cried the Devil) but you must
understand, that they do not foot it hither, as other mortals; but come upon
the Wing, in Troops like Wild-geese; so that it is no wonder you see none of
them upon the way. We have millions of them, but they cut it away in a trice,
for they are damn'dly rank-wing'd, and will make a flight, in the third part of
a minute, betwixt Earth and Hell. But if there be so many (said I) how comes it
we see none of them? For that (quoth the Devil) we change their names, when
they come hither once, and call them no longer Notaries or Scriveners, but
Cats: and they are so good mousers, that though this place is large, old, and
ruinous; yet you see not so much as a Rat or a mouse in Hell: how full soever
of all other sorts of Vermin. Now ye talk of Vermin (said I) are there any
Catchpoles here? No not one (says he.) How so (quoth I?) when I dare undertake
there are five hundred Rogues of the Trade for one that is ought. The Reason is
(says the Devil) that every Catchpole upon Earth, carries a Hell in's Bosom.
You have still (said I, crossing my self) an aching tooth at those poor Varlets.
Why not (cried he) for they are but Devils incarnate, and so damn'dly verst in
the art of tormenting, that we live in continual dread of losing our places,
and that his Infernal Majesty should take these Rascals into his Service.

I had enough of this, and traveling on, I saw a little way off, a great
enclosure, and a world of Souls shut up in it; some of them weeping and
lamenting without measure, others in a profound silence. And this I understood
to be the Lovers Quarter. It sadn'd me to consider, that Death it self could
not kill the lamentations of Lovers. Some of them were discoursing their
passions, and teizing themselves with fears and jelousies; casting all their
miseries upon their appetites and phansies, that still made the Picture
infinitely fairer than the Person. They were for the most part troubled with a
simple disease, called (as the Devil told me) I Thought. I asked him what that
was, and he answered me, it was a Punishment suitable to their Offense: for
your Lovers, when they fall short of their Expectations, either in the pursuit,
or enjoyment of their Mistresses, they are wont to say, Alas! I Thought she
would have loved me: I Thought she would never have pressed me to marry her: I
Thought she would have been a Fortune to me: I Thought she would have given me
all she had: I Thought she would have cost me nothing: I Thought she would have
asked me nothing: I Thought she would have been true to my Bed: I Thought she
would have bin dutiful and modest: I Thought she would never have kept her
Gallant. So that all their Pain and damnation comes from I thought This or
That, or So, or So.

In the middle of them was Cupid, a little beggarly Rogue, and as naked as he
was born, only here and there covered with an odd kind of Embroidery; but
whether it was the workmanship of the Itch, Pox, or Measles, I could not
perfectly discover; and ^lose by him was this Inscription. Many a good Fortune
goes to wrack;
And so does many an able b^ck;
With following Whores, and Cards and Dice*
We Are Pox'd and beggared in a^trice.


A ha! (said I) by these Rimes methinks the Poets should not be far off; and
the word was hardly out of my mouth, when I discovered millions of them through
a Park-Pale, and so I stopped to look upon them. (It s^^ms in H^ll they are not
called Poets now, but Fools) One of them showed me the Women's Quarter there
hard by, and asked me what I thought of it, and of the handsome Ladies in it. Is
it not true (says he) that a Buxome Lass is a kind of half-Chambermaid to a
man? when she has stripped him and brought him to Bed, she has done her business,
and never troubles her self any further about the helping him up again, and
dressing him. How now (said I?) have ye your Quirks and Conceits in Hell? In
troth ye are pleasant: I thought your edge had been taken off. With that, out
stepped the most miserable Wretch of the whole Company laden with Irons: Ah!
(quoth he) I would to God the first Inventer of Rimes and Poetry were here in
my Place, and then he went on with this following and sad Complaint. A
Complaint of the Poets in Hell:
Oh, this damned trade of Versifying
Has brought us all to Hell for lying
For writing what we do not think,
Merely to make the Verse cry clink.
For rather than abuse the meeter,
Black shall be white, Paul shall be Peter.
One time I called a Lady, Whore;
Which in my Soul she was no more
Than I am; a brave Lass, no Beggar,
And true, as ever man laid leg over.
Not out of malice, Jove's my witness,
But merely for the Verses fitness.
Now we are all made, said I, if luck hold,
And then I called a fellow Cuckold;
Though the Wife was (or I Will be hanged)
As good a Wench as ever twang'd.
I was once plaguely put to it;
This would not hit, that would not do it;
At last, I circumcised ('it is true)
A Christian, and baptized a Jew.
Nay I Have made Herod Innocent
For Riming to Long-Parliament:
Now to conclude, we are all damned ho,
For nothing but a game at Crambo.
And for a little jingling pleasure,
Condemned to Torments without measure:
Which is a little hard in my sense,
To fry thus for Poetic License.
It Is not for sin of Thought or Deed,
But for bare sounds, and words we bleed:
While the Cur Cerberus lies growling
In consort with our catterwowling.


So soon as he had done; There is not in the world (said I) a more ridiculous
frenzy, than yours, to be poetizing in Hell. The humor sticks close sure, or
the fire would have fetched it out. Nay (cried a Devil) these Versifiers are a
strange Generation of Buffons. The time that others spend in Tears and Groans
for their sins and follies; these Wretches employ in Songs and Madrigals; and
if they chance to light upon the critical minute, and get a snap at a Lady,
all is worth nothing, unless the whole Kingdom ring of it, in some miserable
Sing-song or other, under the name forsooth of Phillis, Chloris, Sylvia, or the
like: and the goodly Idol must be decked and dressed up with Diamond, Pearl,
Rubies, Musque, and Amber, and both the Indies are too little to furnish Eyes,
Lips, and Teeth for this Imaginary Goddess. And yet after all this magnificence
and bounty, it would put the poor Devil's credit upon the stretch, to take up
an Old Petty-coat in Long-Lane, or a pair of Cast-shooes, at the next Cobblers.
Beside; we can give no Account either of their Country, or Religion. They have
Christian Names, but most Heretical Souls; They are Arabians in their Hearts:
and in their Language, Gentiles; but to say the Truth, they fall short of the
right Pagans in their Manners. If I stay here a little longer, (said I to my
self) This spiteful Devil will hit me over the Thumbs e're I Am aware; for I was
half Jealous, that he took me already for a piece of a Poet.

For fear of being Discovered, I went my way, and my Next Visit was to the
Impertinent Devotes; whose very Prayers are made up of Impiety, and
Extravagance. Oh! what Sighing was there, and Sobbing! Groaning, and Whining!
Their Tongues were tied up to a perpetual Silence; Their Souls, Drooping; and
their Ears condemned to hear eternally the hideous cries and Reproaches of a
wheasing Devil, greeting them after this manner. Oh, Ye Impudent and Profane
Abusers of Prayer, and Holy Duties! that treat the Lord of Heaven and Earth, in
His own house, with le^^ respect then ye would do a Merchant upon the Change,
sneaking into a Corner with your Execrable Petitions, for fear of being
overheard by your Neighbors; and yet without any scruple at all, ye can
Expose, and offer them up to that Eternal Purity! shameless Wretches that ye
are! Lord, (says one) take the Old man, my Father, to thy self, I beseech Thee,
that I may have his Office and Estate. Oh, that this Uncle of mine would but
march off! There Is a Fat Bishopric, and a good Deanery; I would the Devil had
the Incumbent so I had the Dignity. Now for a lusty Pot of Guinneys, or a Lucky
hand at Dice if it be thy pleasure, and then I would not doubt of good Matches
for my Children. Lord, make me His Majesty's Favorite and Thy Servant; that I
may get what is Convenient, and keep what I have gotten. Grant me This, and I do
here engage my self, to entertain six Blew-Coats, and Bind them out to good
Trades; to set up a Lecture for every day of the Week; to give one Third part
of my clear gains to Charitable Uses; and another, toward the Repairing of
Paul's; and to pay all honest Debts, so far as may stand with my Private
Convenience. Blind and Ridiculous Madness! for Dust and Ashes thus to reason
and Condition with the Almighty! for Beggars to talk of Giving, and obtrude
their Vain and unprofitable Offerings upon the Inexhaustible fountain of Riches
and Bounty! To Pray for Those things as Blessings, which are commonly showered
down upon us for our Confusion and Punishment. And then in Case your Wishes
take effect; what becomes of all the Sacred Vows and Promises ye made, in
storms, (perhaps) Sickness, or Adversity? so soon as ye have gained your Port,
recovered your Health; or Patched up a Broken Fortune, you show your selves,
all of ye, a pack of Cheats; Your Vows, and Promises are not worth so many
Rushes: They are forgotten with your Dreams; and to keep a Promise upon
Devotion, that you made out of Necessity, is no Article of your Religion. Why
do ye not ask for Peace of Conscience? Increase of Grace? The Aid of the
Blessed Spirit? But you are too much taken up with the Things of this World, to
attend those spiritual Advantages and Treasures; and to consider, that the most
acceptable Sacrifices and Oblations you can make to the Almighty, are Purity of
Mind, an humble Spirit, and a Fervent Charity. The Almighty takes delight to be
often called upon, that He may often pour down his Blessings upon his
Pe^itioners. But such is the Corruption of Humane Nature, that Men seldom think
of him, unless under affliction; and therefore it is, that they are often
Visited; for by Adversity, they are brought to the Knowledge, and Exercise of
their Duty. I would now have you consider, how little Reason there is in your
Ordinary Demands. Put Case you have your Asking; what are you the better for
the Grant? since it fails you at last; because you did not ask aright. When you
die, your Estate goes to your Children; and for their parts, you are scarce
cold, before you are forgotten. You are not to expect they should bestow much
upon Works of Charity; for if nothing went that way while you were living:
They Will live after your Example when you are Dead. And beside; there is no Merit
in the Case. At this word some of the poor Creatures were about to Reply; but
the Devils had put Barnacles upon their Lips, that Hindered them.

From thence, I went to the Witches and Wizards; such as pretend to cure Man
and Beast by Charms, Words, Amulets, Characters: and These were all burning
alive. These (says a Devil) are a Company of Cousening Rogues; the most
accursed Villains in Nature. If they help one man, they kill another, and only
remove the Disease from a worse to a Better: And yet there is no great Clamor
against them neither; for if the Patient recover, he is well enough content,
and the Doctor Gets both Reputation and Reward for his Pains. If He dies, his
mouth is stopped, and forty to one the next Heir does him a good turn for the
Dispatch. So that, Hit, or Miss; All is well at last. If you enter into a
Debate with them about their Remedies, They Will tell you, they learned the
Mystery of a certain Jew; and There Is the Original of the Secret. Now to hear
these Quacks give you the History of their Cures, is beyond all the Plays and
Farces in the World. You shall have a fellow tell you of fifteen people that
were run clean through the Body, and glad for a matter of three days to carry
their Puddings in their Hands; that in four and twenty hours he made them as
whole as Fishes, and no so much as a Scar for a Remembrance of the Orifice. Ask
him, when and where? you will find it some Twelve Hundred Leagues off, in a Terra
Incog^ita, by the Token, that at that time he was Physician in Ordinary to a
great Prince that died about five and twenty years ago.

Come, Come; (Cried a Devil) make an End of this Visit, and you shall see those
now, that Judas told you were ten times Worse then himself. I went along with
him, and he brought me to a Passage into a great Hall, where there was a Damned
smell of Brimstone, and a Company of Match-makers, as I thought at first; but
they proved afterward to be Alchymists, and the Devils examining them upon
Interrogatories, who were filthily put to it, to understand their Gibbrish.
Their Talk was much of the Planetary Metals; Gold they called Sol; Silver,
Luna; Tin, Jupiter; Copper, Venus. They had about them, their Fornaces,
Crucibles, Coal, Bellows, Clay, Minerals, Dung, Man's Blood, Powders, and
Alimbecks. Some were Calcining; Others Washing; Here Purifying; There
Separating. Fixing what was Volatile, in one place; and Rarifying what was Fix
in another. Some were upon the Work of Transmutation, and Fixing of Mercury
with Monstrous Hammers, upon an Anvile. And after they had resolved the Viscous
matter, and sent out the subtler parts, that they came to the Coppel, All went
away in Fume. Some again were in a hot dispute, What Fuel was best; and whether
Raymund Lullius his Fire, and no Fire, could be any thing else then Lime; or
otherwise to be understood of the Light Effective of Heat, and not of the
Effective Heat of Fire. Others were making their Entrance upon the Great Work,
after the Hermetical Method. Here they were watching the Progress of their
Operations, and making their Observations upon Proportions, and Color. While
all the rest of these blind Oracles lay waiting for the Recovery of the Materia
Prima: till they brought themselves to the last Cast both of their Lives and
Fortunes: and instead of turning Base Metals and Materials into Gold, as they
pretended; they made the Contrary Inversion, and were glad at length to take up
with Beggarly Fools, and False Coiners. What a stir was there, with crying out,
ever and anon! Look ye, Look ye! The old Father is got up again; Down with him,
Down with him; What Glossing, and Commenting upon the o^d Chemical Text, that
says; Blessed be Heaven, That has ordered the most Excellent thing in Nature
out of the Vilest. If so, (quoth one) let us try, if we can fetch the
Philosophers Stone out of a Common Strumpet, which is of all Creatures
undoubtedly the Vilest. And the Word was no sooner out, but a matter (...)
Three and Twenty Whores went to Pot, but the Flesh was so Cursedly Mawmish and
Rotten, that they soon gave over the Thought of that Projection. And then they
entered upon a fresh Consultation, and concluded, Nemine Contradicente, that the
Mathematicians, by that rule, were the only fit matter to work upon; as being
most damnably dry, (to say nothing of their Divisions, among, and against
themselves) so that with one Voice, they called for a parcel of Mathematicians,
to the Furnace, to begin the Experiment. But a Devil came in just in the
God-speed, and told them; Gentlemen Philosophers, (says he) if you would know
the Wretched'st, and most contemptible thing in the World; It is an Alchymist:
and we are of Opinion, that you will make as Good Philosopher's stones, as the
Mathematicians. However, for Curiosity's sake, we will try for Once; and so he
threw them all together into a great Caldron; and to say the Truth, the poor
Snakes suffered very contentedly; out of a desire I suppose, to help on toward
the perfecting of the Operation.

On the other side, we^e a Knot of Astrologers, and one among the rest that had
studied Chiromancy or Palmestry; who took all the Damned by the Hands, one
after another. One he told, that it was as plain as the Nose on his Face, that
he was to go to the Devil, for he perceived it by the Mount of Saturn. You
(says he to another) have been a Swindging Whore-master in your Days; I see
that by the Mount of Venus here, and by her Girdle; and in short; every Man's
Destiny he read in his Fist. After him advanced another, Creeping upon all
four; with a pair of Compasses betwixt his Teeth; his Spheres and Globes about
him; his Jacob's staff before him; and his Eyes upon the Stars, as if he were
taking a Height, or making an Observation. When he had gazed a while, up he
starts of a sudden, and wringing his Hands, Good Lord (says he) What an Unlucky
Dog was I! If I had come into the World, but one half quarter of an hour
sooner, I had been saved; for Just then Saturn shifted, and Mars was lodged in
the house of Life. One that followed him, bad his Tormentors be sure he was
Dead, for (says he) I am a little doubtful of it my self; in regard that I had
Jupiter for my Ascendent, and Venus in the House of Life, and no Malevolent
Aspect to cross me. So that by the Rules of Astrology, I was to live,
precisely, a hundred years and one; Two Months, Six days, four Hours, and Three
Minutes. The next that came up was a Geomancer; one that reduced all his Skill
to Certain little points, and by them would tell you, as well things past, as
to come: These points he bestowed at a Venture, among several unequal lines;
some long, others shorter, like the Fingers of a Man's Hand; and then with a
certain Ribble-Rabble of Mysterious Words, he proceeds to his Calculation, upon
Even, or Odd, and challenges the whole world to allow him the most learned, and
Infallible of the Trade.

There were Diverse great Masters of the Science that followed him. As Haly,
Gerard, Bart'lemew of Parma, and one Toudin; a familiar Friend, and Companion
of the Great Cornelius Agrippa, the famous Conjurer: who though he had but one
Soul, was yet burning in four Bodies. (I mean the four Damnable Books he left
behind him.) There was Trithemius too, with his Polygraphy, and Stenography:
that had Devils now, his Belly full, though in his Life time his Complaint was,
that He could never have enough of their Company: Over against him was Cardan;
but they could not set their horses together, because of an old Quarrel;
whether was the more Impudent of the Two. And there I saw Misaldus, tearing his
Beard, in Rage, to find himself Pumpt dry; and that he could not fool on, to
the End of the Chapter. Theophrastus was there too, bewailing himself for the
Time he had spent at the Alchymists Bellows. There was also the Unknown Author
of Clavicula Solomonis, and The Hundred Kings of Spirits; with the Composer of
the Book, Adversus Omnia pericula Mundi. Taysnerus too, with his Book of
Physiognomy, and Chiromancy; and He was doubly punished, first for the Fool he
was; and then for those he had made* Though to give the Man his Due, He knew
himself to be a Cheat, and that he that gives a Judgment upon the Lines of a
Face, takes but a very uncertain aim. There were Magicians, Necromancers,
Sorcerers, and Enchanters innumerable, beside diverse private Boxes that were
kept for Lords and Ladies; and other Personages of great quality, that put
their trust in these Disciples of the Devil, and go to Strand-Bridge or
Billeter-Lane, for resolution in cases of Death, Love, or Marriage, and now and
then to recover a Gold Watch or a Pearl Neck-lace.

Not far from these, were a company of handsome Women, that were tormented in
the quality of Witches; which grieved my very heart to see it: but to comfort
me, What? (says a Devil) Have you so soon forgot the roguery of these Carrions?
Have you not had trial enough yet of them? they are the very poison of life,
and the only dangerous Magicians that corrupt all our senses, and disturb the
faculties of your soul; these are they that cosen your Eyes with false
appearances, and set up your wills in opposition to your Understanding and
Reason. It Is right, said I, and now you mind me of it, I do very well remember,
that I have found them so; but let us go on and see the rest.

I was scarce gone three steps further, but I was got into so hideous a dark
place, that it was even a mercy we knew where we were. There was first at the
entrance, Divine Justice, which was most dreadful to behold; and a little
beyond stood Vice, with a countenance of the highest pride and insolence
imaginable: There was Ingratitude, Malice, Ignorance, obstinate and
incorrigible Infidelity, brutish and headstrong Disobedience, rash and
imperious Blasphemy, with Garments dipped in blood, Eyes sparkling, and a hundred
pair of Chops, barking at Providence, and vomiting rage and poison. I went in
(I confess) with fear and trembling) and there I saw all the Sects of Idolaters
and Heretics, that ever yet appeared upon the stage of the Universe: And at
their feet, in a glorious array, was lascivious Barbara, second Wife to the
Emperor Sigismund, and the Queen of Harlots: One that agreed with Messalina in
This, that Virginity was both a burden and a folly; and that in her whole life
she was never either wearied or satisfied; but herein she went beyond her; in
that she held the mortality as well of the Soul as of the Body; but she was now
better instructed, and burnt like a bundle of Matches.

Passing forward still, I spied a fellow in a corner, all alone, with the
flames about his ears, gnashing his teeth, and blaspheming through fury and
despair. I asked him what he was, and he told me he was Mahomet. Why then (said
I) thou art the damn'dest Reprobate in Hell, and have brought more Wretches
hither than half the World beside: and Lucifer has done well to allot thee a
Quarter here by thy self, for certainly thou have well deserved the first place
in his Dominions. But since every man chooses to talk of what he loves, I
prithee good Imposter tell me, What Is the reason that thou have forbidden Wine
to all thy Disciples? Oh (says he) I have made them so drunk with my Alchoran
they need no Tipple. But why have thou forbidden them Swines-flesh too (said
I?) because (says he) I would not affront the Iambon; for Water upon Gammon,
would be false Heraldry. And beside I never loved my people well enough to
afford them the pleasure, either of the Grape or the Spare-Rib. Nay, and for
fear they should chance to grope out the way to Heaven, I have established my
power and my Dominion by force of Arms; without subjecting my Laws to idle
disputes and discourses of reason. Indeed there is little of Reason in my
Precepts, and I would have as little in their obedience. A world of Disciples I
have, but I think they follow me more out of appetite than Religion, or for the
miracles I work. I allow them Liberty of Conscience; they have as many Women as
they please, and do what they list, provided they meddle not with the
Government. But look about ye now, and you will find that there are more Knaves
than Mahomet.

I did so, and found my self presently surrounded with a Ring of Heretics, and
their Adherents; many of which were ready to tear out the Throats of their
Leaders. One among the rest was beset with a brace of Devils, and either of
them a pair of Bellows, puffing into each ear Fire instead of Air, which made
him a little hotheaded. There was another, that; as I was told, was a kind of
a Symoniac, and had taken up his seat in a Pestilential Chair; but it was so
dark I could not well discern whether it was a Pope or a Presbyter.

By this time I had enough of Hell, and began to wish my self out again; but as
I was looking about for a Retreat, I stumbled upon a Long Gallery before I was
aware: and there I saw Lucifer himself with all his Nobility about him, male
and female. (For let married men say their pleasure, there are she-Devils too)
I should have been at a damned loss what to do, or how to behave my self among
so many strange faces, if one of the Vshers had not come to me, and told me,
that being a stranger, it was his Majesty's pleasure, I should enter and have
free liberty of seeing what was there to be seen. We exchanged a couple or two
of Complements, and then I began to look about me, but never did I see a Palace
so furnished, nor indeed comparable to it.

Our Furniture at the best is but a choice collection of dead and dumb Statues,
or paintings without life, sense, or motion: But there, all the pieces were
animated, and no trash in the whole Inventory. There was hardly any thing to be
seen, but Emperors and Princes, with some few (perhaps) of their choicest
Nobility and Privados. The first Banque was taken up by the Ottoman Family; and
after them sat the Roman Emperors, in their order; and the Roman Kings down to
Tarquin the proud; beside Highnesses and Graces, Lords Spiritual and Temporal
innumerable. My Lungs began now to call for a little fresh air, and I desired
my Guide to show me the way out again. Yes, yes, with all my heart (says he)
follow me then: And so he carried me away by a back passage into Lucifer's
House of Office, where there was I know not how many Tun of Sr Reverence, and
Bales of flattering Panegyricks, not to be numbered; all of them Licensed, and
Entered according to Order. I could not but smile at this provision of
Tail-Timber, and my Guide took notice of it; who was a good kind of a damned
Droll. But I called still to be gone, and at length he led me to a little hole
like the vent of a Vault, and I crept through it as nimbly as if the Devil
himself had given me a lift at the Crupper; when to my great wonder, I found my
self in the Park again, where I begun my story: not without an odd medly of
Passions, partly reflecting upon what others endured, and in part, upon my own
condition of ease and happiness, that had deserved, perhaps, the contrary as
well as they. This thought put me upon a resolution of leading such a course of
life, for the future, that I might not come to feel these torments in Reality,
which I had now only seen in Vision.

And I must here entreat the Reader to follow my example, without making any
further experiment; and likewise not to cast an ill construction upon a fair
meaning. My design is to discredit, and discountenance the works of darkness,
without scandalizing of Persons; and since I speak only of the damned, I Am sure
no honest man alive will reckon this discourse a Satyr.

The end of the sixth Vision.
THE SEVENTH VISION OF HELL REFORMED.
THere happened lately so terrible an Vproar, and Disorder in Hell, that
(though it be a place of perpetual Outrage, and Confusion) the oldest Devil
there never knew the Fellow of it; and the Inhabitants expected nothing less
then an absolute Topsy-Turvy, and Dissolution of their Empire. The Devils fell
upon the Damned; and the Damned fell upon the Devils, without knowing One from
the other: and all running helter-skelter, to and again, like Mad; for in fine,
it was no other then a general Revolt. This Hurly-Burly lasted a good while,
before any Mortal could imagine the meaning of it; but at length, there came
certain Intelligence of a Monstrous Talker; A Pragmatical, Meddling Undertaker,
and an old Bawd of a Gouvernante, that had knocked off their Shackles, and made
all this Havoc: Which may give the Reader to Understand what kind of Cattle
These are, that could make Hell it self more Dangerous, and Unquiet.

Lucifer, in the Mean time, went Yelping up and down, and Bawling, for Chains,
Hand-Cuffes, Bolts, Manacles, Shackles, Fetters, to tie up his Prisoners again;
when, in the Middle of his Carriere, He and the Babbler, or Talker, I told ye
of, met full-butt; and after a little staring one Another in the Face, upon the
Encounter, the Babbler opened. Prince mine; (says he) you have a pack of Lazy,
Droning Devils in your Dominions, that look after Nothing, but sit with their
Arms and Legs across, and leave all your affairs at Six and Seven, And you have
diverse abroad too, upon Commission, that have staid out their Time, and yet
give you no Account of their Employment. The Gouvernante, that had been blowing
the Coal, and Whispering Sedition from one to another, chanced to pass by in
the Interim* and stopping short, addressed her self to Lucifer: Look to your
self; (she cried) there is a Desperate plot upon your Diabolical Crown, and
Dignity. There are Two Tyrants in it; Three Parasites; A world of Physicians,
and whole Legions of Lawyers, and Atturneys. One word more in your Ear. There
is among them, a mungrel Priest (a kind of a Lay-Elder) that will go near to
sit upon your Skirts, if you have not a care of him.

At the very name of Priest, and Lay-Elder, Lucifer looked as Pale as Death;
stood stone-still; as mute as a Fish; and in his very looks, discovered his
Apprehensions. After a little pause, he roused himself, as out of a Trance; A
Priest do ye say? a Lay-Elder? Tyrants? Lawyers? Physicians? A Composition (he
cries) to poison all the Devils in Hell, and purge their very Guts out. With
that, away he went to visit the Avenues, and set his Guards, and who should he
meet next, but the Medler? in a monstrous have, and hurry. Nay then (says he)
here is the Forerunner of Ill-Luck. But what is the Matter? The Matter? cried
the Medler; And then with a huge deal of tedious, and Impertinent Circumstance,
he up, and told him, that a great many of the Damned had Contrived an Escape;
and that there was a Design to call in four or five Regiments of Hypocrites,
and Usurers, under color forsooth of Establishing a better Intelligence
betwixt Earth, and Hell, with a Hundred other Fopperies; and had gone on till
this time, if Lucifer would have found Ears. But he had other Fish to fry; for
Neck and All was now at Stake; and so he went about his Business of putting all
in a posture, and strengthening his Guards. And for the further Security of his
Royal Person, he entertained into his own Immediate Regiment, several
Reformadoes of the Society, that he particularly knew to be no Flinchers.

He began his Survey in the Vaults, and Dungeons, among his Iaylers, and
Prisoners. The Makebate Babbler Marched in the Van, breathing an Air that
kindled, and Enflamed wherever he past, without giving any Light (setting
People together by the Ears, they know not why) In the second Place the
Gouvernante, as full of News, and Tittle-Tattle as she could hold, and telling
her tale all the way she went. In the Breech of her, followed the Medler,
learing as he past along, first on one side, then on the Other, without ever
moving his Head, and making fair with every Soul He saw in's way. He gave One,
a Bow; TO other, a Kiss; Your most humble Servant, to a Third; Can I serve you
Sir to a Fourth: But every Complement was worse to the poor Creatures, then the
Fire it self. Ah Traitor! says one; For Pity's sake, away with this new
Tormenter! cries another. This Fellow is Hell upon Hell, says a Third. As he
trudged on, there was a Rabble of Rascals, got together; and in the Middle of
the Crowd, a most Eminent Knight of the Post, (a great Master of his Trade)
that was reading a Lecture to that Venerable Assembly, of the Noble Mystery of
Swearing and Lying; and would have taught any man in one Quarter of an hour, to
prove any thing upon Oath, that he never saw, nor heard of in his life. This
Doctor had no sooner cast his Eye upon the Intermedler, but up he started in a
Fright. How no? says he; Is that Devil here? I came hither on purpose t^ avoid
him; and if I could but have dreamed, he would have been in Hell, beyond all
Dispute, I Would have gone my self to Paradise.

As He was speaking, we heard a great, and a confused Noise of Arms, Blows, and
Outcries; and presently we discovered several Persons falling one upon Another
like lightning; and in short with such a Fury, that it is not for any Tongue, or
Pen to Des^ribe the Battle. One of them appeared to be an Emperor; for he was
crowned with Laurel, and surrounded with a grave sort of People, that looked
like Counselors or Senators; and had all the Old Statutes, and Records at
their Fingers End: by which they endeavored to make it out; That a King might
be killed in his Personal Capacity, and his Politic Capacity never the worse
for it. And upon this point, were they at Daggers Drawn with the Emperor.
Lucifer came then roundly up to him, and with a Voice that made Hell quake;
what are you Sir, (says he) that take upon you thus in my Dominions? I am the
Great Julius Caesar, (says he) that in this general Tumult, thought to have
revenged my self upon Brutus, and Cassius, for Murdering me in the Senate,
under color (forsooth) of asserting the Common Liberty: Whereas these Traitors
did it merely out of Envy, Avarico, and Ambition. It was the Emperor not the
Empire they hated. They pretended to destroy Me, for Introducing a Monarchy;
But did they overthrow the Monarchy it self? No; but on the Contrary, they
confirmed it; and did more Mischief, in taking away my life, than I did in
dissolving their Republic. However, I died an Emperor, and these Villains
carried only the Infamy, and Brand of Regicides, to their Grav^s, and the World
has ever since, adored my Memory, and abhorred theirs. Tell me (quoth he) ye
cursed Bloud-Hounds; (turning toward them) Whether was your Government better,
think ye? in the ^ands of your Senators; a Company of talking Gown-men, that
knew not how to keep it; Or in the hands of a Soldier, that won it by his
Merit? It is not the Drawing of a Charge, or the making of a fine Oration, that
fits people for Government; nor will a Crown sit well upon the Head of a
Pedant; but let him wear it that deserves it. He is the true Patriot that
advances the Glory of his Country, by Actions of Bravery and Honor. Which has
more right to Rule, think ye, he that only knows the Laws, or He that Maintains
them? The one only studies the Government; The other Protects it. Wretched
Republic! Thou call'st it Freedom, to obey a Divided Multitude, and slavery,
to serve a single Person; and when a Company of Covetous little Fellows are got
together, they must be styled Fathers of their Country, forsooth; And shall
one Generous Person take up with the Name of Tyrant? Oh! how much better had it
been for Rome to have preserved that one Son that made her Mistress of the
World, than that Multitude of Fathers, who by so many Intestine Wars, rendered
her but a Stepmother to her own Children. Barbarous, and Cruel that you are!
so much as to mention the name of a Commonwealth, considering that since the
people tasted of Monarchy, they have preferred even the worst of Princes, as
Nero, Tiberius, Caligula, Heliogabalus, etc. before your Tribe of Senators.

This discourse of Caesar's struck Brutus with exceeding shame and confusion;
but at length with a feeble and trembling voice, he delivered himself to this
effect. Gentlemen of the Senate ( says he) do ye not hear Caesar? or will ye
add sin to sin, and suffer all the blame to be cast upon the Instruments, when
you your selves were the Contrivers of the Villainy? Why do ye not answer? for
Caesar speaks to you, as well as to us. Cassius and my self were but your
Bravos, and governed by your persuasions and advice, little dreaming of that
insatiable ambition that lay lurking under the gravity of your long Beards and
Robes. But it is the practice of you all, to arraign that Tyranny in the Prince,
which you would exercise your selves: in effect, when you have gotten Power,
and the color of Authority in your hands, it is more dangerous for a Prince
not to comply with you, than for a Vassal to rebel against his Prince. To what
end served your perfidious and ungrateful Treason? Make answer to Caesar. But
for our parts, in the conscience of our sin, we feel the severity of our
Punishment.

At these words a hollow-Ey'd, supercilious Senator (that had been of the
Conspiracy, and was then blazing like a Pitched Barrel) raised himself, and with
a faint voice, asked Caesar what reason he had to complain? For Prince (says he)
if King Ptolomy murdered Pompey the Great, upon whose score he held his
Kingdom: why might not the Senate as well kill you, to recover what you had
taken from them? And in the case betwixt Caesar and Pompey, let the Devils
themselves be Judges. As for Achillas (who was one one of the murderers) what
he did, was by Ptolomy's command, and then he was but a Free-booter neither, a
fellow that got his living by Rapine and Spoil: but Caesar was undoubtedly the
more infamous of the two. It Is true, you wept at the sight of Pompey's head,
but such tears as were more treacherous than the Steel that killed him. Ah
cruel compassion and revengeful piety! that made thee a more barbarous Enemy to
Pompey, dead than living. Oh that ever two Hypocrite Eyes should creep into the
first Head of the World! To conclude, the death of Caesar, had been the
Recovery of our Republic, if the multitude had not called in others of his
Race to the Government, which rendered thy fall the very Hydra of the Empire.

We had had another skirmish upon these words, if Lucifer had not commanded
Caesar to his Cell again, upon pain of Death; and there to abide such
correction as belonged to him, for slighting the warnings he had of his
Disaster. Brutus and Cassius too were turned over to the politic Fools: and
the Senators were dispatched away to Minos and Rhadamanthus, and to sit as
Assistants in the Devils Bench.

After this I heard a murmuring noise, as of people talking at a distance, and
by degrees I made it out that they were wrangling and disputing still louder
and louder, till at length it was but a word and a blow; and the nearer I came
the greater was the clamor. This made me mend my pace; but before I could
reach them, they were all together by the Ears in a bloody fray: They were
persons of great quality all of them, as Emperors, Magistrates, Generals of
Armies. Lucifer, to take up the Quarrel, commanded them Peace and Silence, and
they all obeyed, but it vexed them to the hearts to be so taken off in the full
carriere of their Fury and Revenge. The first that opened his mouth, was a
fellow so martyred with wounds and scars, that I took him at first for an
indigent Officer; but it proved to be Clitus (as he said himself) And one at
his Elbow told him, he was a saucy Companion, for presuming to speak before his
time; and so desired Audience of Lucifer, for the high and mighty Alexander,
the Son of Jupiter, and the Emperor and Terror of the World: He was going on
with his Qualities and Titles; but an Officer gave the word, Silence, and bad
Clitus begin; which he took very kindly, and told his story.

If it may please your Majesty (says he) I was the first Favorite of this
Emperor; who was then Lord of all the known World; bare the Title of the King
of Kings, and Boasted himself for the son of Jupiter Hammon; and yet after all
this Glory, and Conquest, he was himself a slave to his Passions: He was Rash,
and Cruel, and consequently, Incapable either of Counsel, or Friendship. While
I lived, I was near him, and served him faithfully; but it seems, He did not
Entertain me, so much for my Fidelity, as to augment the Number of his
Flatterers: But I found my self too honest for a Base Office; and still as he
ran into any foul Excesses, I took a Freedom with all possible Modesty, to show
him his Mistakes. One day, as he was talking slightly of his Father Philip
(that brave Prince, from whom he received as well his Honor, as his Being) I
told him frankly what I thought of that Ingratitude, and Vanity, and desired
him to treat his Dead Father with more Reverence, as a Prince Worthy of Eternal
Honor, and Respect. This Commendation of Philip, so enflamed him, that
presently he took a Partisan and struck me Dead in the place with his own Hand.
After this; pray'e where was his Divinity, when he gave Abdolominus, (a poor
Garden-Weeder) the Kingdom of Sidonia: which was not, as the World would have
it, out of any Consideration of his Virtue, but to Mortify, and take down the
Pride, and Insolence of the Persians. Meeting him here just now in Hell, I asked
him what was become of his Father Jupiter now; that he lay so long by it; and
whether he were not yet convinced that all his Flatterers were a Company of
Rascals, who with their Incense, and Altars, would persuade him that He was of
Divine Extraction, and Heir apparent to the Throne, and Thunder of Jupiter.
This now was the Ground of our Quarrel. Invectives apart; who but a Tyrant
would have put a Loyal Subject to Death, only for his Affection, and Regards to
the Memory of his Dead Father? how barbarously did he treat his Favorites,
Parmenio, Philotas, Calisthenes, Amyntas, etc. so that good or bad is all a
case, for it is crime enough to be the Favorite of a Tyrant: As in the course
of humane life, every man dies because he is mortal, and the disease is rather
the pretext of his death, than the cause of it. You find now (says Satan) that
Tyrants will show their people many a Dog-trick, when the humor takes them.
The good, they hate, for not being wicked; and the bad, because they are no
worse. How many Favorites have you ever seen come to a fair and timely end?
Remember the Emblem of the Sponge, and that is the use that Princes make of
their Favorites: they let them suck and fill, and then squeeze them for their
own profit.

At that word there was heard a lamentable cry, and at the same time a
venerable old man, as pale as if he had no blood in his veins, came up to
Lucifer, and told him, that his Emblem of the Sponge came very pat to his Case;
For (says he) I was a great Favorite, and a great horder of Treasure: a
Spaniard by birth, the Tutor and Confident of Nero; and my name is Seneca.
Indeed his bounties were to excess, he gave me without asking, and in taking I
was never covetous but obedient. It is in the nature of Princes, and it befits
their quality, to be liberal where they take a liking, both of Honor and
Fortunes: and it is hard for a Subject to refuse, without some reflection upon
the generosity or discretion of his Master. For it is not the merit, or modesty
of the Vassal, but the glory of the Prince that is in question: and he is the
best Subject, that contributes the most to the splendour and reputation of his
Sovereign. Nero indeed gave me as much as such a Prince could bestow; and I
managed his liberalities with all the moderation imaginable: yet all too
little, to preserve me from the strokes of envious and malicious tongues; which
would have it, that my philosophizing upon the contempt of the World, was
nothing else but a mere imposture, that with less danger and notice I might
feed and entertain my avarice, and with the fewer Competitors. Finding my
credit with my Master declining, it stood me upon to provide some way or other
for my quiet, and to withdraw my self from being the mark of of a public envy.
So I went directly to Nero, and with all possible respect and humility made him
a Present back again of his own ^^unties. The truth is, I had so great a
p^ssion for his service, that neither the severity of his Nature, nor the
debauchery of his Manners could ever deter me from exhorting him to nobler
courses, and paying him all the duties of a Loyal Subject. Especially in cases
of cruelty and blood, I laid it perpetually home to his conscience, but all to
little purpose; for he put his mother to death, laid the City of Rome in ashes,
and indeed depopulated the Empire of honest men. And this drew on Piso's
Conspiracy, which was better laid than executed: for upon the discovery, the
prime instruments lost their lives; and by Divine Providence this Prince was
p^eserv'd, in order (as one would have th^ught) to his repentance and change of
life. But upon the issue, the Conspiracy was prevented, and Nero never the
better. At the same time he put Lucan to death, only for being a better Poet
than himself. And if he gave me my choice what death to die, it was rather
cruelty than pity: for in the very deliberation which death to choose, I
suffered all even in the terror and apprehension that made me refuse the rest.
The election I made, was to bleed to death in a Bath, and I finished my own
dispatches hither; where to my further affliction, I have again encountered this
infamous Prince, studying new cruelties, and instructing the very Devils
themselves in the Art of tormenting.

At that word Nero advanced, with his ill-favored face and shrill voice. It is
very well ( says he) for a Princes Favorite, or Tutor to be wiser than his
Master; but let him manage that advantage then with respect, and not like a
rash and insolent Fool make proclamation presently to the world, that he is the
wiser of the two. While Seneca kept himself within those, bounds, I lodged him
in my bosom, and the love I had for that man was the glory of my Government;
but when he came to publish once (what he should have dissembled or concealed)
that it was not Nero, but Seneca that ruled the Empire, nothing less than his
blood could make satisfaction for so intolerable a scandal, and from that hour
I resolved his ruin. And I had rather suffer what I do a hundred times over,
than entertain a Favorite that should raise his credit upon my dishonor.
Whether I have reason on my side or no, I appeal to all this Princely Assembly:
Draw near I beseech ye, as many as are here, and speak freely, my Royal
Brethren; Did ye ever suffer any Favorite to escape unpunisht, that had the
impudence to write [ I and my King] to make a Stale, of Majesty, and to publish
himself a better Statesman than his Master? No, no, (they cried out all with
one voice) it never was, and never shall be endured, while the world lasts: For
we have left our Successors under an Oath, to have a care on it. It Is true, a
wise Counselor at a Prince's elbow, is a Treasure, and ought to be so
esteemed, while he makes it his business to cry up the abilities and justice of
his Sovereign: but in the instant that his vanity transports him to the
contrary; away with him to the dogs, and down with him, for there is no enduring
of it.

All this ( cried Sejanus) does not yet concern me; for though I had indeed
more brains than Tiberius, yet I so ordered it, that he had the credit in
public of all my private Advices. And so sensible he was of my services, that
he made me his Partner and Companion in the Empire: he caused my Statues to be
erected, and invested them with sacred Privileges. Let Sejanus live, was the
daily cry of the People; and in truth, my well-being was the joy of the Empire;
and far and near there were public Prayers and Vows offered up for my health.
But what was the end of all? when I thought my self surest in my Master's Arms
and favor; he let me fall, nay he threw me down, caused me to be cut in
pieces, delivering me up to the fury of a barbarous and enraged Multitude, that
dragged me along the Streets, and happy was he that could get a piece of my
flesh to carry upon a Javelins point in triumph. And it had been well if this
inhumane cruelty had stopped here; but it extended to my poor Children, who,
though unconcerned in my crimes, were yet to partake in my fate. A Daughter I
had, whom the very Law exempted from the stroke of Justice, because of her
Virginity; but to clear that scruple, she was condemned first to be ravished by
the Hangman, and then to be beheaded, and treated as her Father. My first
failing was upon temerity and pride: I would outrun my destiny; defy fortune:
and for Divine Providence I looked upon it as a ridiculous thing. When I was
once out of the way, I thought doing worse was somewhat in order to being
better; and then I began to fortify my self by violence, against craft and
malice. Some were put to death, others banished, till in fin^, all the Powers of
Heaven and Earth declared themselves against me. I had recourse to all sorts of
ill people, and means. I had my Physician for poisoning; my Assassins for
revenge; I had my false Witnesses and corrupt Judges; and in truth, what
Instruments of wickedness had I not? And all this not upon choice or
inclination; but purely out of the necessity of my condition. When ever I
should come to fall, I was sure to be forsaken both of good and bad; and
therefore I shunned the better sort, as those that would only serve to accuse
me; but the lewd and vicious I frequented, to increase the number of my
Accomplices, and make my party the stronger. But after all; if Tiberius was a
Tyrant, I Will swear he was never so by my advice: But on the contrary; I have
suffered more from him for plain dealing and dissuading him, than the very
subjects of his severity have commonly suffered by him. I know, it is charged
upon me, that I stirred him up to cruelty, to render him odious, and to
ingratiate my self to the people. But who was his Adviser I pray'e, in this
butcherly p^oceeding against me? Oh Lucifer, Lucifer! you know very well that
(...) the practice of Tyrants, when they do amiss themselves, and set their
people a grumbling, to lay all the blame (and punishment too) upon the
Instrument; and hang up the Minister for the Masters fault. This is the end of
all Favorites, cries one; Not a halfpenny matter if they were all served so,
says another. And every Historian has his saying upon this Catastrophe, and
sets up a Buoy to warn after-ages of the Rock of Court-favours. The greatness
of a Favorite I must confess, proclaims the greatness of his Maker; and the
Prince that maintains what he has once raised, does but justify the prudence
of his own choice: and when ever he comes to undo what he has done, publishes
himself to be light and unconstant, and does as good as declare himself ( even
against himself) of the Enemies party.

Up stepped Plantian then, ( Severus his Favorite) he that was tossed out of a
Garret Window to make the people sport. My condition in the World (says he) was
perfectly like that of a Rocket or Fire-work: I was carried up to a Prodigious
Height in a Moment, and all peoples Eyes were upon me, as a Star of the first
Magnitude; but my Glory was very short-lived; and down I fell, into Obscurity,
and Ashes. After him, appeared a number of other Favorites; and all of them
hearkening to Bellisarius the Favorite of Justinian; who Blind as he was, had
already knocked twice with his staff, and shaking his Head, with a weak and
complaining Voice, desired Audience; which was at length granted him, Silence
commanded; And he said, as follows.

Princes (said he) before they destroy the Creatures they have raised, and
chosen, should do well to Consider, that Cruelty, and Inconstancy is much a
greater Infamy to a Prince, then the Worst effects of it can be to a Favorite.
For my own part, I served an Emperor, that was both a Christian, and a great
Lover, and Promoter of Justice. And yet after all the services I ha^ done him,
in several Battles, and Adventures, (insomuch that He was effectually become my
Debtor, for the very glory of his Empire) My Reward, in the End, was to have my
Eyes put out, and (with a Dog and a Bell) to be turned a begging from Door to
Door. Thus was That Belizarius treated, whose very Name formerly was Worth an
Army, and he was the Soul of his Friends, as well as the Terror of his Enemies.
But a Prince's Favor, is like Quicksilver, Restless, and Slippery, never to
be fixed; never secured. Force it, and it spends it self in Fumes: Sublime it,
and it is a Mortal Poison. Handle it only, and it works it self into the very
Bones; and all that have to do with it, Live and Dye, Pale, and Trembling.

At these Words, the whole Band of Favorites, set up a Hideous, and a Heavy
Groan, trembling like Aspen-leaves, and at the same time, reciting several
passages out of the Prophet Habbacuck, against Careless, and Wicked Governors.
By which Threatenings, is given to understand, that the Almighty, when he has a
Mind to destroy a Wicked Ruler, does not always punish one Potentate by
Another, and bring his Ends about by a Trial of Arms, or the Event of a Battle:
but many times makes use of things the most Abject, and Vile, to Confound the
Vanity, and Arrogance of the Mighty; and makes even Worms, Flies, Caterpillars,
and Lice to serve him ^s the Ministers of his Terrible Justice: Nay, the Stone
in the Wall, and the Beam in the house, shall rise in Judgment against them.

This Discourse might have gone further, but that the Company presently parted,
to know the Meaning of a sudden Noise, and Clatter they heard, that half
deafen'd the Auditory. And what was it at last? but a Scuffle between the
Gown-men, and the Brothers of the Blade; And there were Persons of great
Honor, and Learning, Young, and Old, engaged in the Fray: The Men of War were
at it dashing with their Swords, and the Gentlemen of the Long Robe, fencing,
some with Tostatus, Others with huge Pandects, that with their old Wainscot
Covers were as good as Bucklers, and would now and then give the Foe a Heavy
Rebuke, over and above. The Combat had certainly been very Bloody, if one of
Lucifer's Constables had not commanded them in the King's name to keep the
Peace; which made it a Drawn Battle. And with That, one of the Combatants with
his best Leg forward, said aloud; If Ye knew (Gentlemen) either Us, or our
Quarrel, you would say we had reason, and perhaps side with us. At that Instant,
there appeared Domitian, Commodus, Caracalla, Phalaris, Heliogabalus, Alcetes,
Andronicus, Busiris, and old Oliver, with a World of great Personages more;
which when Lucifer saw, he disposed himself to treat so Majestical an
Appearance, and as much to their satisfaction as was Possible. And then came up
a grave Ancient man, with a great Train at his Heels, all Bloody, and full of
the Marks they had received under the Persecution of these Tyrants.

You have here before ye, (quoth the Old Man) Solon; and these are the Seven
Sages, Native of Greece, but renowned throughout the Universe. He there in the
Mortar, is that Anaxarchus that was pounded to Death by Command of Nicocreon.
He with the Flat Nose, is Socrates; The little Crump-shoulder'd Wretch, was the
Famous Aristotle: and The Other there, the Divine Plato. Those in the Corner, are
all of the same Profession too; Grave* and Learned Philosophers; that have
displeased Tyrants with their writings: and in fine, the World is stored with
their works, and Hell with the Authors. To come to the point, (most mighty
Lucifer) we are all of us Dealers in Politics; Great Writers, and
Deep-read-men in the Maxims of State, and Government. We have digested Policy
into a Method, and laid down Certain Rules, by which Princes may make
themselves Great, and Beloved. We have advised them, Impartially to administer
Justice; To reward Virtue, as well Military, as Civil; to Employ able Men,
Banish Flatterers; To put men of Wisdom, and Integrity in Places of Trust. To
reward, or Punish, without Passion; and according to the Merits of the Cause,
as God's Vicegerents. And This now is our offense. We name no Body; We design
no body; but it is Crime enough to wish well to the way, and to the Lovers of
Virtue. With that, turning toward the Tyrants. Oh most Unjust Princes; (said
he) Those Glorious Kings, and Emperors from whom we took the Model of ou^
Laws, and Instructions, are now in a state of Rest, and Comfort, while you are
tormented. Numa is now a Star in the Firmament, and Tarquin a Firebrand in
Hell. And the Memory of Augustus and Trajan is still fresh and fragrant, when
the Names of Nero, and Sardanapalus are more Putrid, and Odious then their
Bodies.

When Dionysius the Tyrant heard this, (with his Companions about him) Flesh
and Blood could hold no longer; and He cried out in a Rage, That Roguy
Philosopher has told a Thousand Lies. Legislators, with a Pox? Yes, yes; they
are sweet Legislators; and Princes have many a fair Obligation to them. No, no,
Sirrah, (says he to Solon) You are all of yea Company of Quacks; Ye prate, and
speculate of things ye don't understand; and with your damned Moralities set
the People agog upon Liberty; cry up the Doctrine of Freeborn Subjects, and
then our Portion, is persecution in one World, and Infamy in the other.

We shall have a fine time on it, my most Gracious Prince (cried Julian the
Apostate, staring Lucifer in the face) when these Dunghill Pedants, A Company of
Cock-brain'd, Ridiculous, Mortified, Ill-bred, Beggarly Tatterdemallions, shall
come to erect a Committee for Politics, and pass Sentence upon Governors, and
Governments; stiling themselves (forsooth) the Supporters of both; without any
more skill then my Horse in what belongs to either. Tell me (says he) if a
Brave Prince had not better be Damned, then subject himself to hear one of
these Turdy-Facy-Paty-Nasty-Lowsy-Fartical Rascals, with a Scabb'd Head, and a
Plantation of Lice in his Beard; and his Eyes crept into the Nape of his Neck,
pronouncing for an Aphorism; That A Prince that looks only to One, is a
Tyrant; and that a True King is the Shepherd, and Servant of his People. Ah,
Rash, and besotted Coxcombs! If a King looks only to others, who shall look to
him? As if Princes had not Enemies enough abroad; without being so to
themselves too. But you may write your Hearts out* and never the nearer.
Where Is our Sovereignty? if we have not our Subjects Lives, and Estates at our
Mercy. And where is our Absolute Power? if we submit to the Counsels of our
Vassals. If we have not to satisfy our Appetites, Avarice, and Revenge, we want
power to discharge the Noblest Ends of Government. These Contemplative Idiots,
would have us make Choice of Good Officers, to keep the Bad in Order; which
were a Madness, in our Condition. Let them be Complaisant, and no matter for
any other Merit, or Virtue. A Parcel of Good Offices, handsomely disposed among
a Pack of Cheats, and Atheists, will make us a party another Day; whereas all
is lost that is bestowed upon honest men; for they are our Enemies; Speak Truth
then all of ye, and shame the Devil: for the Butcher fats his Sheep only for
the Shambles.

I have said enough, I suppose, to stop your Mouths, but here is an Orator will
read you another-gates Lecture of Politics, then any you have delivered, if
you will give him the Hearing. Photinus, advance, (said Julian) and speak your
Mind; whereupon, there appeared a Brazen-faced fellow, with a hanging look, and
twenty other marks of a Desperate Villain: who with a Hellish Yell, and three
or four wry mouths for a Prologue, brake into his Discourse.

The Wicked Advice of one of Ptolomy's Courtiers, about the Killing of Pompey:
taken out of Lucan's Pharsalia. Lib. 8.
MEthinks, under favor, (most Renowned Ptolomy) we are now slipped into a
debate, a little beside the business. The question is, whether Pompey should be
delivered up to Caesar, or no. That is to say, whether in reason of State, it
ought to be done* and we are formalizing the matter, whether in point of equity
and justice it may be done. Bodies Politic have no Souls; and never did any
great Prince turn a Council of State, into a Court of Conscience, but he
repented it. Kingdoms are to be governed by Politicians, not by Casuists; and
there is nothing more contrary to the true interest of Crowns and Empires, then
in public cases, to make a scruple of private duties. The Argument is this;
Pompey is in distress: and Ptolomy under an Obligation; so that it were a
violation of Faith and Hospitality, not to relieve him. Now give me leave to
reason it the other way. Pompey is forsaken, and persecuted by the Gods; Caesar
upon the Heels of him, with victory and success. Shall Ptolomy now ruin
himself, to protect a Fugitive, against both Heaven, and Caesar? I must
confess* where honesty, and profit are both of a side, it is well; but where
they disagr^e, the Prince that does not quit his Religion, for his convenience,
falls into a direct conspiracy against himself. He shall lose the Hearts of his
Soldiery, and the reputation of his power. Whereas on the contrary, the most
hateful Tyrant in the world shall be able to keep his head above water, let him
but give a general License to commit all sorts of Wickedness: you will say it is
Impious: but I say, what if it be? who shall call you to account? These
deliberations are only for Subjects, that are under Command; and not for
Sovereign Princes, whose will is a Law. Exeat Aula
Qui volet esse pius.
He was never cut out
For a Court, that is devout.


In fine, since either Pompey or Ptolomy must suffer, I am absolutely for the
saving of Ptolomy, and the presenting of Pompey's head, without any more ado,
to Caesar. A dead Dog will never bite.

Photinus had no sooner made an end, but Domitian appeared in a monstrous Rage,
and lugging of poor Suetonius after him, like a Bear to the stake. There is not
in nature (says he) so damned a Generation of Scribbling Rogues, as these
Historians. We can neither be quiet for them, Living, nor Dead: for they haunt
us in our very Graves; and when they have vented the Humor, and Caprice of
their own Brains, that forsooth must be called, The life of such an Emperor.
And for an Instance, I Will show ye what this Impertinent Chronicler says of my
self. He had squandered away his treasure (says he) in expensive Buildings,
Comedies, and Donatives to the Soldiers.

Now would I fain know which way it could have been better employed.

In another place, he says, that Domitian had some thoughts of easing himself
in his Military charges, by reducing the number; but that he durst not do, for
fear some of his Neighbors should put an affront upon him. So that to lick
himself whole, he fell to raking and scraping what ever he could get, either
from Dead, or Living; and any Rascals Testimony was proof enough for a
Confifcation: for there needed no more to undo an honest man, then to tell a
Tale at Court, that such a one had spoken ill of the Prince.

Is this the way of treating Majesty? what could this impudent Pedant have said
worse, if he had been speaking of a Pick-pocket or a Pirate? But Princes and
Thieves are all one to them.

He says further, that Domitian made seizure of several Estates, without any
sort of right whatsoever; and there went no more to his Title, than for a false
Witness to depose, that he heard the Defunct declare, before he died, that he
made Caesar his Heir. He set such a Tax upon the Jews, that many of them denied
their Religion to avoid it; and I remember that when I was a young fellow, I
saw an old man of fourscore and ten taken upon suspicion by one of Domitian's
spies, and turned up in a public Assembly, to see if he were circumcised.

Be you now Judges, Gentlemen of the Black-Guard, if this be not a most
intolerable indignity. Am I to answer for the actions of my inferior Officers?
it amazes me that my Successors should ever endure these scandalous reports to
be published, especially against a Prince that had laid out so much money in
repairng the Libraries that were burnt.

It is very true (said Suetonius in a doleful tone) and I have not forgotten to
make mention of it to your Honor. But what will you say, if I show you in a
Warrant under your hand, this execrable and impious Blasphemy? It is the
Command of your Lord and God. And in fine, if I speak nothing but truth,
where is your cause of complaint? I have written the Lives too of the great
Julius Caesar, and the divine Augustus, and the world will not say but I have
done them right. But for your self, and such as you, that are effectually but
so many incarnate and crowned Plagues, what fault have I committed in setting
before your eyes those Tyrannies, which Heaven and Earth cannot but look upon
with Dread and Horror?

This discourse of Suetonius was interrupted by the Babbler or Boutefeu, that
rounded Lucifer in the Ear, and told him, Look ye Sir ( says he, pointing with
his finger) that limping Devil there, that looks as if he were surbated with
beating the Hoof, has been abroad in the world, this twenty year, and is but
just now come back again. Come hither Sirrah, cries Lucifer; and so the poor Cur
went wrigling and gloting up toward his Prince. You are a fine Rogue to be s^nt
of an Errand, are ye not? (^^ys Lucifer) to stay twenty year out, and come back
again even as wise as ye went: What souls have ye b^o^ght now? or what news
from the other world? Ha! Your Highness (quoth the D^vil) has too much honor and
justice to condemn me unheard. Wherefore be pleased to remember, that at my
going out, you gave me charge of a certain Merchant; It cost me the first ten
year of my time to make him a Thief, and ten more to keep him from turning
honest again, and restoring what he had stolen. A fine fetch for a Devil this,
is it not? cried Lucifer. But Hell is no more the Hell it was when I knew it
first, than Chalk is Cheese: And the Devils now adays are so damn'dly insipid
and dry, they are hardly worth the roasting. A sensl^s^ Puppy to come back to me
with a story of Waltham 's Calf, that went nine mile to suck a Bull. But he is
not Master of his Trade yet: and with that Lucifer bad one of his Officers take
him away and put him to School again; for I perceive he is a Rascal, says he,
and he has even been roguing at a Playhouse, when he should have been at
Church.

In that instant, from behind a little hill, a great many men came running as
hard as they could drive after a company of Women: The Men crying out, Stop,
Stop; and the Women crying for Help. Lucifer commanded them all to be seized,
and asked what was the matter. Alas, alas! (cried one of the men, quite out of
breath) These Carrions have made us Fathers, though we never had Children.
Govern your Tongue, Sirrah (cried a Devil of Honor, that had a kindness for
the Ladies) and speak truth: for it is utterly impossible you should be Fathers
without Children. Pardon me, said the Fellow, we were married men, and honest
men, and good Housekeepers, and have born Offices in the Parish, and have
Children that call us Fathers: But it is a strange thing, we have been abroad
some of us by the seven year together; Others, as long Bedridden; and so
impotent, that the Civilians would have put us inter frigidos and maleficiatos;
and yet our Wives have brought us every year a Child, which we were such Fools
as to keep and bring up, and give our selves to the Devil at last to get them
Estates; out of a charitable persuasion (forsooth) they might yet be our own,
though for a twelvemonth together (perhaps) we never so much as examined
whether our Wives were Fish or Flesh. But now since the Mothers are dead, and
the Children grown up, we have found the Tools that made them. One has the
Coach-mans Nose; another the Gentleman-Vsher's Legs; a third a Cousin-german's
Eyes. And some we are to presume, conceived purely by strength of imagination,
or else by the Ears like Weazels.

Thereupon appeared a little Remnant of a man; a dapper Spaniard, with a kind
of a Besome-beard, and a Voice not unlike the Yapping of a foysting Cur. As he
came near the Company, he set up his throat, and called out: Ah Jade! says he,
I shall now take ye to task, ye Whore you, for making me Father my Negro's
Bastard, and for the Estate I settled upon him. I did ever misdoubt foul play,
but should never have dreamt of That ugly Toad, when there was such choice of
handsome, lusty young Fellows about us; but it may be she had them too. I cursed
the Monks many and many a time, I remember, to the Pit of Hell, Heaven forgive
me for it* for the Strumpet would be perpetually gadding abroad, under color of
going to Confession, and in sooth, I was never any great Friend to Penance and
Mortification. And then would I be easing my mind ever and anon to this cursed
Moor. I cannot imagine (said I) where this Mistress of thine should commit all
the sins that she goes every hour of the day to confess at yonder Monastery.
And then would this Dog-Moor answer me. Alas good Lady! I would even venture my
Soul with hers with all my heart; she spends all her time you see in holy
Duties. I was at that time so innocent, that I suspected nothing more, than a
pure Respect and Civility to my Wife; but I have learnt better since, and that
effectually his Soul and hers were commonly ventured in the same Bottom; yes
and their Bodies too, as I perceive by their Magpy Issue, for the Bastards take
after both Father and Mother.

So that at this rate, cried the adopted Fathers, the Husband of a Whore has a
ple^sant time on it. First, he is subjected to all the Pukings, Longings, and
peevish importunities, that a breeding Woman gives those about her till she is
Laid; and then comes the squalling of the Child, and the
Twittle-twattle-Gossippings of the Nurse and Midwife, that must be well treated
too, well lodged, and well paid. A sweet Baby, says one (to the Jade the Mother
on it) it is even as like the Father as if he had spit it out on's mouth: It has
the very Lips, the very Eyes of him, when it is no more like him, than an Apple
is like an Oyster. And in conclusion, when we have born all this, and twenty
times more in the other World with a Christian Patience, we are hurried away to
Hell, and here we lie a Company of damned Cuckolds of us; and here we are like
to lie, for ought I see, in Saecula Saeculorum: which is very hard, and in
truth out of all reason.

I cut this Visit short, to see what news in a deep Vault near at hand, where
we heard a great bustle and contest betwixt diverse Souls and the Devils. There
were the Presumptuous, the Revengeful, and the Envious, gaping and crying out
as they would break their hearts. Oh, that I could but be born again! says one;
Oh, that I might back into the world again! says another; Oh, that I were but
to die once more! cries a third. Insomuch that they put the Devils out of all
Patience, with their impertinent and unprofitable Wishes and Exclamations. Hang
your selves, cried they, for a pack of cousening, bawling Rascals: You live
again? and be born again? and what if you might do it a thousand times over? You
would only die at last a thousand times greater Villains, than now you are, and
there would be no clearing Hell of you with a Dog-whip. However, to try you,
and make you know your selves; we have Commission to let you Live again and
Return. Up then ye Varlets, go, be born again: Get ye into the World again.
Away, cried the Devils, with a lusty lash at every word, and thrust hard to
have got them out. But the poor Rogues hung an Arse, and were struck with such
a Terror, to hear of Living again, and Returning, that they slunk into a
Corner, and lay as quiet upon it, as Lambs.

At length, one of the Company that seemed to have somewhat more Brain, and
Resolution then his Fellows, entered very gravely upon the Debate, whether they
should go out, or no. If I should now, says he, at my Second Birth, come into
the World a Bastard; The shame would be mine, though my Parents committed the
fault; and I should carry the Scandal, and the Infamy of it to my Grave. Now
put Cale, my Mother should be honest, (for that is not Impossible) and that I
came into the World, Legitimate; how many Follies, Vices, and Diseases are
there that run in a Blood! who knows, but I should be Mad, or Simple? Swear,
Lie, Cheat, Whore; Nay if I came off, with a Little Mortification of my
Carcass, as the Stone, the Scurvy, or the Noble Pox, I were a happy Man. But oh
the Lodging, the Diet, and the Cookery that I am to expect for a matter of Nine
Months in my Mother's belly: and then the Butter and Beer that must be spent to
sweeten me, when I change my Quarter. I must come Crying into the World, and
live in ignorance even of what Life is, till I dye; and then as ignorant of
Death too, till it is past. I Phansy my Swadling-Clouts, and Blankets to be
worse then my Winding Sheet; My Cradle represents my Tomb. And then who knows,
whether my Nurse shall be sound, or No? She Will over-lay me perhaps; leave me
some four and twenty hours, it may be, without clean Clouts, and a Pin or Two
all the while perchance, up to the Hilts in my backside. And then follows
Breeding of Teeth, and Worms; with all the Gripes, and Disorders that are
caused by Unwholesome Milk. These Miseries are Certain, and why should I run
them over again?

If it happen that I pass the state of Infancy, without the Pox, or Meazils: I
must be then pack't away to School, to get the Itch; a Scaled Head, or a pair
of Kib'd Heels. In Winter, it is ten to one you find me always with a Snotty
Nose; and perpetually under the Lash, if I either miss my Lesson, or go late to
Shool. So that Hang him for my Part that would be born again; for any thing I
see yet.

When I come up toward Man; the Women will have me as sure as a Gun, for they
have a Thousand Ginnes, and Devices to catch Wood-cocks; and if ever I come to
set eye upon a Lass that understands Dress, and Raillery, I Am gone, if there
were no more Lads in Christendom. But for my part I am as sick as a Dog, of
Powdering, Curling, and playing the Lady-bird. I would not for all the world be
in the Shoomakers stocks, and choke my self over again in a straight Doublet;
only to have the Ladies say, Look, what a Delicate shape, and foot that
Gentleman has. And I should take as little pleasure to spend six hours, of the
four and twenty, in picking Gray hairs out of my Head, or Beard; or turning
White into Black: To stand half ravished in the contemplation of my own shadow:
To dress fine, and go to Church only to see handsome Ladies: To correct the
Midnight Air with ardent sighs, and Ejaculations; and to keep company with
Owls, and Batts, like a Bird of Evil Omen: To walk the round of a Mistress
lodging, and play at Bo-peep at the corner of every street: To adore her
imperfections, (or as the song says, -- for her Vgliness, and for her want of
Coin) To make Bracelets of her Locks, and truck a Pearl Necklace for a
Shoo-string. At this rate, I say, Cursed again and again be he, for my part,
that would live over again so Wretched a Life.

Being come now to write full Man; If I have an Estate, how many Cares, Suits
and Wrangles go along with it! If I have None, what Murmuring, and Regret, at
my Misfortunes! By this Time, the Sins of my Youth are gotten into my Bones; I
grow Sour, and Melancholy; Nothing pleases me; I curse old Age to Ten thousand
Devils, and the Youth which I can never recover in my Veins, I endeavor to
fetch out of the Barber's Shops, from Perruques, Razors, and Patches, to
conceal, or at least disguise all the Marks and Evidences of Nature in her
Decay. Nay, when I shall have never an Eye to see with, nor a Tooth left in my
head; Gowty Legs; Wind-mills in my Crown; my Nose running like a Tap, and
Gravel in my Reins, by the Bushel; then must I make Oath that all this is
nothing but mere Accident, gotten by Lying in the Field, or the like, and
outface the Truth in the very Teeth of so many undeniable Witnesses. There is
no Plague Comparable to this Hypocrisy of the Members. To have an Old Fop shake
his Heels, when he is ready to fall to pieces; and cry, These Legs would make a
shift yet to play with the best Legs in the Company; and then with a lusty
Thump on's Breast, fetch ye up a Hem, and cry, Sound at Heart Boy, and a
Thousand other Fooleries of the like Nature. But all this is Nothing, to the
Misery of an Old fellow in Love; especially if he be put to Gallant it against
a Company of Young Gamesters. Oh the Inward shame, and Vexation, to see himself
scarce so much as Neglected. It happens sometimes times that a Jolly Lady, for
want of better Entertainment, may content her self with one of these Reverend
Fornicators, instead of a Whetstone; but alack, alack! the poor Man i^ weak,
though willing; and after a whole Night spent, in cold, and frivolous
Pretenses, and Excuses, away he goes with Torments of Rage, and Confusion about
him, not to be expressed; and many a heavy Curse is sent after him for keeping a
poor Lady from her Natural Rest, to so little purpose. How often must I be put
to the Blush too, when every old Toast shall be calling me Old Acquaintance,
and telling me, Oh Sir, it is many a fair Day since you and I knew one Another
first. I think 'twas in the four and thirtieth of the Queen, that we were
School-fellows. How the World's altered since! etc. And then must my head be
turned to a Memento Mori: My flesh, dissolved into Rheums; My Skin, Withered,
and Wrinkl'd; with a staff in my Hand, knocking the Earth at every trembling
step, as if I called upon my Grave to receive me: walking, like a Moving
Phantosme; my Life little more then a Dream; My Reins, and Bladder turned into
a Perfect Quarry; and the Vrinal, or Pisspot my whole Study. My next heir,
watching, every Minute, for the long-look't-for, and happy hour of my
Departure; And in the mean time, I Am become the Physicians Revenue; and the
Surgeons Practice, with an Apothecaries shop in my Guts; and every old Jade
calling me Grandsire. No no* I Will no more Living again, I thank ye: One Hell
rather then two Mothers.

Let us now consider the Comforts of Life: The Humors, and the Manners. He
that would be Rich, must play the Thief, or the Cheat; He that would rise in
the World, must turn Parasite, Informer, or Projecter. He that Marries,
Ventures fair for the Horn, either before, or after. There is no Valor,
without Swearing, Quarrelling or Hectoring. If ye are poor, No body Owns ye. If
Rich, you will know No body. If you dye Young, what pity it was (they will say) that
he should be cut off thus in his Prime. If Old: He was even past his best;
there is no great Mis^ of him. If you are Religious, and frequent the Church,
and the Sacrament; You're an Hypocrite; And without this, you are an Atheist, or
an Heretic. If you are Gay, and pleasant, you pass presently for a Buffon: and
if Pensive, and reserved, you are taken to be sour, and Censorious. Courtesy
is called Colloguing, and Currying of Favor: Downright Honesty, and
plain-dealing, is Interpreted to be Pride, and Ill manners. This is the World;
and for all that is in it, I would not have it to go over again. If any of ye, My
Masters (said he to his Camerades) be of another Opinion, hold up your hands.
No, No (they cried all Unanimously) No more Generation-work, I beseech ye;
Better the Devils, then the Midwives.

After This, came a Testator, cursing, and Raving, like a Bedlam, that He had
made his last Will, and Testament. Ah Villein! (said he) for a Man to murder
himself as I have done! If I had not Sealed, I had not died. Of all things,
next a Physician, Deliver me from a Testament. It has killed more then the
Pestilence. Oh Miserable Mortals; let the Living take warning by the Dead, and
make no Testaments. It was my hard Luck, first to put my Life into the
Physicians power, and then by making my Will, to sign the Sentence of Death
upon my self, and my Own Execution. Put your Soul, and your Estate in Order,
(says the Doctor) for there is no hope of Life; And the Word was no sooner out,
but I was so wise and Devout (forsooth) as to fall immediately upon the
Prologue of my Will, with an In Nomine Domini, Amen, etc. And when I came to
dispose of my Goods and Chattels I pronounced these Bloody Words ( I would I
had been Tongue-ty'd when I did it) I make and Constitute my Son, my Sole
Exec'tor. Item, to my Dear Wife, I give and Bequeath all my Plays, and
Romances, and all the Furniture in the Rooms upon the Second Story. To my very
good Friend T. B. my large Tankard, for a Remembrance. To my Footboy Robin,
five pound to bind him Prentice: To Betty that tended me in my sickness, my
little Candle-Cup. To Mr. Doctor, my fair Table-Diamond, for his Care of me in
my Illness. After Signing, and Sealing, the Ink was scarce dry upon the Paper,
but methought the Earth opened as if it had been hungry to devour me. My Son
and my Legatees were presently Casting it up, how many hours I might yet hold
out. If I called for the Cordial Iulep, or a little of Dr. Gilbert's Water; my
Son was taking Possession of my Estate: My Wife so busy about the Beds, and
Hangings, that she could not intend it. The Boy, and the Wench could understand
Nothing but about their Legacies. My very good Friend's Mind was wholly upon
his Tankard. My kind (...) I must confess took Occasion now and then, to handle
my Pulse, and see whether the Diamond were of the right Black Water, or no. If
I ask't him, what I might Eat; his Answer was; Any thing, any thing, Even what
you please your self. At every Groan I fetched, they were calling for their
Legacies; which they could not have till I was Dead.

But if I were to begin the World again, I think I should make another kind of
Testament. I would say. A Curse upon him that shall have my Estate when I am
Dead: And may the first bit of Bread he eats out on it, choke him. The Devil in
Hell take what I cannot carry away, and him too, that struggles for it, if He
can Catch him. If I dye, let my Boy Robin have the Strappado, three hours a
day, to be duly paid him during Life. Let my Wife dye of the Pip, or the
Mother; (not a half penny matter which) but let her first live long Enough to
Plague the Damned Doctor, and Indite him for poisoning her Poor Husband. To
speak sincerely, I can never forgive that Dog-Leech. Was it not enough to make
me Sick, when I was well, without making me Dead, when I was Sick? And not to
rest there neither, but to persecute me in my Grave too. But to say the Truth,
this is only Neighbour's-fare; for all those fools that trust in them, are
served with the same Sauce. A Vomit, or a Purge is as good a Passport into the
other World, as a man would wish. And then when our heads are laid; it is never
to be endured, the Scandals they cast upon our Bodies, and Memories! Heaven
rest his Soul (cries one) He killed himself with a Debauch. How is it possible
(says another) to cure a man that keeps no Diet? He was a Madman; (cries a
Third) a Mere Sot, and would not be governed by his Physician. His Body was as
Rotten as a Pear: He had as many Diseases as a Horse: and it was not in the
Power of Man to save him. And truly 'twas well that his hour was come, for he
had better a great deal Dye well, then live on as he did. Thieves and
Murderers that ye are; You your selves are that hour ye talk of. The Physician
is only Death in a Disguise, and brings his Patients Hour along with him. Cruel
People! Is it not Enough to take away a Man's life; and like Common Hang-men to
be paid for it when ye have done: but you must blast the Honor too of those you
have dispatched, to excuse your Ignorance? Let but the Living follow my
Counsel, and write their Testaments after This Copy, they shall live long and
Happily; and not go out of the World at last, like a Rat with a straw in his
Arse (as a learned Author has it) or be cut off in the flower of their days, by
these Counterfeit Doctors of the faculty of the Close-stool.

The dead man plied his discourse with so much Gravity and Earnestness, that
Lucifer began to believe what he said. But because all Truths are not to be
spoken, especially among the Devils, where hardly any are admitted; and for
fear of mischief, if the Doctors should come to hear what had been said,
Lucifer presently ordered the Fellow should be Gagged, or to put in security
for his good behavior.

His mouth was no sooner stopped, but another was opened; and one of the damned
came running cross the Company, and so up and down, back and forward (like a
Cur that had lost his Master) bawling as if he had been out of his Wits, and
crying out, Oh! Where am I? Where am I? I am abused, I am choused: What Is the
meaning of all this? Here are damning Devils; tempting Devils; and tormenting
Devils; but the Devil a Devil can I find of the Devils that brought me hither:
They have gotten away my Devils: where are they? Give me my Devils again.

It might well make the Company stare, to see a Fellow hunting for Devils in
Hell, where they swarm in Legions. But as he was in this Hurry, a Governante
caught him by the arm, and gave him a half turn, and stopped him. Thou art a
Luckey-bird (says she) if thou want Devils here, where do expect to find
them? He knew her as soon as he saw her. And Art thou here old Beelzebub in a
Petticoat? ( said he) the very Picture of Satan; The Coupler of Male and
Female; The Buckle and Thong of Leachery; The Multiplyer of sin, and the Guide
of Sinners; The Seasoner of Rotten Mutton; The Interpretress betwixt Whores and
Knaves; The Preface to the Remedy of Love, and the Prologue to the Critical
Minute. Speak, and without more ado, tell me; where are the Devils and their
Dams that brought me hither? These are none of them. No, no; I am not such and
Awfe as to be Trepan'd, and spirited away by Devils with Tails, Horns,
Bristles, Wings, that smell as if they had been smoakt in a Chimney-Corner. The
Devils that I look for, are worse than these. Where are the Mothers that play
the Bawds to their own Daughters? and the Aunts that do as much for their
Neices, and make them caper and sparkle like Wildfire? The black-ey'd Girls,
that carry fire in their Eyes, and strike as sure as a Lance from the Rest of a
Cavalier? Where are the Flatterers, that speak nothing but pleasing things? The
Make-bates and Incendiaries, that are the very Canker of Humane Society? Where
are the Story-Mongers? The Masters of the faculty of Lying? That Report more
than they, Hear, Affirm more than they Know, and swear more than they Believe.
Those slanderous Backbiters, that like Vultures prey only upon Carrion? Where
are the Hypocrites that turn Devotion into Interest, and make a Revenue of a
Commandment? That pretend Ecstasy when they are drunk; and utter the Fumes and
Dreams of their Luxury and Tipple for Revelations? That make Ch^ppels of their
Parlours; Preachment of their ordinary Entertainments; and every thing they do
is a miracle. They can Divine all that is told them; and raise people to life
again, that counterfeit sick, when they should work; and give an honest man to
the Devil with a Deo gratias. These are the Devils I would be at: These are
they that have damned me; look them out, and find them for me, ye impudent Hag,
or I shall be so bold as to search your French Hood for them. And with that
word, he fell on upon the poor Governante, tore off her Head-Geer, and laid
about him so furiously, that there were would have been no getting him off, if
Lucifer had not made use of his Absolute Authority to quiet him.

Immediately upon the composing of this Fray, we heard the shooting of Bars and
Bolts, the opening of Doors and Hinges that creakt for want of Grease, and a
strange humming of a great number of People. The first that appeared, were a
company of Bold, Talkative, and painted old Women; but as bonny and gamesome,
tickling and toying with one another, as if they had never seen Fifteen; and
carrying it out with an Air of much satisfaction and content. The Babbler was
somewhat scandalized at their Behavior; and told them how ill they did to be
so merry in Hell: and several others admired it as much, and asked them the
reason of it, considering their Condition. With that, one of the Gang that was
wretchedly thin and pale, and raised upon a pair of Heels that made her legs
longer than her Body, told Lucifer, with great Respect; that at their first
coming, they were as sad as it was possible for a company of damned old Iades
to be. But (says she) we were a little comforted, when we heard of no other
Punishments here, than Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth; and in some hope to come
off upon reasonable terms: for we have not among us all so much as a drop of
moisture in our bodies, nor a Tooth in our Heads. Search them presently (cried
the Intermedler) squeeze the Balls of their Eyes, and let their Gums be
examined, you will find Snags, Stumps, or Roots; or enough of somewhat or other
there to spoil the Jest. Upon the Scrutiny, they were found so dry, that they
were good for nothing in the world, but to serve for Tinder or Matches; and so
they were disposed of into the Devils Tinder-boxes.

While they were casing up the Old Women, there came on a number of people of
several sorts and qualities, that ^all'd out to the first they saw; Pray'e
Gentlemen (said they) before we go any further, will ye direct us to the Court
of Rewards? How Is That? (cried one of the Company) I was afraid we had been in
Hell; but since you talk of Rewards, I hope it is but Purgatory. Good, Good!
(said the whole Multitude) you will quickly find where you are: Purgatory! (cried
the Intermedler) you have left that up the Hill there, upon the Right hand.
This is Hell, and a Place of Punishment; Here Is no Registry of Rewards. Then we
are mistaken (said he that spoke first.) How so? (cried the Intermedler) You
shall hear (said the other) We were in the other world entitled to the Order of
the Squires of the Pad; and borrowed now and then a small sum upon the Kings
Highway: we understood somewhat too of the Cross-bite, and the use of the
frail Dye. Some of our conscientious and charitable friends, would fain have
drawn us off from the course we were in; and to give them their due, bestowed a
great deal of good counsel upon us to very little purpose; for we were in a
pretty way of Thriving, and had gotten a habit of, and could not leave it. We
asked them, What would you have us do? Money we have none, and without it,
there is no living: should we stay till it were brought, or came alone? How
would ye have a poor Individuum Vagum to live? That has neither Estate, Office,
Master, nor Friend to maintain him: and is quite out of his Element, unless he
be either in a Tavern, a Bawdy House, or a Gaming Ordinary. Now, That Is the
man, that Providence has appointed to live by his Wits. Our Advisers saw there
was no good to be done, and went their way, telling us, that in the other world
we should meet with our Reward.

They would tell us sometime, how base a thing it was to defame the house, and
abuse the Bed of a Friend. Our Answer was ready; Well! and had we not better do
it there where the house is open to us, the Master and Lady kind, the occasion
fair and easy; than to run a Catterwawling into a Family where every servant
in the house is a spy, and (perhaps) a Fellow behind every door in the house
with a Dagger, or Pistol in his hand to entertain us. Upon this, our Grave
Counselors finding us so resolute, even gave us over, and told us as before;
that, In the other world we should meet with our Reward. Now taking This to be
the other World these honest men told us of, we are inquiring after the Rewards
they promised us.

Abominable Scoundrels! said an Officer of Justice, there at hand; How many of
your reprobated Companions, have squandered away their Fortunes upon Whores and
Dice, exposing not only their Wives and Children, but many a Noble Family to a
shameful and irreparable Ruin: And let any man put in a word of wholesome
advice, their Answer is, Tush, Tush; Our Wives and Children are in the hands of
Providence; and let him provide for the Rooks, that feeds the Ravens. Then was
it toldye, you should find your Reward in the other World; and the time is now
come, wherein ye shall receive it: Up, up then ye cursed Spirits, and away with
them. At which word, a Legion of Devils fell on upon the miserable Caitiffs,
with Whips and Firebrands, and gave them their long expected Reward; And at
every lash, a voice was heard to say; In the other World you shall receive your
Reward. These Wretches in the mean while, damning and sinking themselves to the
pit of Hell, still, as if they had been upon Earth, and vomiting their
customary and execrable Blasphemies.

Just as this storm blew over, there drew near a multitude of Bailiffs,
Sergeants, Catchpoles, and other Officers of Prey, with the Thieves Devil,
bound hand and foot, and a foul Accusation against him. Whereupon Lucifer with
a fell countenance took his seat in a flaming Chair, and called his Officers
about him. So soon as the Prince had taken his place, a certain Officer began
his Report. Here is before thee (quoth he) a Devil (most mighty Lucifer) that
stands charged with Ignorance in his Trade; and the shame of his Quality and
Profession, instead of damning men, he has made it his business to save them.
The word save, put the Court in such a Rage, that they bit their lips, till the
blood started, and the fire sparkled at their Eyes; and Lucifer, turning about
to his Attorney; Who would ever have imagined, said he, that so treacherous a
Rascal could have been harbored in my Dominions? It is most certain, my
gracious Lord, replied the Attorney, that this Devil has been very diligent in
drawing people into Thefts and Pilferies, and then when they come to be
discovered, they are clapped up and hanged, or some mischief or other. But still
before Execution, the Ordinary calls them to shrift; and many times the toy
takes them in the head, to confess and repent, and so they are saved. Now this
si^ly Devil thinks, that when he has brought them to Steal, Murder, Coin, and
the like, he has done his part, and so he leaves them: whereas he should stick
close to them in the Prison; and be tempting of them to despair, and make away
themselves. But when they are once left to the Priest, he commonly brings them
to a sight of their sins, and they 'scape. Now this simple Devil was not aware,
it seems, that many a soul goes to Heaven from the Gallows, the Wheel, and the
Faggot: and this failing has lost your Highness many a fair Purchase. Here Is
enough (cried the President) and there needs no more Charge against him. The
poor Devil thought it was high time to speak now, when they were just upon the
point of passing his Sentence: and so he cried out, My Lord (said he) I beseech
you hear me; for though they say the Devil is deaf, it is not meant of your
Greatness: so there was a general silence, and thus he proceeded.

I cannot deny (my Lord) but Tyburn is the way to Paradise, and many a man goes
to Heaven from the Gallows. But if you will set those that are damned for
condemning others, against those that are saved from the Gallows, Hell will be
found no Loser by me at the foot of the Account. How many Marshal's-me^,
Turn-keys, and Keepers have I sent ye for letting a Coiner give them the slip
now and then, with his false Money (always provided they leave better Money
instead on it) How many false Witnesses, and Knights of the Post, that would set
their Consciences like Clocks to go faster or slower, according as they had
more or less weight, and swear ex tempore, at all Rates and Prices! How many
Sollicitors, Atturneys, and Clerks, that would draw ye up a Declaration or an
Indictment so slily, that I my self could hardly discover any Error in it; and
yet when it came to the Test, it was as plain as the nose on a man's face (that
is to say again, Provided they were well paid for the Fashion) How many Iaylers
that would wink at an Escape for a Lusty Bribe! And how many Atturneys that
would give ye Dispatch or Delay thereafter as they were greased! Now after all
this, what does it signify, if one Thief of a thousand comes to the Gallows?
he only suffers because he was poor, that there may be the better Trading for
the Rich, and without any design in the world to suppress stealing. Nay It
often falls out, that they that bring the Malefactor to the Gibbet, are the
worse Criminals of the two. But they are never looked after; or if they should
be, they have tricks and fetches enough to bring themselves off; so that it
fares in this case, as it did with him that had his house troubled with Rats,
and would needs take in a company of Cats to destroy them: The Rats would be
nibbling at his Cheese, his Bacon, a crust of Bread, and now and then a Candles
End: But when the Cats came, down went a Milk-bowl, away goes a Brace of
Partriges, or a Couple of Pigeons; and the poor man must content himself to go
supperless to Bed. In the Conclusion, the Rats were troublesome, but the Cats
were intolerable. And then there is This in it: suppose One poor fellow hangs and
goes to Heaven; I do but give him in truck for two hundred at least, that
deserve to be hanged, but 'scape and go to Hell at last. Beside; A Thief upon a
Gibbet, is as good as a Roasted-Dog in a Pigeonhouse; for ye shall immediately
have two or three thousand Witches about him, for s^ips of his H^lter, an
Eye-Tooth, or a Collop of his Fat, which i^ of Sovereign use in many of their
Charms. But in fine, let me do what I will, my services are not understood. My
Successor, it may be, will discharge his Duty Better, and indeed I am very well
content to lay down my Commission; for, ( to say the Truth) I am in Years, and
would gladly have a Little Rest now, in my old age, which I rather propose to
my self in the Service of some Pretender, then where I am.

Lucifer heard him with great Patience, and in the End, gave him all the
satisfaction imaginable; strictly charging the Evil Spirits that had abused
him, to do so no more, upon hazard of Pain^ Corporal, and Spiritual: And they
desired him too, that he would not lay down his Employment, for he was strong
enough yet to do very good service in it. But to think of Easing himself, by
going to a Pretender, he would find himself mistaken, for 'twas a Duty he would never
be able to endure. Well! (says he) even what your Highness pleases. But truly I
th^ught a Devil might have lived very Comfortably in that Condition; for he has
no more to do, that I can see, then to keep his Ears open, and learn his Trade.
For put Case it should be some Pretender to a Good Office, or a fat Bishopric
(though the Fathers, and Counsels are against Pretenders in This Case) I Phansy
to my self, all the Pleasure, and Divertisement that may be. It is as good as
going to School, for these People teach the Devils their A. B. C. And all that
we have to do, is to sit still, and learn.

The Vision that followed this, was the Demon of Tabacca; which I must confess
did not a little surprise me. I have indeed, often said to my self; Certainly
These Smokers are Possessed; but I could never swear it till now. I have (said
the Devil) by bringing this Weed into Spain, revenged the Indians upon the
Spaniards for all the Massacres and Butcheries they committed there, and done
Them more Mischief, then ever Colon, Cortes, Almero, Pizarro did in the Indies:
By how much it is more honorable, to dye upon a Sword's point, by Gunshot, or
at the Mouth of a Cannon; then for a man to Snivel, and Sneeze himself into
another World; or to go away in a Meagrim, or a Spotted-Feaver, perchance;
which is the Ordinary effect of this poisonous Tabacca. It is with
Tobacconists, as it is with Demoniacs under an Exorcism; They fume, and Vaper,
but the Devil sticks to them still. Many there are that make a very Idol of it,
they admire, they adore it, tempting and persecuting all people to take it, and
the bare mention of it, puts them into an Ecstasy. In the Smoke, it is a
Probation for Hell, where another day they must Endure Smoking; Taken in
Powder, at the Nose, it draws upon Youth the Incommodities of old age, in the
perpetual Annoyance of Rheum, and Drivel.

The Devil of Subornation came next, which was a good complexion'd, and a well
timber'd Devil: to my great Amazement I must acknowledge, for I had never seen
any Devils till now, but what were Extreme Ugly. The Air of his face was so
familiar to me, that methought I had seen it in a Thousand several places;
som^time under a Veil, sometime open; now under one shape, and then under
another. One while he called himself Child's-play; Another while, Kind
Entertainment; Here, Payment; there, Restitution; and in a third place, Alms:
but in fine, I could never learn his right Name. I remember in some places I
have heard him called Inheritance; Profit; Good Cheap; Patrimony, Gratitude.
Here he was called Doctor; there, Bachelor. With the Lawyers, Solliciters, and
Atturneys, he past under the Name of Right; and the Confessers called him
Charity.

He was well accompanied, and styled himself Satan's Lieutenant: but there was
a Devil of Consequence that opposed him, might and main: and made This
Proclamation of himself. Be it known, (says he) that I am the Great Embroyler,
and Politic Entangler of Affairs. The Deluder of Princes, The Pretext of the
Unworthy, and the Excuse of Tyrants. I can make Black, White; and give what
Color I please to the foulest Actions in Nature. If I had a Mind to overturn
the World, and put all in a general Confusion, I could do it; for I have it in
my Power, to Banish Order and Reason out of it: To turn Sauciness, and
Importunity into Merit; Example into Necessity; To give Law to Success;
Authority to Infamy; and Credit to Insolence. I have the Tongues of all
Counselors at my Girdle, and they shall speak neither more nor less then just
as I please. In short, That Is Easy to me which others account Impossible, and
while I live, ye need never fear either Virtue, Justice or Good Government in
the World. This Devil of Subornation, that talks of his Lieutenancy, what could
he ever have done without me? He Is a Rascal that no Person of Quality would
admit into his Company, if I did not fit him with Vizors, and Disguises. Let
him hold his Tongue then, and know himself; and let me hear no more of those
Disputes about the Lieutenancy of Hell, for I have Lucifer's Broad Seal to show
for my Title to it.

For my part (cried another Mutinous Spirit) I am one of those humble-minded
Devils that can content my self to hold the Door, upon a good Occasion; or
knock under the Table, and play at small Game rather then stand out. But few
words among Friends are best, and when I have spoken three or four, let him
come up that lists. I am then (says he) the Devil Interpreter, and my business
is to Gloss upon the Text; In which Case, the Cuckolds are Exceedingly beholden
to me; for I have much to say for the Honor of the Horn. How should a poor
fellow that has a handsome Wench to his Wife, and never a penny to live on,
hold up his Head in the World, if it were not for that Quality? I have a pretty
faculty in doing good Offices for Distressed Ladies, at a time of Need; and I
make the whole Sex sensible how great a Folly, and Madness it is to neglect
those sweet opportunities. Among other Secrets, I have found out a way to
establish an Office for Thievery, where the Officers shall be Thieves and
Justify it when they have done. Here he stopped.

There was a short Silence, and then there appeared another Devil, of about a
foot and a half long. I am (says he) a Devil but of a small size, and perhaps
one of the least in Hell; and yet the Door opens to me as well as to another;
for I never come Empty-handed. Why, what have you brought then? (says the
Intermedler) and came up to him; What have I brought? (quoth he) I have brought
an Eternal Talker, and a Finical Flatterer: They are two pieces, that were in
high Esteem in the Cabinets of two Great Princes; and I have brought them for a
Present to Lucifer. With That, Lucifer cast his Eye upon them, and with a
Damn'd-Verjuice-face, as if he had bitten a Crab, You do well (says he) to say
ye had them at Court; and I think you should do well to carry them thither
again; for I had as live have their Room, as their Company.

After him, followed another Dwarf-Devil, complaining that he had been a matter
of six years about so infamous a Rascal, that there was no good to be done with
him, for the Bad as well as the Better sort were Scandalized at his
Conversation. A mighty Piece of business, cried the Governante. And could you
not have gotten him a handsome Office, or Employment? That would have made him
good for something, and you might have done his Business.

In the mean time the Babbler went whispering up and down, and finding faults,
till at length he came to a huge bundle of sleeping Devils in a Corn^r, that
were fagotted up, and all moldy and full of Cobwebs; which he immediately gave
notice of, and they cut the band to give them Air. With much ado, they waked
them, and asked what Devils they were; what they did there, and why they were
not upon Duty. They fell a Yawning, and said, that they were the Devils of
Luxury: But since the Women have taken a Fancy to prefer Guinies and
Iacobusses, before their Modesty and Honor, there has been no need of a Devil
in the Case to tempt them: for it is but showing them the merry Spankers,
they will dare like Larks, and fall down before ye, and then ye may even do what
you will with them, and take them up in a Purse-net. Gold supplies all
imperfections; it makes an Angel of a Crocodile; turns a Fool into a
Philosopher; and a Dressing-Box well lined, is worth twenty thousand Devils. So
that there is no temptation like a Present: and take them from Top to Bottom,
the whole Race of Woman is frail, and one thread of Pearl will do more with them
than a million of fine stories.

Just as this Devil made an end, we heard another snorting; and 'twas well he
did so, for we had trod upon his belly else. He was laid hold of, upon
suspicion that he slept Dog-sleep, or rather the sleep of a contented Cuckold,
that would spoil no sport where he made none. I am (says he) the Nuns Devil,
and for want of other employment I have been three days asleep here as you
found me. My Mistresses are now choosing an Abbess, and always when they are at
that work, I make Holy Day: For they are all Devils themselves then; There is
such Canvasing, Flattering, Importuning, Cajoling, making of Parties; and in a
word so general a Confusion, that a Devil among them would do more hurt than
good. Nay, the Ambitious make it a point of Honor upon such an occasion, to
show that they can out-wit the Devils. And if ever Hell should be in danger of
a Peace, It is my Advice, that you presently call in a Convention of Nuns to
the Election of an Abbess; which would most certainly reduce it to its ancient
state of Sedition, Mutiny, and Confusion, and bring us all in effect to such a
pass, that we should hardly know one another.

Lucifer was very well pleased with the Advice, and ordered it to be entered
upon the Register, as a sure Expedient to suppr^ss any disorders that might
happen for the future to the disturbance of his Government: after which he
commanded the issuing out of a Summons to all his Companies and Liverymen, who
forthwith appeared in prodigious Multitudes; and Lucifer with a Hideous Yell
delivered himself most graciously as follows.

The Decree of Lucifer.
TO our Trusty and Despairing Legions, and well-beloved Subjects, lying under
the Condemnation of Perpetual Darkness, that lived Pensioners to sin, and had
Death for their Play Master, Greeting. This is to let you understand, that there
are two Devils, who pretend a claim to the honor of our Lieutenancy; but we
have absolutely refused to gratify either the One or the Other, in that point,
out of a singular Affection and Respect to Our right Trusty and Well-beloved
Cousin, a certain She-Devil that deserves it before all others.

At this the whole Assembly fell to whispering and muttering, and staring one
upon another; till at last Lucifer observing it, bad them never trouble
themselves to guess who it might be, but fetch Good Fortune to him, known
otherwise by the name of Madam Prosperity; who presently appeared in the tail
of the Assembly, and with a proud and disdainful Air, marched up and planted
her self before the degraded Seraphim; who looked her wistly in the face, and
then he went on in the Tone he first began.

It is our Will, Pleasure, and Command, that next and immediately under our
proper Person, you pay all Honor and Respect to the Lady Prosperity, and obey
her, as the most mighty and supreme Governess of these our Dominions. Which
Titles and Qualities, we have conferred upon her, as due to her merit; for she
has damned more Souls than all you together; She it is that makes men cast off
all fear of God, and Love of their Neighbor. She it is, that makes men place
their Sovereign good in Riches. That Engages and Entangles men's minds in
Vanity; strikes them blind in their Pleasures; Loads them with Treasure, and
Buries them in sin. Where Is the Tragedy that she has not played her part in it?
Where Is the Stability and Wisdom that she has not staggered? Where Is the Folly
that she has not improved and augmented? She takes no Counsel, and fears no
Punishment. She it is that furnishes matter for Scandal, experience for Story,
that entertains the Cruelty of Tyrants, and bathes the Executioners in Innocent
Blood. How many Souls, that lived innocent, while they were poor, have fallen
into impiety and reprobation, so soon as ever they came to drink of the
enchanted Cup of Prosperity! Go to then, be Obedient to Her, we charge ye all,
as to Our Self: and understand, that They that stand their ground against
Prosperity are none of your Quarry. Let them even alone; for it is but time lost
to attempt them. Take example from that impertinent Devil, that got leave to
tempt Job; he persecuted him, beggered him, covered him all over with Scabs and
Ulcers. Sot that he was! if he had understood his business, he would have gone
another way to work, and begged leave, to have multiplied Riches upon him; and
to have possessed him of Health and Pleasures. That Is the Trial; and how many are
there that when they thrive in the world, turn their backs upon Heaven, and
never so much as name their Creator; but in Oaths, and then too, without
thinking on him? Their Discourse is all of Iollities, Banquets, Comedies,
Purchases, and the like. Whereas the poor man has God perpetually both in his
mouth and heart. Lord (says he) be mindful of me, and have mercy upon me, for
all my trust is in thee. Wherefore (says Lucifer, redoubling his accursed
clamor) let it be Published forthwith throughout all our Territories, that,
Calamities, Troubles, and Persecutions are our mortal Enemies: for so we have
found them upon Experience: they are the Dispensations of Providence, the
Blessings of the Almighty, to fit Sinners for himself, and they that suffer
them are enrolled in the Militia of Heaven.

Item; For the better administration of our Government, It is our Will and
Pleasure, and we do strictly charge and command, that our Devils give constant
attendance in all Courts of Judicature; and they are hereby totally discharged
from any further care of Little petty Foggers, Flatterers, and Envious Persons,
for they are so well acquainted with Hell Rode, that they will guide one another,
without the help of a Devil to bring them hither.

Item; We do Ordain and Command that no Devil presume for the future to
entertain any Confident, but Profit; for That Is the Harbinger that provides
Vice the most commodious Quarter, even in the straitest Consciences.

Item; We do Ordain, as a matter of great importance to the conservation of our
Empire, that in what part soever of our Dominions, the Devil of Money shall
vouchsafe to appear, all other Devils there present, shall rise, and with a low
Reverence* present him the Chair, in token of their submission to his Power and
Authority.

Item; We do most expressly Charge and Command all our Officers, as well Civil
as Military, to employ their utmost Diligence and Industry, for the
establishing a General Peace throughout the World. For that is the time for
wickedness to thrive in, and all sorts of vices to prosper and flourish; as
Luxury, Gluttony, Idleness, Lying, Slandering, Gaming, and Whoring; and in a
word, sin is upon the Increase, and Goodness in the Wane. Whereas in a state of
War, men are upon the exercise of Valor and Virtue; calling often upon Heaven,
in the morning, for fear of being Knocked on the Head after Dinner: and honest
men and actions are rewarded.

Item; We do from this time forward discharge all our Officers and Agents
whatsoever, from giving themselves any further trouble of tempting Men and
Women to sins of Incontinence; for as much as we find upon Experience, that
Adultery and Fornication will never be left, till the old Woman scratches the
stooll for her backside. And though there may be several intervals of
Repentance, and some faint Purposes of giving it over: yet the Humor returns
again with the next Tide of Blood, and Concupiscence is as Loyal a Subject to
us, as any we have in our Dominions.

Item; In Consideration of the Exemption aforesaid, by which means several
Devils are left without present Employment; And for as much as there are many
Merchants and Tradesmen in London, Paris, Madrid, Amsterdam, and elsewhere, up
and down the world, that are very charitably disposed to relieve People in
want; especially young Heirs newly at Age, and Spend-Thrifts, that come to
borrow money of them; but the times being Dead and little money stirring, all
they can do is to furnish them with what the House affords; and if a hundred
pound or two in Commodity will do them any good, it is at their service (they
say.) This the Gallant takes up at an excessive Rate, to sell again immediately
for what he can get; and the Merchant has his friend to take it off underhand,
at a third part of the Value (which is his way of helping men in distress.) Now
out of a singular Respect ^o the said Merchants and Tradesmen, and for their
better Encouragement; as also, to the end that the Devils aforesaid may not run
into lewd Courses, for want of business; We Will and Require that a Legion of
the said Devils, shall from time to time be continually aiding and assisting to
the said Merchants and Tradesmen, in the Quality of Factors, to be relieved
monthly by a fresh Legion, or oftener if occasion shall require.

Item; We Will and Command that all our Devils, of what Degree, or Quality
soever, do henceforth Entertain a strict Amity and Correspondence with Our
Trusty, and well beloved, the Usurers, the Revengeful, the Envious, and all
Pretenders to great Places, and Dignities: And above all Others, with the
Hypocrites, who are the most Powerful Impostors in Nature, and so Excellently
skilled in their Trade, that they steal away People's Hearts and Souls at the
Eyes, and Ears, insensibly, and draw to themselves Adoration, and Reward.

Item; We do further Order, and Command, that all Care possible be taken for
the maintaining of Blabs, Informers, Incendiaries, and Parasites in all Courts,
and Palaces, for thence comes Our Harvest.

Item; That the Bablers, Tale-Bearers, Make-Bates and Instruments of Divorces,
and Quarrels, be no longer called Fannes, but Bellows; in regard that they
draw, and Inflame, without giving any Allay, or Refreshment.

Item; That the Intermedlers be hereafter called, and Reputed the Devils
Body-Lice, because they fetch Blood of those, that feed, and Nourish them.

Lucifer then casting a Sour Look over his Shoulder, and spying the
Governante: I Am of his Mind (quoth he) that said, Let God dispose of the
Douegnas (or Governantes) as he pleases: for I Am in no little Trouble, how to
dispose of these Confounded Carrions. Whereupon, the Damned cried out with one
Voice: Oh! Lucifer, let it never be said, that it rained Douegnas in thy
Dominions. Are we not miserable enough without this new Plague of being baited
by Haggs? Ah! Cursed Lucifer; (cried every one to himself) stow them any where,
so they come not near me. And with that, they all clapped their Tayls between
their Legs, and drew in their Horns, for fear of this new Torment. Lucifer,
finding how the Dread of the old Women wrought upon the Devils, contented
himself, at the present, to let it pass only, in Terrorem; but withal, he
swore, by the honor of his Imperial Crown, and as he hoped to be saved; that
what Devil, Devil s Damme, or Reprobate soever, should in time to come be found
wanting to his Duty; and in the least Degree disobedient to his Laws, and
Ordinances: All, and every the said Devil, or Devils; their Dams, and
Reprobates so offending, should be delivered up to the Torture of the Douegna;
and tied Muzzle to Muzzle; so to remain in Secula Seculorum, without Relief or
Appeal; or any Law, Statute, or Usage to the Contrary Notwithstanding. But in
the Mean time, Cast them into that Dry Ditch, (says he) that they may be ready
for use upon any Occasion.

Immediately, upon the Pronouncing of this Solemn Decree, Lucifer retired to
his Cell; The Weather cleared up; and the Company dispersed in a fright, at so
horrible a Menace, and so went about their Business: When a Voice was heard out
of the Clouds, as the Voice of an Angel, saying, He that rightly comprehends
the Morality of this Discourse, shall never repent the Reading of it.

THE END.

