portrait of Edward Pearse. Vera Effigies Rdi Edwardi Pearse. Aetatis Suae 40.
1673.
R: White sculp.


A BEAM OF Divine Glory: OR THE Unchangeableness of God: Opened, Vindicated,
and Improved. Whereunto is added, The Soul's Rest in God.

By EDWARD PEARSE.

To which is prefixed the Author's last Letter, written in the time of his
Sickness, to some peculiar Friends

Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, etc. LONDON, Printed by J. D. for
Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard; and Brabazon
Aylmer at the three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1674.

TO THE READER.
THE Unchangeableness of God is one of those Perfections of his, whereby he is,
in a peculiar manner, distinguished from the Creatures. The Creatures are made
up of Changes. Their Beings, Life, Conditions, are subject to many Changes. But
God knows none of these Changes, his Being is most immutable, his Life the most
even, constant, Uniform, serene Life; his Happiness at all times alike and the
Same. God does always abide in the same likeness, (...). Philo Judaeus.
says one of the Ancients, with him there is no Variableness nor shadow of
Change. Now there is an instinct in us, whereby we are carried out to desire
unchangeableness. Every thing does naturally desire its Perfection; Man
therefore being a reasonable Creature, finding himself subject to many Changes,
longs after a perfect State, which is to be Unchangeable, he would fain come to
an Unchangeable Life, to an Unchangeable Happiness. Now what we cannot find, or
attain unto in our selves, we should aspire after, by attaining Union and
Conjunction with our Maker. Every thing is made perfect by reaching or
attaining its First Cause or Principle. God is the Fountain of Life, the
Fountain of Unchangeableness, so far as unchangeableness is communicable to the
Creatures. Indeed, in a strict and proper sense Unchangeableness is one of the
Incommunicable Attributes of God, none but God is simply and absolutely
Unchangeable, or can be so. It implies a Contradiction to suppose a Creature,
and that Creature intrinsecally and in its own Nature, not to be under a
possibility of Change; but yet after a sort, the Creatures may be made
Unchangeable, in having an Unchangeable Life, an Unchangeable Happiness given
to them by some kind of participation of God, who is the chief Good, and who
has all Life and Happiness in himself. Thus the holy Angels, who are not
simply and absolutely unchangeable in themselves, do yet enjoy an unchangeable
Life and Happiness, in way of donation and Communication, by the sight of God,
and Communion with God. We should therefore aspire after the sight of God, and
press after the most perfect adherence to him. God only is the Center of
Unchangeableness, and by fixing our hearts in him, we shall, after a sort,
become unchangeable. Join thy heart to Eternity, (says Austin) and thou thy
self shall be eternal. Junge Cor tuum aeternitati, and aeternus eris.


The Author of the following Discourses has now blessed experience what that
participated Unchangeableness is, (if we may so Call it) which glorified Souls
have in the Divine presence, by having Communion with God, the first
unchangeable Being. Whilst he lived here on Earth, he saw many Changes passing
over himself, both as to his Person and Condition; this put him upon the
Contemplation of the Unchangeableness of God, and caused him to seek for that
Rest in God which he could not find in himself, nor in any thing here below.
And as those that observed his Spirit did clearly perceive that he was much
quickened and helped, as to his Spiritual Estate, by meditating much of an Holy
Rest in God; So it is not to be doubted, if we take the same Course, and keep
the eye of our minds fixed on God, laboring to take up all our Rest and
Satisfaction in him; there shall we find that true quiet to our Souls, which we
vainly seek after in the Variety of Objects here below. And the serious
perusing of these Discourses, which carry much of the Impress of the Authors
Spirit upon them, may be of good use to us to help us to attain such an end.

The Author had no thoughts at first of bringing forth these Sermons unto
public view, but being much persuaded hereunto by his Nearest Relation; at
last he yielded unto that Importunity, and perfected them with his own hand.
The rest of his Notes being left in Characters, it is much to be feared, these
are the last Sermons of his that are like to see the Light.

For a close, I may only add this, That it is matter of sad Lamentation to us,
to consider how many of the Faithful Servants of God, who have been eminent in
their Generations, have been taken away in a few years. Certainly it becomes us
to bewail greatly the deaths of so many Godly Ministers, and since the Harvest
is great, and the faithful Laborers are but few, we should pray the Lord of
the Harvest that he would thrust forth Laborers into the Vineyard;

Thine in the Lord Christ, JOHN ROW.

Mr. Pearse' s last Letter.
To my dearly beloved Friends, that small Company, to whom, by the providence
of God, I have some years last past preached the Everlasting Gospel.
Dearly and longed for in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; Grace, Mercy, and
Peace unto you from God our Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by the
Eternal Spirit.
IT is now many years since, by the providence of God, we have been called to
worship his great and Reverend Name together; during which time God has ^een
exceeding good to us, manifesting his Power in our weakness, and his Love in
our unworthiness: He has declared his Name to be recorded amongst us, by his
coming to us, and blessing of us: Some of you have been Convinced, some
Converted, some Edified, and all (I hope) quickened and encouraged Heavenwards:
And not only your selves, but, through the Grace of God, many others have been
born to Christ amongst us, and more built up in the holy Faith. O the many,
warm, sweet and refreshing Sabbaths we have enjoyed together! And what shall we
say to these things, or what shall we do? O, let us bow down at the foot of
God, and adore his infinitely, infinitely, infinitely free, rich, and powerful
Grace, ascribing all the glory to that alone, to which (I am sure) all is due.
God has now called me aside from you, and not only from you, but he seems to
be calling me out of his Vineyard, yea, out of this World: I have long had a
weak and infirm Body, but now God, in his wise and holy Providence, has seen
good to reduce me to a far lower and weaker state of Body, my Health being now
utterly broken: Yet I must say, God is exceeding good to me, and deals in
fatherly tenderness with me; I have neither much sickness, nor much pain, only
my Disease, according to its name, gradually consumes me, nor am I without some
lucid intervals: God both lifts me up, and casts me down, (as he dealt with the
Church of old;) Sometimes I am under some revivings, which seem to give hopes
of a return from the Grave; Anon nothing but Death seems to be in view; And in
this dubious state I am waiting upon the Will of God, which (I am sure) is
Holy, Wise, and Good, and which (I hope) shall be welcome to me, whether it be
for Life or Death: Hitherto, through Grace, Death has not been terrible to me;
what it may be, in its nearest approaches, I cannot tell; but I look to, and
rest upon him, who has destroyed both Death, and him that had the power of
Death.

And now only two things I beg of you: One is, That you all give me a room in
your Prayers, while I am in the Land of the Living; and I desire you would beg
of God these things for me.

First, That all sin and guilt cleaving to me may be fully expiated and
discharged through the Blood of Christ. O beg both forgiveness and repentence
for me, which (God knows) I greatly need.

Secondly That my Will may be thoroughly resigned up into the Will of God,
either for Life or Death.

Thirdly, That I may have much of God's Presence with me, and may always have
good Thoughts of Him and his Dispensations toward me, in all He does, or shall
lay upon me.

Fourthly That if God shall please to restore me, I may come out of this
Furnace purisied and refined, as Gold that is tried seven times, and more
fitted for my Masters Service: or if his pleasure is, (which seems at present
most probable) to put a period to my mortal life, that his Love, and the Light
of his Countenance may shine upon me, to sweeten the bitter pangs of Death to
me: we cannot live comfortably without his Love, much less can we die
comfortably without it. That is my first request: The other is, That you will
accept and embrace some plain, but weighty counsels. God is my Record, that my
hearts-desire and Prayers for you is and has been, that you may be saved, and
in love to your salvation I leave these Directions with you.

1. Above all things look well to, and labor to make sure of an Union with
Christ, knowing assuredly that without Union with him, all your Religion is
vain and ineffectual.

2. Take heed of too much addictedness to his World, as remembering, that if any
Man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him; and that the
friendship of this World is enmity to God.

3. Dwell much within, and be much conversant in Heart-work, in studying the
Heart, searching the Heart, cleansing the Heart, keeping the Heart, looking
always upon it as the veriest Cheat and Impostor in the World, deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked.

4. Take heed of splitting upon that fatal Roek of self-deceit, of which you
have sometimes heard, and upon which the greatest part of Professors split and
perish for ever.

5. Set up and keep up the Worship of God both in your Families and Closets:
for the Lord's sake let none of yours be Prayerless Families.

6, Always maintain a great honor and reverence for all God's Ordinances, and
in an especial manner honor and sanctify his Sabbath: The Sabbath Day is your
Souls Market day: O lose not your Market.

7. Be universally honest and upright in your Callings, and your Dealings in
them; the fraudulent dealings of Professors do much reproach the Gospel.

8. Covet to seat your selves under a sound, clear, searching Gospel ministry,
and keep mainly to the same Ministry; and the Lord guide you therein.

9. Labor that your profiting under the Ministry may appear unto all men: it
will be a dreadful thing to enjoy rich means, and bring forth no fruit to
perfection: O Sirs be fruitful Christians.

10. Expect further Trials and Sufferings, and prepare for them: there is a
dark and gloomy Day coming, such as (I am apt to think) you and I have never
seen any like unto it, and such as wherein (possibly) you will think it best
with them that God shall have hid in the Grave before hand: But be not
troubled, it will be short; and a glorious Day will follow, a Day wherein the
Church of God shall sing the song of Moses and of the Lamb, a Day wherein our
dear Lord and Head shall reign gloriously: And therefore.

11. Pray and long, long and pray much and earnestly for the coming of the Day
of God, for the coming of Christ's Kingdom: Thy Kingdom come, is a Petition
should be much upon our hearts. O do not Rest in low things as to divine
appearances and manifestations both in the World and in your own Souls. These
Counsels I leave with you out of that entire love and affection I bear to your
salvation, and our Lord's honor as concerned in you. I will conclude all with
that solemn and cordial profession to you, which Augustine often made to those,
to whom he was wont to preach: viz. that it is the desire of my Soul, that as
we have been often crowded together to worship God in one Earthly House or
Temple, so we may all worship him together for ever in the Heavenly House or
Temple; And if we must never Pray, and Preach, and Hear, and Mourn together
more on Earth, yet we may Love, and Sing, and Praise, and Admire, and Rejoice
together for ever in Heaven: Which that we may do, the God of Peace, (who
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, that great Shephed of the
Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant) make us perfect in every
good Work to do his Will, working in you and me that which is well-pleasing in
his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen and
Amen.

My dear, dear, dear Friends I am your weak and languishing, but yet Cordial
Friend, and willing Servant, in Christ, and for Christ, EDWARD PEARSE.
Hampstead, October. 3. 1672.
A Beam of Divine Glory: OR, The Unchangeableness of God, Asserted, Opened,
Vindicated, and Improved, from Mal. 3. 6. I am the Lord, I change not;
therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed.


CHAP. I.
Wherein way is made to the Text; the Words thereof opened; the Foundation of
our intended Discourse laid, and the principal Matters to be considered, in the
prosecution of it, hinted at.

IT is a great, as well as a true Observation, which I have read in a Learned
Man; namely, That all the many various Attributes of God mentioned in the
Scripture, are no other than his very Essence, Multae est varia Dei attributa
sunt ipsa Dei essentia, and Deo propter captum nostrum tribuuntur, qui non
possumus sub uno nomine aut actu intellectus, quod de Deo percipiendum est,
intelligere. Schar.
and are ascribed to him to help us in our Conceptions and Understandings of
Him, who are not able to apprehend what may be known of God, under any one Name
or Notion, or by any one Act of the Intellect. We read (you know) of his Power,
his Wisdom, his Holiness, his Justice, his Goodness, his Faithfulness, his
All Sufficiency, and the like, all which are not distinguished in him, either
from himself, or from one another, but are all one and the same God revealed
and manifested to us, under various notions, and that to help us the better to
conceive and apprehend him, as also to perform our homage and worship to him;
accordingly we may say, the Holiness of God, is God; the Wisdom of God, is God;
the Power of God, is God; the Goodness of God, is God: And to come to my Text,
the Unchangeableness of God, is God; and indeed the unchangeableness of God, is
God manifested and revealed under a sweet and blessed, as well as a glorious
Notion to us, under such a Notion as conduces-much to the quickening and
encouraging of our Faith and Love, our Comfort and Obedience in him, and to
him; and so indeed the Text represents it, I am the Lord, I change not,
therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed: In which words we have two things
to be noted.

1. Here is a Display or Representation of God in one Ray or Beam of his Divine
Glory, and that is his Unchangeableness, I am the Lord, I change not; or, I the
Lord am not changed: for it may be read either Actively or Passively, and the
sense will be the same: I change not, I am not altered or varied at all, what I
was, I am; what I am, I still shall be: Deus hic se tacit mortalibus opponit
et a se. Procul repellit omnem inconstantiam. Calv.
God here (as a judicious Expositor observes) tacitly opposes himself to mortal
men, and removes and renounces all wavering and inconstancy from himself. I
change not; as if he should have said, Men die, but I live; men change, but I
change not, I am still the same.

2. Here is a Mention or Declaration of the blessed Fruit or Issue of this
Glorious Perfection of God, in reference to his Church and People, and that is
their preservation from destruction: Therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not
consumed. Here two things must be enquired into; First, Who are we to
understand by the Sons of Jacob? And, secondly, What by their being not
consumed?

1. Who are we to understand by the Sons of Jacob? By the Sons of Jacob here we
are to understand God's Professing Church and People. We read in Scripture of
the House of Jacob, the Seed of Jacob, and the Sons of Jacob; by all which are
meant, God's Church and People, whom he takes into Covenant with himself, and
makes the Objects of his Love; and this will be evident, by comparing my Text
with Cap. 1.2. where God says expressly, that he loved them; And again, I loved
Jacob.

2. What are we to understand by their being not consumed? It imports and
carries in it these two things; 1. An Exemption from Temporal Ruin. 2. A
Preservation from Eternal Destruction.


1. An Exemption from Temporal Ruin: Therefore ye are not consumed: that is,
therefore you are not cut off from being a People; therefore you are not
utterly broken by my Judgments; it is true, some afflictions you have had, yea
great afflictions; but yet still you live, still you are a People, you are
preserved from utter ruin and destruction. And why so? Not because you have
not deserved to be utterly cut off and destroyed, but because I am
unchangeable; I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not
consumed.

2. A Preservation from Eternal Destruction; Therefore ye are not consumed;
that is, therefore you are not in Hell, therefore you are not under the eternal
Revelations of my Wrath, which (alas!) is what you have deserved: As if God
should say to them, True, you have had affliction, but (alas!) it has been
nothing to the desert of your sin, your sins have been many and great against
me, such as deserved utter ruin, yea eternal destruction, an utter Consumption
both of Body and Soul for ever; and this had been your portion long since, had
you not had to deal with an unchangeable God; not your desert, but my
unchangeableness is the sole cause why you are not utterly and eternally
destroyed.

In short, the design of the whole was to upbraid them with their sins, and
particularly their ingratitude; and withal, to let them know, that the reason
why it was not worse with them than it was, yea, why they were not totally and
eternally destroyed, was not because they did not deserve to have had it so,
but because their God was unchangeable: I am the Lord, I change not; therefore,
etc. In which God seems thus to bespeak them: You complain of me, and have hard
thoughts of me, because it is with you as it is, and I do not presently arise
for your help; but let me tell you, it is well for you, that it is not ten
thousand times worse with you than it is; it is well you are a People; it is well
you are not among the Damned; Sure I am, you highly deserved to have had it so
with you; you are a sinful, sinning, rebellious people, a people that have
deserved to be destroyed ten thousand times over; I have done great things for
you above any people, I have shown you much love, but you have not walked
sutably and answerably to the great things I have done for you, nor the great
love I have shown to you: No, you have abused all, and sinned against me under
all, and that with an high hand, whereby you have deserved to be utterly
consumed and destroyed; and indeed, had I not been an unchangeable God,
consumed and destroyed you had been long ago; I see that in you, and among
you, for which I might justly destroy you, and that for ever, and nothing but
my own Unchangeableness keeps you alive; Should you therefore complain of me?
Should you not rather admire at my patience and forbearance so long with you,
and toward you? Truly it is a Miracle of Grace, Goodness, and Patience in me,
that you have not been long since destroyed once for all. This I take to be the
true scope and meaning of the Word; the sum of which, together with the
foundation of my intended Discourse from them, I shall give you in this short
Position; Namely, That the Lord Jehovah is an unchangeable God; or how
changeable soever the Creatures are, yet God the Lord changes not.

Whoever changes, I the Lord change not, I am always and for ever the same.
Now that God is unchangeable, wherein he is unchangeable, why, or whence it is
that he is unchangeable, as also the vindication of his unchangeableness from
all Cavils and Objections that seem to lie against it, with the practical
improvement of all, are the principal matters that will fall under
consideration in the prosecution of this Argument; and I hope, by the
assistance of God, we shall find some light, and much comfort and quickening in
our going through them.

CHAP. II.
Which contains a general proof of the unchangeableness of God.

THe Creatures, yea, the best of Creatures in themselves are subject to change;
but God is every way, and in all respects unchangeable; God himself expressly
here (you see) asserts his own unchangeableness. I am the Lord, I change not;
and it is frequently asserted also elsewhere. Jam. 1.17. Every good and perfect
Gift (says the Apostle) comes down from Above, from the Father of Lights,
with whom is no variableness or shadow of change. God is here called the Father
of Lights. He is sometimes called Light it self, 1 John 1.5. God is Light. Quo
Majestas, Sanctitas, Perfectio et Beatitudo ejus notatur. Glass. Rhet. Sac.
By which (as a learned Man observes) is noted to us, the Majesty, Holiness,
and perfect Blessedness of God; and here he is called the Father of Lights. To
note that all Light, all Glory, all Holiness and Blessedness is originally in
him, and that whatever of these Creatures do partake of, does come from him as
its proper Spring and Fountain. Now with this Father of Lights there is (says
the Apostle) no variableness, no mutation; the word is (...), which is an
Astronomical term taken from the Heavenly Bodies, which suffer many
Declinations and Revolutious; the Heavenly Lights have their Vicisitude and
Eclipsis, their Decreases and Increases; but with God, the Father of Lights,
there is no such thing, he always shines with a like Brightness, Luster, and
Glory, with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning; that is, he is
without the least show or resemblance of change; nothing that looks like a
change is found in him: God is a Son which does not Set and Rise, that can
never be Overcast or Eclipsed. So also, Psalm. 102.24, 25, 26, 27. I said, O my
God, take me not away in the midst of my days; thy years are throughout all
Generations: Of old have thou laid the Foundations of the Earth; and the
Heavens are the work of thy hands; They all perish, but thou shall endure, all
of them shall wax old like a Garment; as a vesture shall thou change them, and
they shall be changed. But thou art the same, At tu idem es, id est nihil est
firmum et perpetuum nisi tu nullis enim alterationibus et mutationibus es
obnoxious, Mol.
and thy years shall have no end. Pray observe, the Heavens are the purest part
of the Creation, yet they, the Psalmist tells us, shall wax old, and be
changed; but says he to God, thou art the same, and thy years shall have no
end; thou changest not, but what thou were thou art, and wilt be so for ever.
The Heavens, and so all the Creatures, do not only wax old and change; but
observe, they change and wax old like a Garment. Cloth by degrees will rot and
be eaten out by Moths, but a Garment or Vesture is worn and wasted every day;
every day brings changes upon the Creatures more or less, but God changes not,
he remains the same for ever; from everlasting to everlasting he is God, as you
have it Psalm 90.2. that is, he is unchangeably one and the same infinitely Holy
and Blessed One. Deus est immutabilis, mutans omnia, nunquam novus, nunquam
vetus. Aug.
God (says one of the Ancients) who changes all things, who works all the
changes are in the world, is himself unchangeable, never new, never old. Thus
you see that God is unchangeable. Now if you ask me what this unchangeableness
of God is? I answer, that it is that Attribute of God, whereby he is free from
all corruption and alteration, is always like himself; so as that he can
neither cease to be what he is, nor begin to be what he is not; and hereby he
is infinitely distinguished from all the Creatures in Perfection and Glory:
they are all subject to corruption and alteration, at least in their own nature
they are so, if not in their condition; they may cease to be what they are, and
may begin to be what they are not; they may lose what they had, and may attain
somewhat which before they had not; even the very Angels themselves are in
themselves thus mutable; As may be more fully hereafter shown. But now with God
their is no such thing, he is free from all possibility of corruption or
alteration; he is always the same, nor can he cease to be what he is, or begin
to be what he is not. But that God is unchangeable and also what his
unchangeableness is, will further appear by what next falls under consideration.

CHAP. III.
Which shows wherein, in a peculiar manner, God is unchangeable.

HAving thus given you a general proof of God's Unchangeableness, our next Work
shall be to consider wherein he is unchangeable; by which we shall be both
further enlightened and confirmed in this Truth; and withal, brought, I hope,
into an acquaintance with the Life, Power, and sweetness of it, at least in
some measure. God then is unchangeable, especially in six things, all which do
carry unexpressible Sweetness, as well as Glory in them, and should be great
encouragements to our Faith and Comfort. He is unchangeable; 1. In his Being
and Essence. 2. In his Blessedness and Glory. 3. In his Council and Decree. 4.
In his Kingdom and Rule. 5. In his Covenant and Promise. 6. In his Love and
Grace to his People.


1. God is unchangeable in his Being and Essence. Deus ut in Essentia sua
consideratur est actus purus, a quo omnia sunt, and in quem omnia redeunt.
Scharp.
What the Being or Essence of God is, is not easy for us to conceive or
apprehend; the Learned tell us, that the Essence or Being of God is, that one
mere and pure Act whereby God is God; or thus, that God, in respect of his
Essence, is one most pure and mere Act, from which all things are, and to which
all things return; that is, which is the first Cause, and the last End of all
things: but whatever the Essence or Being of God is, yet to be sure he is
therein unchangeable, he cannot be changed into another Essence or Being; nor
can that which he has, or rather is, be corrupted or decay: so much is held
forth in my very Text. God therein stiling himself Jehovah. Which Name or Title
of his notes, as the truth and absoluteness, so the sameness and
unchangeableness of his Being: Thus Calvin and others note upon the place; and
therefore do make that [I change not] to be but an Exegesis, or somewhat added
by way of explication of this Title Jehovah, which here God gives himself, I am
Jehovah, I change not, q. d. I am an absolute, independent, unchangeable Being
in my self, and one that gives Being to all the Creatures; and thus the Learned
in the Hebrew Tongue do all expound this glorious Name of God, they tell us
that this glorious Name of his, notes both his Being, and the unchangeableness
of his Being; and when God, as in my Text, says, I am Jehovah; he does in one
word say, I am He, that great He, who have my Being in and of my self, and do
give Being to all the Creatures, and who in my Being was from all eternity, am
now, and will be one and the same for ever. The same thing does God assert of
himself in that other Name of his, Exodus 3.14. where he calls himself [I am];
God said unto Moses, I am that I am; and he said, Thus shall thou say unto the
Children of Israel, I am has sent me unto you. I am what I am, or I will what
I will be, it notes eternal and unchangeable Being in himself, and that he is
now and will be for ever, that which he was before to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. It notes (as a Learned Man observes) the Necessity, Dinotat in Deo
essendi Necessitatem, Aeternitatem, Immutabilitatem, atque plenitudinem, and
omnis Essentiae Fontem. Vatab. in loc. Ego sum perpetuus Deus. Oleast.
Eternity, Immutability, and infinite fullness of God's Being, and indeed the
Fountain of all Being to be in him. It speaks him to be perpetually God, and to
his Name, Christ alludeth, when he asserts his own Divinity in Joh. 8.58.
Before Abraham was, I am. So Psalm. 102.27. Thou art the same, says the
Psalmist to God; or, which is more suitable to the Hebrew, Thou art thy self,
always thy self. Thus God is unchangeable in his Being or Essence; and when I
say he is unchangeable in his Being or Essence, I say he is unchangeable in all
his Essential Properties, his Wisdom, his Power, his Justice, his Holiness, his
Omniscience, his All Sufficiency, and the like. For pray mark, Multa est varia
Dei attributa cum ejus unitate non pugnant, sed omnia unam simplicissimam Dei
essentiam significant, imo sunt ipsa Dei essentia. Sch.
The Attributes or Properties of God are not in him distinguished, either from
his Essence, or from one another really, but notionally or virtually; that is,
they are not distinguished at all in God, but are all one and the same
perfection in him; they are indeed, as was noted in the beginning, the Divine
Essence it self; according to that general Rule, Whatever is in God, is God;
they are distinguished only in the manner of our understanding, which being
unable to comprehend that infinite pure Act at once, do conceive thereof after
the manner of many Acts; so that I say, when we affirm that God is unchangeable
in his Being or Essence, we affirm that he is unchangeable in all his
Attributes and Perfections, in his Holiness, his Wisdom, his Power, his
Greatness, his Love, and the like. I Will close this Head with a great Saying
which I have read in Austine, Tu solus es Deus, id quod neque in melius neque
in deterius commutari potest, quia solus simpliciter es, etc. August. Confess.
lib. 13. cap. 3.
Thou (says he to God) alone art God, that Being which cannot possibly be
changed, either into a better or worse Being, because thou art a most simple
Being; to whom, it is not one thing to live, and another thing to live
blessedly, and that because thou art thine own Blessedness; of which more in
the next Particular.

2. God is unchangeable in his Blessedness and Glory: The Lord Jehovah is a
Glorious and Blessed God, He is the Blessed, as well as the only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15. He is Blessed, and that not only Objectively, as he is the great
Object of the Praises, Blessings, and Admirings of Men and Angels for ever; nor
yet as he is the Spring and Fountain of all that blessedness which the one and
the other of them do eternally enjoy; but Subjectively, being a God infinitely
blessed and happy: God is the most happy and blessed Being, he is so blessed,
that it is more then all the Creatures, whether Men or Angels, can do to add the
least tittle or iota to his blessedness: Hence we read, That their goodness
extends not to him, Psalm. 16.2. And again, Can a Man be profitable unto God?
And is it gain to him that thou make thy ways perfect? That is, It Is no
profit, no gain to God, no addition to his happiness or perfection, that we, or
any, are or do so. See also Job 22.2, 3. and Chap. 35. 7, 8. If thou be
righteous, What give thou unto him? Or what receives he of thine hand? Thy
wickedness may hurt a Man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the Son
of Man, but not God: As if he should say, God is never the more happy or
unhappy by any thing the Creature does or can do: It Is ture, the Saints and
Angels both do love him, praise him, admire and adore him for ever; they cast
all their Crowns down at his Foot: But alas! this adds not one iota to his
happiness; No, He is exalted above all Blessing and Praise, Nehem. 9.5. Yea,
it is a stopping, a condescension in him to take notice of these things, as you
have it Psalm 113.5, 6. And indeed, it is our happiness, not God's, to love him,
serve him, praise him, walk with him, and live to him. Who art thou Lord,
(says Aug.) Quid mihi es Domine, quid tibi sum ipse, ut amari te jubeas a me,
and nisi faciam irascaris mihi, etc? Aug.
and what am I that thou should command me to love thee, that thou will
accept of love from me, and threaten me with great miseries unless I will love
thee? He admires the condescension of God herein. Yea, such is the blessedness
of God, that he himself cannot add hereunto; God cannot make himself more
blessed, happy, and perfect than he is; nothing can by infiniteness be added
unto infiniteness: Now as he is thus blessed, so his blessedness is
unchangeable; hence one of his names is, Over all, God blessed for evermore,
Romans 9.5. (...), throughout all Ages, and to all Eternity: Alas! God makes his
People unchangeably blessed; and he that makes others unchangeably blessed, is
doubtless unchangeable in his own blessedness. But this will further appear, by
considering a little what the blessedness of God is, and wherein it does lie;
it lies wholly in that infinite delight, solace, and satisfaction which he has
in Himself, in the Vision and Fruition of Himself, and those infinite Glories
and Perfections which are in him, and which he sees and knows will be in him
for ever. (First,) God is an infinite Ocean of Sweetness, Perfection, and
Glory; he has all Good and all Perfection in Him, as in its Fountain, Fullness,
and Purity; as all the Lines in the Circumference do meet, and are united in
the Center; so all Excellencies and Perfections do meet, and are united in God;
and as God has all Excellencies and Perfections in him, so (Secondly) he
perfectly understands his own infinite Perfections, contemplates them, and has
an infinite delight, solace, and satisfaction in them; he is infinitely pleased
and at rest in himself, and in the vision and fruition of his own Perfections,
and this is his blessedness; hence he tells us, that he is God All-sufficient;
that is to say, for and to himself, as well as for and to his people, Genesis
17.1. I am God All-sufficient, I am my own blessedness; and Abraham, I am thy
blessedness, and I have enough for both. The truth is, all our happiness lies
in God, in the Knowledge and Enjoyment of God; This is life eternal, to know
thee the only true God, Joh. 17.3. And happy is the People whose God is the
Lord, Psalm. 144.15. Bonus est qui fecit me, et ipse est bonum meum, et ili
exulto bonis omnibus meis.
He that made me is good (says Austin) and he is my good, my happiness, and in
him will I exult and rejoice above all my other good things. And it is a great
saying which he has to the same purpose else where; Infoelix homo, qui seit
illa omnia, te autem, nescit Deus! beatus autem qui te scit etiamsi illa
nesciat! qut vero et te, et illa novit, non propter illabeatiorem, seal propter
te solum beatus. Aug.
Unhappy is that man (says he) who knows all other things, but is ignorant of
thee, O God; but blessed is he who knows thee, though he be ignorant of other
things; but he that knows both thee and other things too, he is not the more
happy because he knows other things, but he is happy in thee only. Thus our
happiness lies in God, and the Vision of him; and where should his own
happiness lie but in himself? He that is the Spring and Fountain of our
Happiness, is an Everlasting Fountain of Happiness to himself; Tibi non est
aliud vivere, aliud beat vivere, quia tua beatitudo, tu ipse es. Aug.
Thou thy self (says Austin) art thine own Happiness. I Will close this head
with a great saying of a learned man; God (says he) is such an infinitely
perfect and happy Being that nothing can be added to him, nothing can be taken
from him; he can want nothing out of himself; nor can he receive any thing but
from himself; and he is infinitely sufficient for and to himself, having all
things in himself.

3. God is unchangeable in his Counsels and Decrees; We read in Scripture
several times of the Counsels of God; Thy Counsels of old, are Faithfullness
and Truth, Isa. 25.1. and in Ephesians. 1.11. he is said to work all things according
to the Counsel of his own Will: and the same thing is else where mentioned
under the notion, sometimes of his Purpose, and sometimes his Decree: and to
understand this, you must know, that God, from all eternity, did as it were sit
in Council with his own Wisdom, Justice, and Grace, and in that Council did
absolutely Decree and deternine the futurition, that is to say, the infallible
future Being of whatever is besides himself, unto the praise of his own Glory;
for that is the Purpose, Counsel, Decretum Dei est definita ejus sententia de
rebus omnibus per omnipotentiam et secundum consilium suum efficiendis. Ames.
or Decree of God; it is his free, absolute, and eternal determining of all
things, which have been, are, or shall be, so as himself saw fittest to have
them; or, it is that one, free, constant Act of God, whereby he has absolutely
determined all things in a subserviency to his own Glory: Now in this Counsel
or Decree of his, he is unchangeable, and the same for ever; what he wills,
he wills always, his willing of things being one pure Act, without any
interuption or shadow of change; this the Scripture is full in, Psalm. 33.11.
The Counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all
Generations: so Prove. 19.21. There are many devices in a man's heart;
nevertheless the Counsel of the Lord, that shall stand. Men may plot and fight
against God and his Counsel, but yet it will stand, and that for ever: and you
have this Truth asserted by God himself, you have it from his own Mouth, Isa.
46.10. My Counsel shall stand (says God) and I will do all my pleasure, God
derides the Counsels of Men that oppose Him and his People, telling them
expressly, that they shall not stand, Isa. 8.10. But as for his own Counsel,
that shall stand; hence also we read of the Immutability of his Counsel, Heb.
6.17.18. God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise the
immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath; that by two immutable
things, wherein it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong
consolation, etc. Mark, the immutability of his Counsel, and two immutable
things wherein it was impossible for God to lie: that is, his Counsel and his
Oath, and his Counsel confirmed by his Oath; confirmed, namely to our Faith;
not in it self, for his Counsel in it self is as firm without as with his Oath;
and his Oath is added, merely as an Indulgence and Condescension to our
weakness; therefore it is added, that we might have strong consolation; and it is
to show unto the Heirs of Promise, etc. And as his Counsels in general, so his
particular Counsels concerning men's eternal Estates are also immutable: Hic et
fundationis et obsignationis metaphora, propositum electionis ad vitam aeternam
intelligitur, etc. Glass. Rhet. Sac.
The Foundation of God stands sure, (says the Apostle) having this Seal, the
Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. By the Metaphor both of a Foundation and
Seal. Here (as a learned Man observes upon the place) is to be understood God's
Decree of Election unto eternal Life; and this stands sure, (says the
Apostle) this changes, this varies not; and to the same purpose Calvin speaks
upon the place. Apostolus nos revocat ad Dei electionem, quam metaphorice
appellat Fundamentum, firmam and stabilem ejus constantiam hoc nomine indicans.
Calv. in Loc.
The Apostle (says he) calls us to look back upon the Election of God, which
he styles a Foundation, hereby showing the firm and stable constancy or
immutability of it: so Romans 9.11. that the purpose of God according to Election
might stand. God will have his own eternal purpose according to his Election
stand, and stand it shall, and that for ever. Thus God is unchangeable in his
Counsels: Alas! all his Counsels are free, wise, absolute, powerful Counsels,
and therefore they cannot change: And this Calvin takes to be a special part of
the meaning of the Text; namely, God's unchangeableness in his Counsels; for
thus he speaks; Deus manet in suo proposito, neque huc and illuc flectitur,
quemadmodum Homines poenitent suscepti consilii, etc. Calv.
God (says he) remains firm and steadfast in his own purposes, nor is he
bended or varied this way, and that way, as men oftentimes repent of, and
change their own Counsels, because things come into their mind which they
thought not of before; and so they wish that undone which they have done and do
seek ways of retracting their own Acts; and it is a saying I have read in
Austin; God (says he) changes his Works, Deus mut at Opera, non mutat
Consilium. Aug.
not his Counsels. O let us reverence and adore God in this his
unchangeableness!

4. God is unchangeable in his Kingdom and Rule: God has a Kingdom and Dominion
over the whole World, which Kingdom and Dominion of his, is that absolute Right
and Power whereby he possesses all things as his own, and also orders and
disposes of them as he pleases, ruling and governing the whole World according
to the Counsel of his own Will, and in a subserviency to his own most wise and
holy ends; hence he is said to be over all, Romans 9.5. And above all, Ephesians. 4.6.
to wit, in Kingdom, Power, and Dominion; he has a right to all, and he has the
ordering and dispose of all, both Persons and Things, States and Kingdoms: He
is the most High, that rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and gives them to
whomsoever he will, Dan. 4.32. He works all, and orders all in the Kingdom of
Providence, as well as in the Kingdom of Grace, and that according to the
Counsel of his own Will, Ephesians. 1.11. He rules and commands all; He has prepared
his Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all, In Coelis i. e,
eminentissime, splendidissime, potentissime, universalissimeque, gubernat
omnia. Gojer.
Psalm. 103.19. He does whatsoever he pleases in Heaven and on Earth, in the
Seas, and in all deep places, Psalm. 135.6. Now in this Kingdom and Dominion of
his, he is unchangeable; it admits of neither stop nor period; he rules by his
Power for ever, Psalm. 66.7. Thy Kingdom, O Lord, is an everlasting Kingdom, a
Kingdom of Ages, and thy Dominion endures throughout all Generations, Regnum
tuum Aeternum durat, cum hominum regna morte saltem finiantur. Mus. in loc.
Psalm. 145.13. And I blessed the most High, (says Nebuchadnezzar) whose
Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom from Generation to
Generation, Dan. 4.34. Ah sirs, whatever men think, yet God governs the World,
and his Dominion is over all; The Lord reigns (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 93.1.
He has reigned, He does reign, and He will reign for ever: There is a day
coming when all Rule, Authority, and Power shall be put down, and that once for
all, even the Principality of the Angels themselves (as Calvin observes) not
excepted, 1 Cor. 15.24. But God reigns for ever and ever, and his Kingdom has
no end: Thus he is unchangeable in his Kingdom and Rule in the World, which is
a great encouragement to the People of God: O my Beloved, God governs the World
now as well as heretofore; yea, and he governs it in our Nature now as well as
heretofore, Joh. 5.27. He governs all by the Man Christ, who has a natural
tender care of, and respect to his Church and People in all; let us therefore
say with the Psalmist, The Lord reigns, let the people tremble; the Lord
reigns, let Sion rejoice: God is not, God cannot be put by his Throne and
Kingdom.

5. God is unchangeable in his Covenant and Promise, his Covenant and Promise
with his People in Christ: God has made a Covenant with his People in Christ,
a Covenant of Peace, a Covenant of Grace, a Covenant of Love; a Covenant
founded upon Grace, a Covenant full of Grace, a Covenant wholly made up of
Grace and Love, from first to last, therefore called Grace, in the Abstract,
Romans 6.14. a Full Covenant, a Rich Covenant, a Precious Covenant, a Covenant
made up of Rich, yea exceeding rich and precious Promises, and filled with
exceeding rich and precious Treasures, precious Grace, precious Peace, precious
Pardon, precious Righteousness, precious Salvation; with a precious God, a
precious Christ, a precious Spirit, a precious Heaven and Blessedness for ever:
Now in this Covenant, and in all the precious Promises of it, is God the Lord
unchangeable: hence you have it so often called an Everlasting Covenant, I will
establish my Covenant between me and thee (says God to Abraham) for an
Everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee, Genesis
17.7 Again, I will make an Everlasting Covenant with them, (speaking of his
people) and I will not turn away from them to do them good, Jer. 32.40. and as
an Everlasting Covenant, so an Everlasting and Sure Covenant; God has made
with me an Everlasting Covenant (says David) well-ordered in all things, and
sure, 2 Samuel 23.5. and again, Come and I will make with you an Everlasting
Covenant, even the Sure Mercies of David, Isa. 55.3. Hence also it is called a
Covenant of Salt, Pactum Salis, q. d. incorruptum, stabile, and perpetuum.
Vatab.
Number. 18.19. that is, a firm, a durable, an unchangeable Covenant. Many other
ways does God set forth the immutability of his Covenant, Sal symbolum
incorruptions, ideoque in foederibus sanciendis usurpatum, ad indicandum ea
incorrupte and inviolate servanda esse. Bonfr. in loc.
and that for the encouragement of our Faith and Comfort: how sweet is that
Word, and what a rest may it be to Faith? Isa. 54.9, 10. This is as the Waters
of Noah unto me; for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go
over the Earth, so have I sworn, that I will no more be wroth with thee, nor
rebuke thee: For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be
removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee. Pray observe, God had in the
two foregoing verses promised his Church and People, that, though for a small
moment he had forsaken them, yet with great Mercies he would gather them; and
that though in a little wrath he had hid his face from them for a moment, yet
with Everlasting kindness he would have mercy on them, and here in these two
verses, he gives them a double ground of the assurance hereof; the one taken
from his Oath, and the unchangeableness thereof, ver. 9. the other from his
Covenant, and the unchangeableness thereof, ver. 10. For the Mountains shall
depart, etc. as if he should say, The Mountains and Hills may sooner be removed
than my Covenant; yea, the time will come when these shall be removed, but the
time will never come that my Covenant shall fail or be removed. But what if his
People sin, what then? Why then, he will correct and chastise them for their
sin, but his Covenant he will keep firm and inviolable for ever
notwithstanding; For this you have a full and an express Text, Psalm. 89.30, 31,
32, 33, 34. If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments; if
they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments; then will I visit their
Transgressions with a Rod, and their Iniquities with stripes. Nevertheless (O
gracious nevertheless!) my loveing-kindness will I not take from him, nor
suffer my faithfulness to fail; my Covenant will I not braek, etc. We sin, and
break; and break, and sin, and God chastises us, it may be, for our sin, but
yet still his Covenant remains firm and unchangeable. So 2 Timothy 2.13. If we
believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself: Oh, I have an
unbelieving heart, and I shall, I fear, forfeit all; although thou have an
unbelieving heart, yet God remains faithful. Thus God is unchangeable in his
Covenant; Alas! his Covenant is built upon unchangeable Love, and sealed with
unchangeable Blood, and cannot therefore but be unchangeable: and as the
Covenant, so all the Promises of the Covenant are sure and unchangeable, they
are all, yea, and Amen, in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. that is, they are all sure,
firm, unchangeable Promises, Promises that will certainly be made good: Men
promise many times and change, but God promises and changes not; and this some
conceive to be held forth in that Name of his, I am, Exodus 3.14. I am, that I
am, or, I am what I was; or, I will be what I was; that is, as one expounds it,
Eroquteram, i. e. ero factis qut eram in promissis. Alting.
I will be in my Performances, what I was in my Promises: God makes good all
his promises to a tittle: he that is Truth it self, and Faithfulness it self,
cannot lie, cannot fail. Promissa tua sunt Domine, quis falli timeat, cum
promittit veritas. Aug.
It Is a sweet saying I have read in Austin, They are thy Promises, O Lord, and
who need fear being deceived when Truth it self promises? Oh, we need not fear,
we need not question, for God is true, God is faithful; Oh, how sweet are the
thoughts of an unchangeable Covenant; God has laid himself under bonds to his
People, when he was infinitely free in himself; and under bonds to do great
things for them, to pardon their iniquities, transgressions and sins, to give
them a new heart, and a new Spirit, to pour out his Spirit upon them; to cause
them to walk in his Statutes and Judgments to do them; to write his Laws in
their Hearts and put them into their inward parts; to cleanse them from all
their filthiness and idols; to put his fear into their hearts that they shall
never depart from him; and (which is all in one) to be a God unto them, and
that they shall be his People; that is, he has laid himself under bonds, to be
to them, and to do for them, what a God can be to, and do for them; and he is
firm and unchangeable in all, and all shall assuredly have its accomplishment
in its season. Oh, how sweet is this? this was David's deathbed Cordial, 2 Samuel
23.5. Although my House be not so with God, yet he has made with me an
Everlasting Covenant; and this is all my Salvation and all my Desire; and
indeed well it might, for what could David or any desire more than is contained
in God's Covenant, which has Heaven and Earth, God and the Creature, Time and
Eternity, all in it? Oh, study this Covenant of God, and the unchangeableness
of it, and you will find it an unchangeable Spring of Comfort to you. God
himself found fault with the first Covenant, it is said, and why? Why, because
it made no provision for his People against sin; but you will be able to find
no fault with this Covenant, this being well-ordered in all things, and sure;
as in the place last quoted you have it.

6. God is unchangeable in his Grace and Love to his People. God loves his
People, and that with a choice and peculiar Love, a Love like that wherewith he
loves Christ himself, Joh. 17.23. They are indeed the dearly beloved of his
soul, as you have it Jer. 12.7. and in this Love of his toward them, he is
unchangeable, always the same, which I shall at once a little open, and evince
unto you in three Propositions.

1. God is unchangeable in his Love it self to his People, that being always
the same toward them; I have loved thee (says God to his People) with an
Everlasting Love, Jer. 31.3. with a Love that is from everlasting to
everlasting, without change or period; God's Love to his People is so firm and
stable, that nothing whatever can possibly null or alter it, nothing can
possibly cast them out of his heart; if any thing could do it, it would be
their sinnings against him, and their breakings with him; but these do not,
cannot do it, so he has told us, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32, 33. If they sin, I Will
correct them for their sin; but my loveing-kindness I will not take from them;
or, (as some render it) I will not so much as interrupt my Love toward them;
as if he should say, though they sin, yet I Will love them still: God does not
love the sins of his People, no, he hates them, but he loves their persons
notwithstanding their sins: But what if afflictions and temptations be added to
their sins, and both the one and the other rise high, will not this break off
his Love from them? No, see that triumph of the Apostle upon this account Romans
8. ult. Who shall separate us from the Love of God? shall Tribulation, or
Distress or Persecution, and the like? Nay, in all these things we are more
than Conquerers, through him that loved us; for I am persuaded, that neither
Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalityes, nor Powers, nor Things
present, nor Things to come, nor Height nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall
be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Here you see are afflictions and temptations added to sins; yea, here are
heights and depths of these things, but all cannot separate God's People from
his Love, nor cast them out of his Heart. One I remember gives the sum of the
whole in this short word; Ab aeterno dilexit, in aeternum diliget. Scult. in
loc.
God has loved from eternity, and he will love to eternity. The truth is,
could either sins or sufferings cast us out of God's Heart, and separate us
from his Love; who then among the Saints could hope to continue in his Love,
and upon his Heart? Besides, in the place lately quoted, Isa. 54.9.10. God
says expressly, that though the Mountains should be removed, yet his kindness
to his People should not be removed; no, that remains firm and steadfast for
ever. True, God may possibly afflict his People, and that many ways, and very
sorely; he may speak against them as against Ephraim, Jer. 31.20. write against
them, and that bitter things, as against Job, Job. 13.26. He may fight against
them, as against those, Isa. 63.10. He may frown upon them, and let in his
terrors into them, as he did upon and into Heman, Psalm. 88. ult. but yet still
he loves them, still they are dear to him.

2. God is unchangeable in all the special saving Fruits and Effects of his
Love to his People, Romans 11.29. the Gifts and Calling of God are without
repentance; that is, the Gifts of his effectual Calling, or his saving Gifts,
such as effectual Calling, and the like, shall never be repented of, never be
recalled or reversed by him; as they who receive those Gifts will have no cause
to repent, but to rejoice in them for ever; so God who gives them, will not
repent that he gave them to them. God gives Christ, he gives Grace, he gives
Peace, he gives Pardon, he gives Righteousness, he gives Salvation, he gives
eternal Life to his People, and all out of his love to them; and he never
recalls or reverses these Fruits and Effects of Love. You have another full
Text for this, Jam. 1.17. Every good, and every perfect Gift is from Above, and
comes down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness nor shadow
of turning. Mark, having spoken of the perfect gifts of God; presently he
adds, with whom is no variableness; as if he should say, as all good and saving
Gifts come from God, so he is unchangeable in all: Indeed there are common
Gifts, and Gifts of a mere outward Calling, which God, out of a common love and
bounty, gives to men; and these many times he recalls, they not improving them:
so the Talent was taken from the slothful Servant, Mat. 25.28. and you know
what Christ speaks immediately thereupon, v. 29. Unto every one that has shall
be given, and he shall have abundance; but from him that has not, shall be
taken away, even that which he has: Pray observe, To him that has shall be
given; that is, who ever God has bestowed Gifts and Talents upon, and he
improves them for God and his own Salvation, he shall have more Gifts and more
Talents; he shall have an abundant increase of these things; But from him that
has not, shall be taken away even that which he has: Here seems to be a
contradiction, Him that has not, and yet what he has; the meaning in short is
this; That when God bestows such and such Gifts and Talents upon a person to
be employed for his Glory, and he does not so employ them, he does not rightly
use and improve them, what God has bestowed upon him shall be taken away: But
it is otherwise with the saving Gifts and Fruits of God's special Love, these
God never recalls; which is a sweet contemplation. Soul! Has God bestowed some
of his saving Gifts upon thee? then they are thine for ever: Has he given thee
his Christ? he will never repent of it, never call him back again, but sweet
Jesus is thine for ever: Has he given thee his Spirit? He will never repent of
it, nor will he ever recall this blessed Gift from thee; the holy, good, and
glorious Spirit is thine for ever: Has he given thee a new and spiritual Life?
Has he given thee Grace, Pardon, Righteousness, Justification, and the like? He
will never repent of it; all these are thine for ever: O how sweet is this to
contemplate! thou may sit down, and say, Christ is mine, the Comforter is
mine, Life, Peace, Pardon, Righteousness, Salvation are all mine, and that for
ever.

3. God is unchangeable in the real designs and workings of his Love; I say,
real, though not sensible; God's Love to his People may be suspended and
interrupted, as to the sensible influences and manifestations thereof, but yet
even then it is active, and really at work for them, however the outward
dispensation may vary; now smile, then frown; now lift up, then cast down; now
fill, then empty; now form light, then create darkness; yet in all still he
goes on in one even constant tenure of love toward them; in all, his love is
at work for them and toward them, and he intends and designs them as much love
in one as in the other, and accordingly first or last effects and accomplishes
it: and this is but agreeable to his Covenant with them and promise to them,
Jer. 32.40. I Will make (says he to his People) an Everlasting Covenant with
you, never to turn away from you to do you good. And, All things shall work
together for good to them that Love God, Romans 8.28. Whatever God does with us,
however he seems to carry it toward us, yet still he is doing us good, and
acting his love toward us; We (as an Holy Man speaks) are apt to think that
God shows us love, when he does some great thing for us; but (faith he) God is
always acting out his Love toward us, when he frowns, as well as when he
smiles; when he withdraws, as well as when he approaches to us: In a word,
Soul! whatever God does, there is love in it, and he designs thee love and good
by it: Does he smile, give, fill, keep alive, draw near to thee? In all there
is love, his special love works and runs through all; or, does he frown, take,
empty, kill, hide his face? In all this there is love, yea, the the same
special love of his, works in all, and runs through all; God is acting out his
Love to thee in the one as well as in the other. O how sweet is this! Death to
the People of God, comes from the same Fountain of Love in God's heart that
Life does.

CHAP. IV.
Which gives an account why or whence it is that God is Unchangeable.

THat God is unchangeable, as also wherein, you have already seen. That which
falls next under consideration, is to show whence it is that God is indeed thus
unchangeable; or if you will, what Basis and Foundation the unchangeableness of
God is built upon: it is built upon a threefold Basis or Foundation: 1. The
infinite purity and simplicity of his Nature. 2. The infinite excellency and
Perfection of his Being. 3. The infinite extent and compass of his Wisdom.


1. The unchangeableness of God is built upon, or springs from, the infinite
purity and simplicity o^ ^^s Nature. God, my Beloved, is a most pur^ ^^st; He
is a Spirit, an Infinite Spirit, Joh. ^^^4. and so an infinitely pure, simple,
unco^^^unded Being, and therefore unchangeable. God (says a learned Man) is a
most simply and perfectly pure Act, Deus est simplissime and perfectissime
purus actus, omnis compositionis expers, ideoque nec dissolvi nec corrumpi, nec
senescere potest. Sca.
free from all composition; and therefore cannot possibly be dissolved,
corrupted, or wax old and decay. And Austin, I remember, founds God's
unchangeableness upon this ground or Basis: Tu solus es Deus, id quod neque in
melius neque in deterius commutari potest, quia solus simpliciter es. Aug.
Thou only art God (says he) and can not be changed, either into a better or
worse Being than what thou art, because thou art a most pure and simple Being.
Men, and so other Creatures, have their mixtures and compositions; they are
compounded and made up of different Elements, Qualities, and Humors, and that
is one reason among others why they change; but God is a most pure simple
Being, he is purity and simplicity it self, and therefore unchangeable: Angels
and Souls have a composition in them, they are compounded of Subject and
Accidents, Nature and Qualities, or Graces; but God is one mere and perfect
Act, without all composition, division, multiplication or the like, and
therefore without change; ^here there is composition, there may be ^^^tation;
but where there is infinite simplic^^^ there is absolute immutability; and thus
^s you see with God.

2. The unchangeableness of God is built upon, and arises from the infinite
excellency and perfection of his Being. As God is a most pure and simple, so he
is a most perfect Being, an infinitely perfect Being; and therefore
unchangeable: men are imperfect; and therefore they change; God is perfect, and
therefore he changes not. All change, my Beloved, argues imperfection in the
subject changed: for, pray observe, there is a twofold change, there is a
corruptive, and there is a perfective change; a corruptive change is a change
from good to bad, or from bad to worse, and such a change to be sure argues
imperfection in the subject; a perfective change, is a change from bad to good,
or from good to better, and this also argues imperfection in the Subject, this
argues the Subject to be imperfect before, whatever it is now: Thus all change
necessarily argues imperfection; but God is infinitely perfect, and therefore
not subject to change; he is capable of no corruptive, nor yet a perfective
change; because he is an infinitely perfect Being, and so can have nothing
added to him, nothing taken from him: Be ye perfect (says Christ) as your
Heavenly Father is perfect, Mat. 5.48. Our Heavenly Father is a perfect Being,
he is both essentially and originally perfect; he is perfect in himself, having
all excellencies and perfections centring in him; and he is the spring and
cause of all those excellencies and perfections that are found in the
Creatures: God is light, (says Saint John) and in him is no darkness at all, 1
Job. 1.5. that is, he is both pure and perfect; pure without mixture, and
perfect without defect; he is wholly perfection, and therefore unchangeable.
What shall I say? God is so good, so full, so blessed, so every way perfect,
that it is impossible he should change. It Is a great speech I have read in one
of the Ancients; For thee, Domino esse and vivere, non atiud atque aliud est,
quia sum esse, and sum vivere idipsum es; summus enim es, and non mutaris.
Aug.
or to thee, Lord, to be and to live, are not two things; because thou art the
chief Being, and the chief Life; thou art every way, the highest, the chiefest,
the most excellent, and thou art not changed: and indeed therefore he cannot
change. My Beloved, God has told us, that he is God Allsufficient, I am God
All-Mighty, (says he) or God All-sufficient, I have all fullness, blessedness
and perfection in me: Sufficientissimus qui sufficiens and sibi and aliis
sufficientiam tribuit. Ar.
He (as one upon the place notes) is most sufficient, one who is infinitely
sufficient for himself, and who also vouchsafes a sufficiency to his people. He
has all excellency and perfection in him, and that in a blessed union and
conjunction; and how then should he change?

3. The unchangeableness of God is built upon and springs from, the infinite
fullness and extent of his Wisdom and Understanding; As God is a most pure and
perfect, so he is a most wise Being, and therefore unchangeable; and this
refers principally to his unchangeableness in his Kingdom, Counsels, Covenant
and Love: Men's wisdom is weak, and their understandings dark and shallow, and
therefore they change, they are not to day what they were yesterday, nor will
they be to morrow perhaps what they are to day; but God is infinitely wise, and
knows all things, and therefore he changes not; he is the same for ever.
Homines quia venit illis in mentem, quod ante non cogitaverant, vellent esse
infectum, quod jam fecerunt, and novas quaerunt retractandi modos, etc. Calv.
Men change (says Calvin) they oftentimes wish the things undone, which they
have done, and seek ways of retracting their own Acts or Grants, because with
them things come to mind many times which they foresaw not, nor ever thought
of; But (says he) God denies any such thing to be found with him; he is
infinitely wise, he has a perfect knowledge and understanding of things, and
therefore changes not: he is called in Scripture a God of Knowledge, 1 Samuel
2.3. Yea, he is said to be perfect in Knowledge, Job. 37.16. he has a perfect
Knowledge of all things, whether past, present, or to come; he sees and knows
all things at once, uno intuitu, with one prospect, or by one single aspect,
and that unerringly and infallibly: He knows all things by one most simple,
immutable, and eternal Act of understanding; God is in Scripture styled the
only wise God; 1 Timothy 1.17. and his understanding is said to be infinite,
Psalm. 147.5. God, my Beloved, sees and knows himself, and in himself, all
things, always, perfectly, and at once; All things, without exception, always
without interruption; perfectly without defect, and at once without succession;
Known unto God are all his Works from the Foundation of the World says the
Apostle) Acts. 15.18. In a word, my Beloved, God has a perfect prospect of all
things in his eternity, neither can there be any thing new to him, that should
occasion a change in him: and thus you see upon what Basis or Foundation the
Unchangeableness of God is built.

CHAP. V.
Several Propositions laid down for the obviating of Objections, and the
vindicating of God's Unchangeableness from all cavil and contradiction.

THe next Work we have to do, is to vindicate the unchangeableness of God from
all cavils and contradiction, and to obviate such Objections as may seem to lie
against it, which I shall do by making good these 4 Propositions.

1. The first Proposition is this; That God's repenting, which we sometimes
read of in Scripture, is no way inconsistent with, or repugnant to the Truth
and Glory of his Unchangeableness. Oftentimes, in Scripture, God is said to
repent, and he is said to repent both of what he has done, and also of what he
has said he would do. First, He is said to repent of some things he had done.
So he is said to repent that ever he made Man, Genesis 6.6. It repented the Lord
that he had made Man on the Earth; and it grieved him at his heart. So it
repented him that he had made Saul King, 1 Samuel 15.11. It repents me (says
God) that I have set up Saul to be King. Secondly, God is said to repent of
some things which he has said he would do. So Psalm. 135.14. The Lord will
repent him concerning his senvants. So Jer. 26.19. The Lord repented him of the
evil which he had pronounced against them; with many other places which might
be mentioned: Thus God is said to repent both ways. Now repentance imports a
change; and how then is God unchangeable? I Answer, Nevertheless unchangeable
because of his repenting; for, pray observe, when God is said in Scripture to
repent, it is to be understood not in a proper, but in an improper and allusive
sense; not affective, but effective; not according to his internal Will, but an
external Work: God is therefore said to repent, Paenitere dicitur more hominum
quia instar penitent is voluit dissipare quod fecerat. Lyra. in Genesis 6.6.
because he does as men do, when they repent, that is, he changes his Deeds,
yet without any change of his Will; yea, Deus panitere dicitur quando mutat
factum. Pet. Mar.
the change of his Deeds, is the execution of his unchangeable. Will: When Men
repent, they cease to do what they had begun, and they are ready to destroy
what they had wrought; and thus God is said to repent, not because his mind is
changed, but because he cease to do what he did, or he destroys what he had
made: thus he is said to repent of his making Saul King, because he meant to
remove him from being King; and to repent of his making Man, because he meant
to destroy Man for his sin. Now such repenting does not argue the least change
in God, and therefore in the very same place where he is said thus to repent,
he is also said not to repent, as 1 Samuel 15.11. and 29.11. he is said to repent
of making Saul King: And in verse. 29. it is said of him, that he will not lie,
nor repent, nor is he a man that he should repent; He can no more repent in a
proper sense, as repentance imports change, than he can lie; and when, as there
it is said of him, that he is not a Man that he should repent, There is thus
much employed, That he must cease to be God, and become Man, if he so repents as
to note change in him. It Is a good and indeed a great Observation which one has
upon this place; No repentance (says he) can properly befall God, Proprie in
Deum cum sit immutabilis, sapientissimus et beatissimus, nulla cadit
paenitentia, sed paenitet eum cum beneficia sua retractat and revocat. A
Lapidin 1 Samuel 15.11. --
whereas he is immutable, most wise, most blessed; but he is said to repent,
when he retracts and revokes his benefits from a Person or People. In a word,
he is said to repent, quoad effectorum mutationem, as to the change of effects,
but non quoad seipsum, not as to himself, in either his Nature or Will: But
this will appear further in the next Proposition. Therefore,

2. The second Proposition is this, That the non-execution and accomplishment
of some Threats and Promises of God, which we find in his Word, is no
impeachment of his unchangeableness. True, there are many things both threatened
and promised by God in his Word that do never come to pass; God sometimes
threatens what he does not execute, as in the case of Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.1,
and 5. compared; and of Nineveh, Jonah 3.4. with 10. On the other hand God
sometimes promises that which is never accomplished, of which instances not a
few might be given. Now does not this impeach and contradict his
unchangeableness? I answer, No; neither the one nor the other of these is any
way repugnant or contradictory thereunto: for, pray consider, those threatenings
and promises which are not accomplished, are not absolute, but conditional
threatenings and promises, threatenings and promises that have either an express
or implicit condition in them, which condition being wanting, the
non-accomplishment of the Threat or Promise is so far from being inconsistent
with, that it strongly argues the unchangeableness of God. I shall illustrate
this by some instances, Jer. 18.7, 8, 9, 10. At what instant I shall speak
concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down,
and to destroy it; if that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. And at
what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom to
build and to plant it, if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice,
then I will repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit them. Mark,
here is both evil threatened, and good promised, but both under a condition; now
if the condition, upon which the one is threatened, and the other is promised,
be wanting, let it not be imputed to any change in God, if either the one or
the other be not accomplished: When an evil is threatened, and not executed; and
when a good is promised, and not performed, the nonexecution of the one, and
the nonperformance of the other, is not because God is not unchangeable, but
because the condition upon which the one was threatened, and the other promised,
is found wanting. I might argue in like manner from Psalm. 7.12. Luke 13. begin.
Rev. 2.22. But let this one suffice instead of all the rest. And to this
purpose speaks a learned Man. Deus mutatsententium sed non decretum. Bradw.
God (says he) changes his Sentence, the outward threatening or promise, but
not his Decree, not his inward Counsel or Purpose. And to the same effect is
the saying of another; Si consilium Dei spectamus, non potest eum poenitere; at
sententiae Dei per prophetas significatae sape mutantur. Pet. Mar.
If (says he) we respect the Counsel of God, that he does not, he cannot
change, but his Mind and Will revealed by the Prophets, that is often changed.
And it is a great saying of one of the Schoolmen, Aliud est mutare voluntatem,
aliud velle mutationem. Aquin.
It Is one thing (says he) for God to change his Will, and another thing to
will a change: God often wills and determines a change, but he never changes
his Will or Determination; thus where an evil is threatened, or a good promised,
which is not accomplished, the non-accomplishment of it is not because God is
not unchangeable, but because the threat or promise was conditional, and the
condition thereof was wanting.

2. The third Proposition is this, That none of those changes, which seem to be
attributed to God in Scripture, are really opposite to his unchangeableness. I
grant, the Scripture several times represents God, seemingly at least, under
changes to us; sometimes he is represented as being changed from an Enemy to a
Friend, to be reconciled to them with whom he was offended before; hence we
read of his being pacified toward sinners, Ezekiel. 16.63. So Isa. 12.1. Though
thou wast angry with me, (says the Church to God) yet thine anger is turned
away. Again, sometimes God is represented as being changed from a Friend to an
Enemy, to be at war with them with whom he was before at peace; So Job 30.21.
Thou art become cruel to me; or, thou are turned or changed, q. d. Thou were
good and gracious, but now thou art severe and cruel: So Isa. 63.10. He was
turned to be their Enemy, and fought against them. Thus both these ways God
seems to be represented under changes; and how then is he unchangeable?
Nevertheless unchangeable for all this, and to vindicate God's unchangeableness
notwithstanding this, I would entreat you to consider two Things.

1. Consider, that God is unchangeable under the most various and changeable
dispensations that he does or can walk in toward us. It Is true, the external
dispensation changes, his outward course and carriage toward us is very
changeable and various; now he smiles, and then he frowns; now he fills, and
then he emtyes; now he lifts up, and then he casts down; now he breaks, and
then he binds up, etc. Thus the outward dealings and dispensations of God are
very changeable and various; yet in and under all he himself changes not, but
is still the same, the same in his Being, and in his Blessedness; and the same
in his Counsel, Covenant, and love to us. Hence Psalm. 25.10. All the Paths
(that is, the providence and dispensations) of the Lord, are said to be Mercy
and Truth to his People: His Paths toward them are very various in themselves,
but God's Love and Grace is the same in all. The outward dispensation of God
toward us, it may be, is changed; he did smile, but now he frowns; he did give,
but now he takes away; he did form Light, but now he creates Darkness for us;
and hereupon we apprehend that God Himself, his Heart, his Counsel, his
Covenant, his Love is changed; but it is only in our apprehension; for indeed,
and in truth, he is the same still; the most variable of his dispensations, do
not argue the least variableness in him at all; and indeed, where he is a
Friend, he is a Friend for ever; and where he is an Enemy, he is an Enemy for
ever; the change is only in the external dispensation.

2. Consider, that the change is in us, and not in God, God is always the
same, but we are not the same; when God is pacified toward those with whom he
was offended, they are changed, not he, he is the same he was; and when he is
angry with Saints, with whom he was before at peace, they are changed, not he:
the change was in Job, not in God, when he said, thou art turned to be cruel to
me; the change was in the Church, not in God, when he was said to be turned to
be their Enemy. God (says a worthy Divine) is the same, his Love is the same,
his Wrath is the same, his Mercy is the same, his Justice is the same, and that
for ever; but we changing are cast sometimes under the effects of his Love, and
sometimes under the effects of his Wrath; we are sometimes under the saddest
droppings of his Justice, and sometimes under the sweetest influences of his
Mercy. As a man that changes his Aspect, and turns about his Body to another
Point of the Heavens, that part of the Heavens which was before at his right
hand, is now at his left. Not but that the Heavens are as they were, they
change not, either their Position or Motion, but the Man has changed his. So
the Wrath and Love, the Justice and Mercy of God stand always at the same
point, but we turn, sometimes Justice-ward, sometimes Mercy-ward; now we face
his Wrath, and then his Love; thus the change is in us and not in God, and so
he remains unchangeable still.

4. The fourth Proposition is this, That God's Unchangeableness does no way
exclude or invalidate the use of means: If God be unchangeable, then to what
purpose is the use of means? Why do we Pray, or Hear, or use any means in order
to our eternal Good? Why, my Beloved, God's Unchangeableness does no way
exclude or invalidate the use of means; for pray consider, (First) That God
wills the Means as well as the End, and the Means in order to the End; he wills
our Praying as well as our Pardon, our Hearing as well as our Happiness, our
Sowing as well as our Reaping, our Sowing in the use of Means, as well as our
Reaping in the Harvest of Mercy. He wills our believing as well as our
blessedness, he wills the one as well as the other; yea, he wills the one in
order to the other, and that with the same absolute immutable and eternal will;
He has ordained we should walk in good works, Ephesians. 2.10. and he ha h chosen us
to Salvation, through the sanctification of the Spirit, and the belief of the
Truth, 2 These. 2.13. -- (Secondly) Consider, that as God wills the Means as
well as the End, so through the use of these it is, that he gives out himself
and his blessings to us, and at last brings us to the End: God makes a Covenant
with his People, and therein lays himself under bonds to do great things for
them, as great as a God can do; but he will have them pray for them, nor will
he do them but in a way of Prayer, Ezekiel. 36.37. and God tells us, that he never
said to the Seed of Jacoh, Seek ye me in vain, Isa. 45.19. Indeed, God is not
wanting to his People in the use of mean: The Lord is good to them that wait
for him, to the Soul that seeks him, Lam. 3.26. Ordinarily God will not
communicate himself and his love any other way, and that Soul that neglects
this, puts himself out of the way of the Manifestations and Communications of
God and his Love: Indeed, God has, as it were, tied himself to Souls under a
conscientious use of means to do them good; Ask, and you shall receive; seek,
and you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you: for every one that
asks, receives; and every one that seeks, finds; and to him that
knocks, it is opened: As you therefore value communion with God, and the
manifestations of his Love, take heed of laying aside the use of means. --
(Thirdly) Consider, that these things we call means, such as Prayer, Hearing,
and the like, are instances of our Homage, Worship, and Obedience to God;
hereby we worship God, and give so far the Glory to him that is due unto his
Name; and consequently to cast off these, is to cast off the Worship of God,
and to deny we owe Homage to him. Lay all these together, and our Proposition
is clear, that God s Unchangeableness does no way exclude or invalidate the use
of means; and when we use means; it is not to change, but fulfill the Mind of
God, it is not to alter, but to accomplish his Counsels, and bring us into the
fruition of them. Thus by these Propositions, I have vindicated the
unchangeableness of God from cavil and contradiction, and it remains a truth,
that the Lord Jehovah is an unchangeable God.

CHAP. VI.
Several doctrinal Corollaries or Deductions from the consideration of God's
Unchangeableness.

HAving thus far asserted, opened, and vindicated the Unchangeableness of God,
our next work shall be to deduce some useful Corollaries or Conclusions thence;
and indeed many things of weight, and very momentous to us, may be drawn from
what has been said. As,

1. See here the Glorious Excellency and Perfection of God, and that he is
infinitely distinguished from all the creatures in Dignity and Glory. God, my
Beloved, is every way above, and distinguished from the creatures; He is the
excellent Glory, 2 Pet. 1.17. and there is hardly any thing wherein his
Glorious Excellency and Perfection does more brightly, illustriously, and
transcendently appear, and shine forth, than in his Unchangeableness. The
Creatures are all changeable, one way or other, the Heavens and the Earth, with
all the furniture of the one and the other, are changeable; they shall perish,
yea, all of them shall wax old like a Garment, and be changed as a Vesture,
Psalm. 102.26. The day is coming, wherein all these shall be dissolved, 2 Pet.
3.10, 11. Men also they are changeable, they indeed are Changeableness it self,
as it were, they are changeable in their Nature, and changeable in their
Condition; changeable in their Spirits, and changeable in their Ways;
changeable in their Counsels, and changeable in their Comforts; changeable in
all they are; unstable as water, as it is said of Reuben, Genesis 49.4. Great Men
are changeable, Psalm. 62.9. Yea, good Men are changeable, the best Men are
changeable, the best Men at their best in this world are changeable, Verily,
every man at his best estate is altogether vanity; (that is, subject to change)
Psalm. 39.5. Men are not to day what they were yesterday, nor will they be to
morrow what they are to day; yea, Men are to day, and to morrow they are not;
so changeable are they. Yea, the Angels, the Blessed Angels themselves are
changeable; God puts no trust in his Saints, and his Angels, he charges with
folly, Job 4.18. that is, with possible, though not actual, folly, with change
and folly in their Nature, though not in their Condition: there is, my Beloved,
a peccability in the very Angels, I mean, in their Nature: The best of
Creatures, in themselves, are subject to the worst of changes; the glorious
Angels are in their Nature capable of sinning; indeed, in their Condition they
are not, being confirmed in, both all Holiness and all Happiness, by the grace
of the Second Covenant, but in their Nature they are: Hence that saying of one
of the Schoolmen; Cuicunque Creaturae hoc convenit, ut peccare non possit, hoc
habet ex dono gratiae, non ex condition naturae, Aquin.
Whatever Creature there is that is impeccable, and cannot sin, he has not this
from himself, or in his Nature, but from the Gift of free Grace. Thus all the
Creatures are changeable, but God is unchangeable, he is for ever the same. And
O how glorious does this speak him to be! And how does it distinguish him from
all the Creatures in Perfection and Glory? The truth is, this is a glorious
Excellency and Perfection in it self, and this puts a luster and glory upon the
Excellencies and Perfections of God; for, this (as one speaks) is an Attribute,
which like the silken string through the Chain of Pearl, runs through all the
rest, and puts a glory upon all. God's Holiness would not be half so glorious,
were it not unchangeable Holiness; his Love would not be half so sweet, were it
not unchangeable Love; his Justice and Wrath would not be half so terrible,
were it not unchangeable Justice and Wrath: Indeed, what were any of all his
Attributes in comparison, were they not unchangeable? O! let us learn to see
and adore God in this glorious Excellency and Perfection of his.

2. From the consideration of God's Unchangeableness, we conclude the
transcendent excellency of Spiritual Things beyond Carnal, Heavenly things
beyond Earthly; and accordingly we should prize and pursue the one and the
other. This take for an eternal Rule, That the nearer things come to God, and
the more they resemble him, and partake of him, the more excellent and
desirable they are. Indeed, as God is the Fountain, so he is the Measure and
Standard of all true Worth and Excellency; and here is nothing that has any
real worth or excellency in it, any further then it resembles him, and partakes
of him. Now, what things do most resemble God and partake of God? are they
Spiritual, or Carnal; Heavenly, or Earthly? surely Spiritual and Heavenly
Things; God is unchangeable, and so in their kind are these: as for Carnal and
Earthly things, they are fading and changeable, the best of them are Treasures
which moth and rust does corrupt, and which Theives do break through and steal,
Mat. 6.19. They are all fadeing, dying, transient things: The World passes
away, (says Saint John) 1 John 2.17. that is, fleeting and perishing. It Is a
good Observation which Calvin has upon these words, Quia in mundo nihil est
nisi caducum, et quasi momentaneum; ex eo colligit quam male and misere sibi
consulant, qui hic sibi faelicitatem constituunt praesertim quum al beatam
aeternae vitae gloriam nos Deus vocet. Calv.
Because (says he) in the World there is nothing but what is fading, and as it
were, but for a moment; the Apostle thence concludes, how ill they consult and
provide for themselves, who carve out to themselves their happiness here,
especially when God calls us to the blessed Glory of eternal Life; and it is as
if he should say, The true happiness which God offers to his Children is
eternal, and therefore most unworthy is it in us to incumber our selves with
this World; which, together with all its good things, will anon vanish away.
Pray let us lay this Observation to heart, The world passes away; that is,
Riches, Honors, and Pleasures, they all fade and change, are short-lived:
Alas! how soon many times do Riches change into Poverty, Pleasure into Pain,
Honor into Disgrace and Contempt, Friends into Enemies, Fullness into Want?
there is no stability in any of these things, they are subject to change every
moment: but now Spiritual and Heavenly Things they are lasting and durable,
they are Treasures which neither moth nor rust does corrupt, nor can Theives
break through and steal them, Mat. 6.20. The Riches of this World are uncertain
Riches, vanishing, disappearing Riches, 1 Timothy 6.17. but the Riches of Heaven,
and the Covenant of God's Love, are certain, durable, and abiding Riches. Grace
is a durable Thing, the Righteousness of Christ is a durable, unchangeable
Thing; Pardon, Justification, Acceptance with God through that Righteousness,
are durable Things; Union and Communion with God through Christ, these are
unchangeable, these live and last for ever, where attained; and being so, they
do come nearer God, they more resemble him and partake more of him than Carnal
and Earthly Things do, and so are more excellent than they, and should be
accordingly prized by us. O, my Beloved, there is more true worth and
excellency in one dram of Grace, one beam of Holiness, one hint of the Pardon
of sin, one sight of God's reconciled Face, one embrace in the bosom of his
Love, than there is in a World of Carual Comforts and Contentments; and
accordingly we should prize and affect them, our eye and heart should be taken
off from the one, and fixed upon the other. But alas! alas! we are apt to dote
upon these changeable things here below: O how fond are we of, and how
passionately for the most part are we carried out after Carnal, Earthly
sensible Things? But how cold are we in our love to, and pursuits after Things
Spiritual and Heavenly? as if indeed Earthly and not Heavenly things were the
only things of weight and moment; whereas indeed the one has no worth, no
glory in them in comparison of the Glory which excels: Let us therefore with
the holy Apostle, not look at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen; for the things which are seen, are temporal; but the things
which are not seen, are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. Mark, the Apostle did not think
Carnal and Earthly Things worth a cast of his eye, because they are temporal,
changeable; but Spiritual Things, which are durable and eternal, these he
counted worthy of his eye, his heart, and all. O, let us measure the worth of
things by their resemblance to God, and what they do partake of him.

3. Behold here, as in a Glass, the notorious folly and madness of such as
prefer the Creature before God, in their choice and affections, placing their
happiness in it, and not in him. Many (not one, or two, or a few, but many)
say, Who will show us any good? and what good is it they would have shown them?
Corn, Wine, Oil, Psalm. 4.6. Creature-good, sensible-good, good to feed and
fill a sensual Appetite; and indeed, this is the good which the most of men
prefer in their choice and affections before God, placing the rest and
happiness of their Souls therein: The generality of men have high thoughts of
the Creature, and low thoughts of God; great affections for the Creature, and
small affections for God; It Is but here and there one that does truly and
indeed carry his happiness above the road of Creatures, and place it in God:
Take the most of men, and it is the Creature they love, it is the Creature they
prize, it is the Creature they choose, and it is the Creature they take up their
rest and happiness in; as for God, they will have none of him; as God
complained of them of old, Israel would none of me, Psalm. 81.11. In a word, God
and the Creatures, share the hearts and affections of the whole World between
them; God tenders himself to men as the rest and happiness of their Souls, and
accordingly to be loved, to be prized, to be chosen, to be delighted in by
them; on the other hand, the Creatures they tender themselves to men in like
manner, and both plead for acceptance; and which I pray carrys it, God or the
Creature? Truly the Creature with the most: Alas! we are carnal, and sensual,
and do naturally incline to carnal and sensual things, embracing them to the
neglect of God, and so the Creature is preferred before God: Oh what folly and
madness is this! to prefer the Creature before God in our choice and
affections, is not only to prefer emptiness before fullness, nothingness before
sufficiency; but it is also to prefer vanity before immutability, and
variableness before unchangeableness; and Oh, what folly, what madness is this!
to prefer the Creature before God in our choice and affections, is to prefer a
broken Cistern that can hold no Water, before a Fountain of Living Waters. So
God himself speaks of it, and withal brands it for a black and horrid evil,
Jer. 2.12, 13. an evil which he calls upon the Heavens to be astonished at, and
the Earth to be horribly afraid because of. O, my Beloved, to prefer a Cistern
before a Fountain; a poor, narrow, scanty, borrowed Good, before a full, ample,
original, all-sufficient Good; a drop before an Ocean of Goodness and
sweetness, this is great folly; but to prefer a broken Cistern, and a broken
Cistern that can hold no Water, before a Fountain of Living Waters, fleeting
nothingness before unchangeable fullness, this is greater folly, folly even to
madness; and yet this is the folly of the most of men. Carnal men are often in
Scripture called Fools, and their folly appears in nothing more than this;
Namely, their preferring changeable Creatures, before an unchangeable God; and
indeed, than this what greater folly can there be? In Luke 12.19. we read of
one that talked to his Soul, saying, Soul, eat, drink, and be merry; for thou
have much goods laid up for thee for many years, take thine ease: Pray mark, he
had never a word of God in his mouth, and (as we may safely conclude) never a
thought of God in his heart; but he was wholly taken up with his Barnes, and
Goods, and Treasures; and yet he bids his Soul to take its ease, to sit down at
rest; God was as nothing with him, and the Creature was all: Well, what title
does Christ give him? does he give him the title of a wise Man? No, Thou fool
(says he) Christ calls him fool, as well he might; for what greater folly than
this, to be wholly taken up with perishing Creatures and neglect and forget an
unchangeable God? yea, and to bid his Soul take its ease too, because he
abounded with Creature-injoyments: Indeed, had he said, Soul, take thine ease,
be merry, thou have Heavenly Treasures laid up in abundance for thee; God is
thine, Christ is thine, the Blessed Spirit, the Comforter is thine, Heaven, and
Eternal Life is thine, this had been something like; but to have his heart
taken up with carnal things altogether, preferring them before God, and to bid
his Soul to rest and be merry upon the account of these, this is folly with a
witness; and who deserves the name of a Fool, if he did not? What shall I say?
this, namely to prefer the Creature before God, is such folly, as will at last
expose to shame and contempt for ever all that are guilty of it, and such are
even hung up in Chains for the highest instances of folly and madness: Lo
(says the Psalmist) this is the man that made not God his Strength, but
trusted in the abundance of his Riches, etc. q. d. Consi erate quam miser nunc
sit qui antea tam foclix crat. Piscat. in loc. Videte quis sit illius exitus.
Musc. in loc.
Psalm. 52.7. Lo, this is the man that preferred the Creature before God, that
made Riches, not God, his Portion; this is that Fool, that very Fool, that mad
Man; yea, and whoever they are that do this, they will at last (though perhaps
too late) see and find themselves to be Fools: At his end (says the Prophet
concerning such an one) he shall be a Fool, Jer. 17.11. at his end he shall be
a fool! what, was he a wise man in his beginning and progress? No, he was a
Fool all along; Yet though he was a Fool, he thought himself wise: but at last
he shall see his folly, he shall find that he was a very fool indeed, and O how
will the sight of such folly then vex and torment him? O Sirs, when you shall
see your selves lanching forth into an unchangeable state, as shortly you will,
how will you then condemn your selves of folly, for preferring changeable
Creatures before an unchangeable God? Let me therefore speak to each of you, as
in Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? Riches make to
themselves wings, etc. Cease from thine own wisdom, labor not to be rich: Men
think it to be their highest wisdom to get Riches; but, sirs, know assuredly,
this is folly; the only wisdom, is to make sure of God, and get an interest in
God, Riches are not, but God always is, and he is the same for ever.

4. From God's Unchangeableness we infer the absolute necessity of a change in
sinners, if ever they be happy, if ever they be saved. My Beloved, if ever
sinners be saved, and made eternally happy, there must be a change either in
God or them; now in God there can be no change, the change thereof must be in
them: It Is a rational and undeniable way of arguing, for a sinner to argue and
say, God is unchangeable; and because God is unchangeable, I must change or
perish, change or die, change or be miserable for ever: For pray mark, God
never did, and he never will save any man in his sins, he is in Christ
infinitely willing, ready, and able to save men from their sins; he sent and
sealed his Son on purpose to save men from their sins, and accordingly gave him
a Name suitable hereunto, even Jesus, which signisies a Savior, Thou shall call
his Name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins, Mar. 1.21. But he
never did, and unless he should change he never will, save any in their sins,
without a change therefore in us and upon us, we are undone for ever. But a
little further, yet to let you see the force of this inference, and the
rationality of such an arguing, that so it may fall with the greater weight and
conviction upon all our Souls; be pleased to consider that it is utterly
repugnant to, and inconsistent with, the Word, Nature, Counsel, and Oath of
God, to save sinners without a change; for all these are absolutely and
expressly against the happiness and salvation of unchanged Souls, Souls
remaining still in their sins, still in their natural state.

1. The Word of God is against the happiness and Salvation of unchanged Souls;
the Word of God says expressly, that without a change, men may not, shall not,
cannot be saved; The Word of God says, the wicked shall be turned into Hell,
and all that forget God, Psalm. 9.17. The Word of God says, that into the Holy
City there shall in no wise enter any thing that defiles or works
abomination, Rev. 21.27. The Word of God says, that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9. The Word of God says, that without
holiness no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. And lest all this should be thought
to concern only profane and licentious ones, let me add, the Word of God
says, that flesh and blood, that is, men in their natural estate, cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50. Yea, the Word of God says, and that
with an emphasis, that except a man be born again, unless he be regenerated by
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. 3.3.5. Verily,
verily, (says Christ) except a man be born again, etc. and again Verily,
verily, he asserts it over and over, which notes among other things, as the
weight of the Truth asserted, so our difficulty and aversness to believe it,
and bow to it: Thus the Word of God is against this thing.

2. The Nature of God is against the happiness and salvation of unchanged
Souls; the nature of God is infinitely pure and holy, and will not admit of
sinners, to dwell with him: Thou art not a God that has pleasure in
wickedness, (says the Psalmist) neither shall evil dwell with thee, Psalm. 5.4.
The foolish (and such are all men by nature) shall not stand in thy sight; thou
hate all the workers of iniquity, v. 5. So Heb. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes
then to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity; that is, without loathing
and detestation: God's Nature is holy, yea, it is Holiness it self, and he can
as soon cease to be God, as cease to be holy; his Nature is infinitely contrary
to all sin, and he infinitely, necessarily, and eternally hates all sin; sin
indeed is strictly and properly the only Object of God's hatred: His love is
et out upon many Objects, but sin is the only Object of his hatred, and is not
the nature of this God against the salvation of unchanged sinners? God must
first cease to be infinitely holy, and so to be God, e're sinners remaining in
their unchanged state can be saved.

3. The Counsel of God is against the salvation of unchanged Souls; the Law of
the Counsel of God is, That we must be holy, if ever we will be happy; that we
must be called, justified, and sanctified, if ever we be glorified; so you find
in that golden Chain, (as it is called) Romans 8.29, 30. Whom he did foreknow, he
also did predestinate to be conformed unto the Image of his Son. Moreover, whom
he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also
justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Mark, the Counsel, or
as it is here called, the foreknowledge of God, tells us, we must be changed,
called, and justified, if ever we be glorified. So expressly, 2 These. 2.13. God
has chosen us to salvation: But how? is there no need of a change? Yes, he has
so chosen us, as calls for a change, He has chosen us to salvation, through
the sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth: Yea, the Counsel of
God aims at holiness, and designs us primarily unto holiness; He has chosen us
that we should be holy, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. God must change all his Counsels which
have been of old, or sinners must be changed, if ever they be saved.

4. The Oath of God is against the salvation of unchanged sinners: God's Oath
is gone out of his mouth, that no unbelieving, unchanged ones shall ever enter
into his Rest: So I swear in my wrath, they shall not enter into my Rest, Heb.
3.11. Thus God's Word, his Nature, his Counsel, his Oath, are all against the
happiness and Salvation of unchanged sinners; and God must change in all, if
ever they be saved without a change: But God can change in neither, the change
must be in them; God being unchangeable, they must change or die, change or
perish; and there must be a double change pass upon them, or they cannot be
saved, a change of their estate, and a change of their image; a change of their
state in justification by the Blood of Christ, and a change of their Image in
Regeneration and Sanctification by the Spirit of Christ; and without both these
they are undone for ever.

1. There must be a change of their state in justification through Christ's
Blood, if ever they be saved. When a poor Soul is justified freely by Grace,
through the redemption that is in Jesus, as the Apostle expresses it, Romans
3.24. when his sins are once pardoned, and his person accepted with God by the
imputation of Christ's perfect righteousness to him, through believing, then is
his state changed, and this change of state sinners must pass under, or God
being unchangeable, they cannot be saved; they must, through the Blood and
Righteousness of Christ applied and appropriated in a way of believing, get
their sins pardoned, and their persons accepted; they must get all Guilt
removed, and all Debts paid, or they cannot possibly be saved; this is
frequently mentioned in Scripture, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: Again, v. 9. Being justified
through his Blood, we shall be saved from wrath by him: Again, verse. 17, 18,
19. If by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they which receive
abundance of Grace, and of the Gift of Righteousness shall reign in life by
one, Jesus Christ: Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all
men to condemnation; so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
Still you see justification through the Blood and Righteousness of Christ, is
necessary unto Life and Salvation. So Ephesians. 1.6, 7. God has made us accepted in
the Beloved, in whom we have redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness
sins: The like is held forth, 1 Cor. 6.10. Romans 8.30. Oh, without pardon and
justification through the Blood of Christ, there is no Life, no Salvation to be
expected for sinners: Unpardoned sin will surely damn, and no pardon is to be
had for sinners but in and by Christ, and union with Christ, through believing.
When once a Soul is pardoned and justified by Christ, through believing, then
he is passed from Death to Life, as you have it, Job. 5.24. but till then he
remains in Death, and under Death and Condemnation.

2. There must be a change of their Image in Regeneration and Sanctification by
the Spirit of Christ. When a sinner is new born, born of Water, and of the
Spirit, as Christ's expression is, when he is made a new Creature, old things
being past away with him, and all things being become new, as the Apostle
phrases it, 2 Cor. 5.17. when he is created in Christ Jesus, and has a sound
Work of Grace wrought and carried on in him by the Spirit of Christ, then is
his Image changed, and such a change of Image must sinners pass under, or they
cannot be saved: God never did, and never will save an unrenewed Soul, his
unchangeableness will not admit of the salvation of such an one; And indeed the
Scripture is full in it, Job. 3.3, 5. Verily, verily, (says Christ to
Nicodemus) except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God: And
again, verse. 5. Verily, verily, (says he) except a man be born of Water, and
of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. You see this is what
Christ asserts, and that over and over, and with the highest asseverations
imaginable: Hence also Heaven is said to be the Inberitance of Saints, Col.
1.12. and of sanctified Ones, Acts 26.18. Hence the Corinthians are said to be
sanctified as well as justified, and so made capable of inheriting the Kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. and Tit. 3.5. God is said, according to his mercy to
save us, by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost.
Thus there must a change of Image as well as State pass upon us, or we cannot
be saved; and that because God is unchangeable: Oh, how should we all therefore
look after this change? Soul, assure thy self, it is not thy civility and
morality, how much soever raised and refined; it is not thy external
reformations; it is not thy conforming thy self to the outward Rules and Laws of
Duty, and the like, that will save thee, or avail thee any thing as to eternal
Life; unles; thou come under this double change, of which thou have heard.
Paul, I am confident, could compare with thee for morality and external
conformity to the Law, when yet he was in a lost estate; and afterward coming
to faith in Christ, he sees cause to account all but as loss and dung, Phil. 3.
begin. And he that came to Christ, (of whom we read in Mat. 19.16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22.) had certainly attained to a great degree of morality, and external
conformity to the Law, who yet was lacking, and so far lacking, as that, for
any thing we find, he fell eternally short of Heaven and Salvation. Oh, there
must a change, a change of State, and a change of Image pass upon us, or our
morality will leave us at last to perish: Let us therefore mind this change: Am
I changed or no? Changed I must be, and that with a great change, with a change
of State, and a change of person, or I cannot be saved; have I therefore any
acquaintance with such a change? O, my Beloved, let unchangeness in God engage
us all to look out after a change in us; God will not change to save any of us
all, he is willing to change us that we may be saved, but he himself will not
change to save any of us.

5. Again, from what has been declared touching God's Unchangeableness, we
conclude and infer the infinite sweetness of his Love, and the infinite
bitterness of his Wrath, and so the exceeding happiness of such as are
interested in the one, and the extreme misery of such as fall under the other.
Sinners slight God's Love, preferring Creature-love before it; and they
disregard his Wrath, wilfully provoking it against themselves; but if they will
view the one and the other, in the Glass of his Unchangeableness, they will
find that there is more sweetness in the one, than that it should be slighted;
and more terribleness in the other, than that it should be disregarded.

1. From God's Unchangeableness, we conclude and infer the infinite sweetness
of his Love, and so the happiness of them that are interested in it. God has a
people whom he loves, and his Love to them is a free love, a rich Love, a
peculiar Love, a Love of singular eminency and perfection in all respects: But
that which indeed crowns all, and puts an infinite sweetness into it is this,
that it is an Unchangeable Love, a Love that never fades, never varies: True,
his Love may be, and sometimes is, veiled and clouded; but though it be veiled,
yet it is not varied; though it be sometimes clouded, yet it is never changed:
Love, under a Vail or Cloud, is Love. The Sun may be under a Cloud, yea, there
may be an eclipse upon it for a time, which may keep it out of our view, and
deprive us of the comfortable influences and shinings of it for a season; but
yet even then the Sun is in being, and after a while it will shine again, and
that as sweetly, brightly, and comfortably, as ever. So there may be a Vail, a
Cloud, an eclipse, as it were, upon God's Love, such as may deprive us for a
time of the comfortable views, shinings, and influences of it: but yet, even
then it is Love, and sweet Love too, and after a while it will shine and show it
self again. It Is a sweet Word which you have Psalm. 30.5. His anger endures but
a moment; in his favor is life: weeping may endure for a right, but joy comes
in the morning. in his favor is life. Vitam momento opponit, benevolentia qua
suos complectitur Deus, durat per emnem vitam and Deus favorem suum prorogat in
longum tempus. Mol.
Life here (as a judicious Interpreter observes) is opposed to a moment,
mentioned in the beginning of the verse; and so the sense is, that that Love
wherewith God loves his People lasts throughout all life, it lives and lasts
for ever, it is a durable abiding love: So Isa. 54.8. In a little wrath I bid my
face from thee, for a moment; (says God to his Church) but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee. Thus, I say, though God's Love to his
People may be veiled, yet it is never varyed; it is a constant Love, and Oh how
sweet does this speak his Love to be, and how happy are they that are
interested in it? Oh, to be beloved by an Unchangeable God, with an
Unchangeable Love, this is sweet indeed! The Creatures Love has little worth or
sweetness in it, and that not only because of its weakness and emptiness, but
also because of its changeableness: Alas! the Creature loves to day, and hates
to morrow; Oh, but now God's Love is another manner of Love, a Love that has
fullness and firmness, sufficiency and immutability both in it; and accordingly
must needs be infinitely sweet and desirable: Well therefore might David
admiringly cry out as he did, Psalm. 36.7. How excellent or how precious is thy
loving kindness, O Lord? and as in Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving kindness is better
than life: It Is before all lives; one dram of it is to be preferred before many
Worlds of Creatureinjoyments. God's Love, it is all good, all comfort, all
happiness in its fountain-fulness and purity; it is an eternal never-failing
spring of sweetness, an unvariable fountain of delight; in it there is Grace,
all Grace; Peace, all Peace; Joy, all Joy; Satisfaction, all Satisfaction; Rest
and Solace, all Rest and Solace: O Soul, look upon the love of thy God to thee,
look upon it, and in it thou will see unsearchable Riches, unmeasurable
Fullness, unfathomable Depths, and (which crowns all) eternal Unchangeableness;
and Oh how happy will thou therein see thy self! With what full consolation of
Spirit may thou sit down and say, God loves me, and he loves me
unchangeably. Friends change, outward comforts change, I my self change; but
God's Love to me changes not, I am for ever upon his heart, nor can either Men
or Devils, sins or sorrows cast me out of it. True, he sometimes afflicts me,
but yet he loves me; he sometimes frowns upon me, but yet he loves me; he
sometimes seems to slay me, he breaks me with breach upon breach, but yet he
loves me; he confines me to a sick Chamber, he lays me upon a sick Bed, he
seems to resolve to lay me in the Dust, but yet he loves me; yea, all this is
in love: I break with him, and depart from him, I am sinning against him every
day and hour; but yet he loves me, he loves me notwithstanding all, his Love
cannot be broken off from me, and after a while I shall bathe in the Fountain
thereof for ever. Oh sweet! who would not long for this Love? He loves me
unchangeably, and he will therefore cleanse me, purify me, pardon me, make me
perfectly holy: He loves me, and he will love me, till he has lodged me in his
own Presence and Bosom above, and there he will love me for ever.

2. From God's Unchangeabless we conclude and infer the infinite bitterness of
his Wrath, and the extreme misery of all such as fall under the weight thereof.
God's Love is not more sweet than his Wrath is bitter, his Love is not more
desirable than his Wrath is formidable, and that because he is an Unchangeable
God; and oh how miserable must they be that do fall under this Wrath. In Isa.
10.6. we read of the People of God's Wrath: there are some then that are
properly the People of God's Wrath, they are Children of Wrath, Heirs of Wrath;
and Wrath, yea God's Wrath, will be their portion for ever; such are all
finally impenitent and unbelieving Ones, all who live and die in their
impenitency and unbelief; and oh how extremely miserable must they be! God's
Wrath is a great Wrath, a fierce Wrath, a sore Wrath, a powerful Wrath, an
irresistible Wrath, a burning, consuming, and devouring Wrath; So the Scripture
speaks of it: all which speaks the exceeding bitterness and terribleness of it,
and the extreme misery of such as fall under it; but that which adds even
infinitely to all is this, that it is eternal and unchangeable Wrath, Wrath that
abides for ever: Hence it is set forth in Scripture by unquenchable fire, Mat.
3.12. God's Wrath is called Fire, because of its exceeding heat and fierceness,
being of a consuming and devouring nature; and it is called unquenchable Fire,
because it is durable and unchangeable, it being what admits of no more change
or period than his Love does; and to fall under this unquenchable fire, under
the revelation of this eternal, unchangeable Wrath; oh how sad, how miserable
must this be? Solomon tells us, that the Wrath of a King, is as the roaring of
a Lion, Prove. 19.12. and what then, and how terrible is the Wrath of God; to
whose Wrath, the wrath of all the Kings on the Earth is as nothing? We are
afraid sometimes of Man's Wrath, yea, so afraid of it, as to suffer our selves
to be driven from our duty by it: But, my Beloved, what is the Wrath of a Man
to the Wrath God; What is the Wrath of a changeable Man, to the Wrath of an
Unchangeable God? let me say to each Soul of you, as God by the Prophet to
them, Isa. 51, 12.13. Who art thou that thou should be afraid of a man that
shall die, (a changeable Creature) and forgettest the Lord thy Maker? It Is but
a little while and Man and his Wrath both shall change and die, but God and his
Wrath will live for ever: O, learn to fear and tremble at his Wrath, and beware
how for a little fading, changeable delight in sin, you throw your selves under
unchangeable wrath and fury: Poor sinner, thou make light of God's Wrath, as
if it were an inconsiderable thing; witness thy wilful and daily provoaking of
it against thee by sin; witness thy insensibleness of and under the tokens and
revelations of it; witness thy neglect of Christ, and of making thy peace with
God by him, and the like: but Soul, view it in the Glass of his infinite
Unchangeableness, and then see whether it be a thing to be made light of or no;
the Saints they tremble but in the apprehension of it; Who knows he power of
thine Anger? says Moses, Psalm. 90.11. They sigh, they bleed, they groan, yea,
they die, and are even distracted under a little temporal sprinklings and
droppings of it, Psalm. 88.15.16. yea they dread and tremble many times at but
the revelation of it against others; I was afraid, (says Moses) of the anger
and hot displeasure, wherewith the Lord was wrath against you, to destroy you,
Deuteronomy. 9.19. Moses could contemn the Wrath of man, yea of Man whose Wrath of all
men is most terrible, the Wrath of a King, Heb. 11.27. but yet he trembles at
the Wrath of God, when 'twas provoaked against others; thus the Saints tremble
at God's Wrath: yea more, the Devils themselves do dread and tremble at God's
Wrath; the Devils believe and tremble, Jam. 2.19. they believe there is a God,
and they tremble at the apprehension of the Wrath of that God. And sinner,
whoever thou art, how light soever thou may now make of God's Wrath, yet
know that there is a time coming, when thou and the stoutest sinners in the
World must and will tremble at it. See that one text, Isa. 33.14. The sinners
in Sion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrite: Why, what is the
matter? Verily nothing but the sight and apprehension of God's Wrath and
Vengeance coming upon them; so much the following words show; Who among us
shall dwell with devouring fire? Who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting
burnings? They saw God's Wrath to be as a devouring fire; they saw the terror
of it in the Glass of God's Unchangeableness, and therefore call it everlasting
burnings; and this filled them with dread and trembling. Take one place more,
Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. in verse. 16, 17. We find some crying out to the mountains
and rocks, to fall on them, and hide them from the face of him that sits
upon the throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb; For (say they) the great day
of his Wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? Well, but who are they
that thus cry out? Surely they are only a company of low-spirited Creatures,
think thou, they are only some Women and Children, or some base cowardly
Ones, that never had the Spirit and Courage of Men: No Soul, they are no such
Persons, they are the Kings of the Earth, and the great Men, and the rich Men,
and the chief Captains, and the mighty Men, and every bondman and every
freemen; all sorts of Men, Men of the highest place, the highest estates, the
highest courage and valor, as well as others; these all are said to hide
themselves in the Dens and in the Rocks of the Mountains, and call unto the
Mountains and Rocks, saying, Fall on us. Oh, but we shall fall heavy; no
matter, fall on us; but to what purpose? Why, to hide us from the Wrath of God;
why, what is the matter, are you afraid of the Wrath of God? Time was you
slighted and disregarded it, as an inconsiderable thing, and do you so dread it
now, and tremble at it now, that you cry to us, Rocks and Mountains to fall on
you, to hide you from it? Oh yes, good Rocks, good Mountains, fall on us, you
will lie light and easy upon us in comparison of what the Wrath of God will
do. How? Why should you think so? You had other thoughts of God's Wrath a while
ago, why do you so dread it and tremble at it now? O, because the great day of
his Wrath is come, and none can stand before it, say they: We looked on this
Wrath, a while ago, at a distance, and then it seemed a light thing; but now
the day, yea, the great day of his Wrath is come, and there is no standing for
us: while we looked at it at a distance, we could stand before it, and make
light of it; yea, in some lesser days of Wrath we have born up well enough;
but now his Wrath is come near us, yea, and the fullness and fierceness of it is
breaking forth against us; now we see this Wrath to be more dreadful and
formidable, and that we can never stand up either under it or against it: Say
ye so, reply the Rocks and Mountains, then no wonder you cry to us to hide you
from it; but truly it is more then we can do for you, you must now bear and
graple with that wrath for ever, as to any relief we can afford you in the
case. O sinner! when the great day of God's Wrath shall come, then, if not
before, thou also wilt tremble at his Wrath: Indeed now would thou see it,
and tremble at it, thou might cry to a Rock that could and would hide thee
from it, provided thou gettest into it; I mean Christ, that Rock of Ages, he
being embraced by Faith, and thy Soul having union with him, would hide and
secure thee against the Wrath of God for ever; but if thou will go on to make
light of this Wrath, and to provoke it daily against thee by sin, thou will at
last sink under the weight and burden thereof for ever.

6. In the Glass of God's Unchangeableness, we see the true reason why the best
of us all are not consumed, and accordingly let us give the glory of it, where
it is due. Beloved, why are you, and I, and others, not consumed? True, we meet
with some afflictions, and are exercised with some disticulties now and then,
but why are we not utterly consumed and destroyed? Verily, it is not because we
are able to save our selves, nor is it because we deserve that God should save
us, but it is purely and solely because our God is unchangeable: This account
the Text it self gives of it; I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye Sons of
Jacob are not consumed: All our security lies in God's Immutability, we perish
not, because he changes not: Pray give me leave a little to be free with you
and my self; Why are we not consumed with an external consumption? We are
sorely broken many of us, it is true, we are broken in our Estates, in our
Healths, in our Comforts, in our Relations, but why are we not utterly
destroyed? Why are we alive? Why have we any one comfort about us? Yea more,
why are we not consumed with an eternal consumption? Why are the best of us all
not in Hell? Why are we not stated in an eternity of woe and misery? Why are we
not now roaring and sweltering under the Wrath of God? Why are we not
Companions with Devils and damned Spirits in everlasting burnings? Is it
because our sins are few and small, and have not deserved it? No surely; Why
then is it? Because our God is unchangeable, unchangeable in Being, Counsel,
Covenant, and Love. Oh! my Beloved, if we seriously consider what we are, and
how we have carried it; what our sins and provocations have been, and how high
they rise against the blessed God, and the like, we may well wonder we are out
of Hell, that we have a being any where on this side the Pit of Perdition; nor
can we resolve it into any other cause but God's Unchangeableness: Let me
therefore entreat you to consider things a little, that you may give glory
where it is due.

1. Consider what you are, I mean, as to your nature and the depravedness of
it: You are a mere lump and mass of sin, Enemies, yea, enmity it self against
God and Christ, Romans 8.7. your heart is a mere Sink, a Fountain, an Abyss of
sin and wickedness against God: The heart is deceiful above all things, and
desperately wicked; who can know it? None but God can look to the bottom of
that sin, wickedness, and deceit that is in your heart, Jer. 17.9. O the
aboundings of sin that are found in the best of us! Oh, the pride, the passion;
the earthliness, the sensuality, the uncleanness, the unbelief, the hypocrisy,
the atheism, the disregard of God, the aversion from all good, that dwells,
works, wars, and oftentimes prevails and predominates in the hearts of the best
Saints, while here! O, the risings of sin, and oh the aboundings of iniquity,
that are found among us!

2. Consider what you have done, and how you have carried it Godward: If you
seriously consider things, you will find, I fear, that you have done, and to
this day do, little else but sin against the Lord: You have despised his
Goodness, abused his Love, violated his Laws, trampled upon his Authority,
grieved his Spirit, wounded his Son, darkened his Glory, and oftentimes struck
even at his very Crown and Being; yea, and this has been your manner from your
youth, (as God charged them of old, Jer. 22.21.) there is not that day, nor
scarcely that hour, wherein you have not, and do not sin against God: often
have you made him serve with your sins, and wearied him with your iniquities,
as those Isa. 43.24. Your lives have been lives of sin for the most part
against God.

3. Consider what black and horrid aggravations your fins are clothed with;
Are not your sins, my Beloved, of a scarlet dye, and crimson tincture? Are they
not heightened with many black and crying aggravations? have they not, at least
many of them, been committed against much love, much light, much mercy, many
motions of the Spirit, many checks of Conscience, many bonds and obligations to
Duty, many signal and eminent appearances of God to you, and for you; many
tastes, many sealings of his Love, and the like? what shall I say? such every
way are our sins, yea the sins of the best of us all, that we cannot possibly
look to the further end of them. Who can understand his Errors, (says holy
David? Psalm. 19.12.) David was an holy Man, a Man after God's own Heart, and
yet he cries out, Who can understand his Errors? His sins were beyond search or
understanding; and if his were so, what are ours? Truly, my Beloved, our sins
in the number, nature, and aggravations of them, are beyond our reach, and well
may we all with him cry out, Who can understand his Errors?

4. Consider what an infinite evil and demerit there is in every sin, even the
least sin? As you are guilty of so much sin, and your sins clothed many of them
with so many and such crying aggravations, so you must know that there is evil
enough in the least sin to damn you eternally, should God render the desert
thereof to you: The wages of sm is death, (says the Apostle) Romans 6.23. Mark,
he speaks of sin indefinitely, every sin, the least sin; and, says he, the
wages, that which is due to it, is death: Every sin is an offense against God,
it is infinitely contrary to his Purity and Holiness, his Will and Glory, his
Life and Being; it is universally contrary to him, and so must needs have an
inconceiveable evil and demerit in it: Every offense (says a learned Man)
against the chief good, Omnis offencio summi boni meruit summam poenam, eternam
creaturae destructionem. Ursin.
even the eternal destruction of the Creature. O Sirs, we little think the evil
there is in a vain thought, an idle word, an unholy, irregular action: we
little think the evil the least sin carries in it.

5. Consider how much God hates sin: sin is even infinitely odious and
abominable to him, God is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, to wit,
without loathing and detestation, Hab. 1.13. and he is once and again in
Scripture represented as a God hating sin; sin indeed is infinitely odious in
his sight. Now let us weigh these things, and lay them together, and then we
shall see that it can be nothing else that keeps us from destruction, but God's
Unchangeableness, to which therefore we should give the glory: It Is the Grace
and Love of God that first brings us into a condition of Life and Salvation,
and it is the Unchangeableness of God that keeps us there. Truly, when some of
us reflect a little upon our selves, and consider what we are, and have been in
our Spirits and carriages Godward; how much we have provoked him, what
frequent forfeitures we have made, and do make of our Lives, Souls, and all, we
see infinite cause to wonder that we are alive, that the flames of divine Wrath
had not long since kindled upon us, and the revenges of divine Justice broken
out against us; and blessed be God, that we are out of Hell. O, that such a
proud, such a stubborn, such a stiff-necked people, as we are, should yet live!
that persons of so many and high provocations against God, as thou Reader, and
I are guilty of, should yet have a being out of Hell! This is solely from the
unchangeableness of God: And my Beloved, we do not rightly consider the matter,
if we do not see, and acknowledge it to be so. O blessed be God for his
unchangeableness! had not God been unchangeable, where had I now been? I had
now been shut up in the infernal Pit; I had now been a companion with Devils
and damned Spirits; I had now been separated from God for ever; and how
miserable then had I been? O, my Soul, adore the Unchangeable One, and bless
him for his unchangeable Counsel, his unchangeable Covenant, his unchangeable
Love.

CHAP. VII.
Several grounds of humbling from the consideration of God's Unchangeableness,
as our unlikeness to him therein, our charging him with change, our living so
little upon his Unchangeableness.

AS the Unchangeableness of God is very teaching and instructive, so also very
humbling, if rightly weighed and improved by us: there are several things which
the consideration thereof do call aloud upon us to be humbled for, and Oh that
we would lay them to heart!

1. Is God unchangeable? Then how should we be humbled for our exceeding great
changeableness, and therein our unlikeness to God, the chief good? The more
changeable we are in what is good, the more unlike God we are; and the more
unlike God we are, the more cause we have of humbling. Oh, how should we loath
our selves, and be abased at the foot of God in the sense of our great
fickleness and changeableness? Alas! how changeable are we in all that is good?
how changeable are many of us in our Judgments and Opinions, being like
Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, as
you have it Ephesians. 4.14. being apt to be soon removed from the Faith of the
Gospel, as the Galatians were, at which Paul marvelled, Gal. 1.6. How
changeable are we in our affections to God, and the things of God? Now the
heart flames with love to God and Christ, anon it is chill and cold. Now we are
full of holy longings and desires after God, and Christ, Grace, and Glory; we
can say with the Church of old, The desire of our Soul is unto thee, O God, and
to the remembrance of thy Name, Isa. 26.8. yea, our Soul thirsts for God, for
the living God; Yea, as the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants our
Soul after God, as the Psalmist speaks: Anon there is not any one holy
breathing to be found within us: No, we are even made up of worldly, sinful,
unclean desires; we pant after the dust of the Earth, as those Amos 2.7. we are
athirst for the Creature, and nothing but that will satisfy us. Now we delight
in God and his Ways; We rejoce in the Lord, and our Soul is joyful in our God,
as 'twas with the Church Isa. 61.10. and his Ways are sweet and pleasant to
us, his Law is our delight; anon we relish no sweetness, we take and exercise
no joy, no delight, either in the one or in the other; but we drive on heavily,
every duty being a burden to us, and the very thoughts of God a trouble. Now
we fear and stand in a we of God, not daring to sin against him; we stand in
awe of his Presence; we stand in awe of his Holiness; we stand in awe of his
Goodness; we stand in awe of his Power, and the like; Anon we are fearless and
regardless of him, boldly venturing upon sinning against him: Now we dread sin
as Hell it self, yea, and worse too; anon we embrace it and delight in it.
Again, how changeable are we in our holy purposes and resolutions? We take up
this and that holy resolution; we purpose to walk so and so with God, to keep
such and such a watch over our spirits and ways; to live more in communion
with God; to drive a greater trade and design for Heaven, and to hasten more to
that better Country, and the like; but alas! how do such resolutions fade, and
change, and die within us, not one of many of them ever proves firm and
effectual; yea, many times no sooner are such resolutions taken up by us, but
presently we run Counter to them, and break with God more than before; the
first temptation that comes turns us quite beside our purpose, and we miserably
miscarry in the very things we resolved about: Our holy purposes are for the
most part abortive, We turn aside like a deceitful bow (as God complains of
those Psalm. 78.57. It Is a sad complaint which I have read in one of the
Ancients; Oftentimes (says he) have I promised and refolved to amend, Multoties
permisi me emondare and nunquam tenut, sed semper ad peocatu redii and
prioribus seeleribus nova and deterior a conjunxi, nunquam ut debui mores meos
in melius mutari etc. Bern. de ascen. Domini.
but I never made it good, but always I returned to sin, and to my former
wickednesses; I added new, and worse, I never reformed as I ought. And who of
us may not in a great measure make the same complaint? Yet once more, How
changeable are we in our ways and walkings? How uneven and unconstant in our
goings? We have an heart that loves to wander, (as God speaks of them of old
Jer. 14.10.) O the turnings aside, and O the turnings back that we are guilty
of in our walking with God! Oh the gaps and pauses, and interruptions that are
in our obedience! we should go on in one even constant tenure of holy
Obedience; but alas! we are in and out, off and on often in the day, yea in the
hour; yea many times, sudden and great changes are found in our spirits and
carriages Godward, and that for the worse. I Will give you one, and but one
instance of this, and that in an eminently holy Man, an instance that may well
make all of us tremble, and that is of Jeremiah Jer. 20.13, 14, 15. Sing unto
the Lord, praise ye the Lord; for he has delivered the Soul of the poor from
the hand of evil doers. Cursed be the day wherein I was horn; let not the day
wherein my mother bare me be blessed. Cursed be the man that brought tidings to
my Father, saying, A man-child is born unto thee, making him very glad. Pray
mark, what a great change there was wrought in this good man's spirit, and that
all of a sudden; in verse. 13. he looks like one dropped out of Heaven, praising
God for his Goodness and Salvation, and calling upon others so to do; but in
verse. 14, 15. he looks rather like one broken loose out of Hell, cursing
himself, and almost every one about him. In the one he looks more like an Angel
than an imperfect Saint; in the other he looks more like a Devil, than a Man;
so great was the change in his spirit, and this suddenly made. When he had in
verse. 13. been praising God, and was, as it were, taken up to Heaven, the very
next news you hear of him is, that he is full of cursing: and truly thus
changeable are we all here. O how suddenly many times do we change and fall
from the best into the worst of frames and carriages before God? from love, to
hatred; from faith, to unbelief; from holy fear, to carnal security; from
obedience to rebellion; from delight in God, to a neglect of God, and a
weariedness of his ways and presence. O let us be humbled for this our
exceeding changeableness, and therein our unlikeness to God in his
Unchangeableness.

2. Is God unchangeable? Then how should we be humbled that we do so often
wrong God, charging him with unconstancy and change, as we do? Such, my
Beloved, is the emnity and unbelief of our hearts, that we are apt, upon all
occasions, to take up hard thoughts of God, and bring in black charges against
him: Now we charge him with weakness, and anon with folly; now with
unfaithfulness, and anon with, unjustice; now with cruelty, and anon with
change; which is a great evil, and calls for great humbling: God is
unchangeable, and he stands much upon the glory of his unchangeableness, and
yet we charge him with change: what an affront is this? This the Psalmist,
whoever he was, came near unto, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. Will the Lord cast off for
ever? And will he be favorable no more? Is his Mercy clean gone for ever? Does
his Promisefail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious? Has he in
anger shut up his tender Mercies? What is all this but in effect a charging of
God with change? He is here even upon the point of concluding, that God is not
the God he was, that he is not so merciful, nor so faithful, nor so gracious,
as formerly he was: It Is as if he should have said, God was a God of Mercy,
Mercy pleased him, but now his Mercy is at an end, and he is become all
severity; he was faithful in his Promises, but now his Promises fail, and fail
utterly: he was a Gracious God, Grace was his darling Attribute, but now his
Grace is forgotten by him: Thus for a time he did charge God with change,
though after wards, as the context tells us, his Faith recovered it self, and
he came to right thoughts of God again. Job also was deeply involved in this
guilt, Job 30.21. Thou art turned to be cruel to me (says he to God) thou were
a kind, but now thou art a cruel God to me. The Church also is full of this,
Isa. 49.14. and she speaks it out, Sion said, the Lord has forsaken me, and my
God has forgotten me, q.d. God is ehanged, he is not the God he was: Thus I
say, though God be unchangeable, yet we are apt to charge him with change; we
are apt to think that he is neither what he was, nor where he was; that he is
either not so good as he was, or also not so great, so powerful, so wise, so
holy, so faithful, so gracious as he was, and the like: Behold (says the
Prophet) the Lord's Hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither is his
Ear heavy, that it cannot hear, Isa. 59.1. They thought and concluded that
God's Hand was shortened, that is, that his Power was lessened, and that he was
not as able to save now as formerly; they thought and concluded, that his Ear
was grown heavy, that is, that he was not so good, and kind, and ready to hear
their Prayers now as formerly; he was a God able to save, but now, say they, he
is not, he was a Prayer-hearing God, but now, say they, he is not: Thus they
were ready to charge him with change: but, says the Prophet, there is no such
matter, God is what he was, his Power is the same, and his readiness to hear,
and help, and save is the same that ever it was. There are, among others, two
cases especially in which we are apt to charge the unchangeable God with
change; one is, when we change in our carriages and behavior toward God; the
other is, when God's carriages and dispensations are changed toward us; for
indeed we are apt to measure God, and judge of him by his out ward carriage and
dispensations toward us; and when they are changed, we conclude he is changed:
in Genesis 31.2. it is said, that Jacob beheld the Countenance of Laban, and behold
it was not toward him as before: So we many times behold the Countenance of
God, his outward carriage and dispensation toward us, and it is not toward us
as before, his Countenance is changed; and because his Countenance is not, we
think his Heart is not toward us as formerly, but is changed. O, my Beloved,
let us take heed of this grand evil, of charging God with change; it is indeed a
grand evil, it is what is very grievous and provoaking to God, and it is what
lays the Soul under much deep-dyed guilt; it is indeed to rob God of one of the
brightest Jewels in his Crown; yea, it is to un-God him: for if he be
changeable, he is not God; tremble therefore, Reader, and tremble, O my Soul,
at the thoughts of such a thing as this, namely, to charge the Unchangeable One
with change.

3. Is God unchangeable? Then how should we be humbled that we live so much
upon the Creature, and so little upon God; so much upon the Creature that does
change, and so little upon God that changes not? If we reflect feriously upon
our selves, we shall find, (at least many of us) that we live more upon the
Creatures, than we do upon God; more upon broken Cisterns, than we do upon this
Fountain of Living Waters; at least, the best and holiest of us will find, that
we live too much upon the Creature, and too little upon God; witness the
eagerness, strength, and vehemence of our desnes after the Creature more than
after God, and communion with God: Alas! how passionately many times do we
long, and how vigorously do we pursue after the Creature, when we can be
content well enough without God and communion with God? Witness the frequency
of our thoughts and contemplations of and about the Creature, more than of God
and about God. Alas! we mind earthly things, as those did Phil. 3.19. but how
seldom do we think of God, and contemplate God? Now that which is most in our
thoughts, that we live most upon, witness our delight and complacency in the
Creature, more than in God. O, what fresh, springing, vigorous delights have we
many times in the Creature? but when, and how little do we delight our selves
in God? Now that which we take most delight and complacency in, that do we live
most upon. Witness our immoderate griefs, and the bitterness of Spirit, we are
usually in for the loss or withdrawment of the Creatures, more than for the
loss and withdrawment of God and his Presence from us. Let this or the other
Creature-comfort be withdrawn from us, and how do we take on usually? And what
bitterness of Soul are we filled withal? Then with Hagar we lift up our voice
and weep, Genesis 21.19. How did Jonah, that good Man, take on when the Gourd was
withered, Jon. 4.7, 8, 9. But how seldom do we grieve, and bleed, and mourn for
want of Communion with God? Yea, how, indifferent for the most part are we
whether we have communion with God or no? And what does this argue, but that we
live too much upon the Creature and too little upon God? Thus if we seriously
reflect upon our selves, we shall find, by these, and such like things as
these, that we live more upon the Creatures than we do upon God; and, O how
humbling should this be upon us! The Creatures, they are vain, fading,
changeable things, they are even vanity it self, and changeableness it self;
but God is an eternal unchangeable Good; He is the same for ever, an
unchangeable Fountain of all Goodness, Sweetness, Blessedness, and Delight: Now
to live upon these changeable Creatures, and not upon this unchangeable God,
this is a great evil, and calls for great mourning and humbling at our hands.
It Is a great speech which I have read in Austin, wherein he bewails this very
sin; Bonus est qui fecit ^^e, and ipse est bonum moum, at in hoc peccabam, quod
non in ipso, sed in creaturis ejus, me atque caeteras voluptates quaerebam,
atque it a irruebam in dolores, confusiones, and errores. Aug.
He that made me, is Good, (says he) and he is my Good; but in this I sinned,
that not in Him, but in his Creatures, I sought my self, and my other
pleasures; that is, I took up my solace and happiness in the Creatures, and not
in God; and what then? and so, says he Iran my self upon many dolors, errors,
and confusion of Soul: And may not many of us make the very same complaint? He
that made us is Good, and he is our Good; but in this we have sinned, and do
sin, that we live upon the Creatures, and not upon Him, and so run our selves
upon many dolors, errors, and confusion of Soul: We live upon changeable
Creatures, more than upon an unchangeable God; and hereby God is dishonored,
his Spirit is grieved, our Souls are bereaved of Good, yea, the best Good, the
Good of Grace, and divine discoveries and communications; hereby we eat Husks,
when we might eat Bread; and we drink Swill, when we might drink Wine in our
Fathers House. Hereby we are exposed to sorrows, snares, and death; yea, and
hereby we are in danger of being excluded from God for ever. Oh, my Beloved,
let us be convinced of this evil, and mourn over it: for My own part, when I
reflect upon my self, I find cause to fear that I have lived upon Creatures all
my days, upon changeable Creatures, to the great, if not total, neglect of the
unchangeable God; and believe it, it is an hard thing to come off from the one,
to live so purely and entirely upon the other, as we ought to do: The Lord
humble us for these things.

CHAP. VIII.
God has a revenue of honor due to him upon the account of his
unchangeableness. We should give him that honor. Several short and plain
Directions in order thereunto.

EVery Attribute or Perfection of God, has a revenue of Honor and Glory due to
it from the Creature; and it is a great part of both the Wisdom and Duty of the
Creature, to give to each Attribute and Perfection of his, its proper Glory.
God is pleased to reveal and discover himself, sometimes in one, and sometimes
in another Attribute of his; sometimes he reveals and discovers himself in his
Wisdom, sometimes in his Power, sometimes in his Holiness, sometimes in his
Faithfulness, sometimes in his Justice, sometimes in his Grace, sometimes in
his Greatness, and sometimes, as here, in his Unchangeableness; now, I say, a
great part of a Christians skill and duty lies in this, To give to each
Attribute, in which God reveals himself, its proper Glory, that is to say, to
honor God suitable to the present Revelation he makes of himself. Now God
being unchangeable, our work and care should be, to give him the Glory of his
Unchangeableness, which, let me tell you, is very dear to him. But how may we
give God the glory due to this Attribute of his? Take only these few plain
Directions as to that briefly.

1. Would we give God the Glory of his Unchangeableness? then let us get our
hearts deeply affected with this Attribute of his, being in an holy manner
overawed therewith. The Unchangeableness of God is an aweful Attribute, an
Attribute that chalenges much holy awe and dread from the Creature; and when
our hearts are indeed in an holy manner overawed with the sense of this
Attribute, and we are filled with a reverential regard of God, as he is an
unchangeable God, then do we give him the Glory thereof: This seems to be
pointed at, Isa. 41.4.5. in verse. 4. God reveals himself in his
Unchangeableness, when he says, I the Lord, the First and the Last; I am the
First, and the Last; or (as some render it) I the same, I the same: and in
verse. 5. you have the Isles affected and overawed with this Attribute of his;
the Isles saw it, and feared: Accordingly, if we would indeed give God the
glory of his Unchangeableness, we should labor to get our hearts overawed
with the sense and apprehension thereof; we should dwell much in the meditation
of this Perfection of God; our language should be, Well, how changeable soever
we are; yet God is unchangeable, he is for ever the same, unchangeable in
Greatness, unchangeable in Goodness, unchangeable in Wisdom, unchangeable in
Power, unchangeable in Holiness, unchangeable in Faithfulness, unchangeable in
Fullness and Sufficiency; he is every way an unchangeable God, what he was, he
is; what he is, he will be for ever: Thus we should sit down and contemplate
this Attribute, till we find our hearts affected and overawed by it.

2. Would we give God the glory of his Unchangeableness? Then let us ascribe
this Attribute to God, and celebrate his Glory in it. In Deuteronomy. 32.3. we are
called upon to ascribe Greatness to God; and as we should ascribe Greatness, so
we must ascribe Unchangeableness to God, and with all admire and adore him
therein, if we mean to give him the glory of this Attribute of his: This the
Psalmist does once and again, From everlasting (says he) to everlasting, thou
art God, Psalm. 90.1, 2. and again, They shall perish, (says he speaking of the
Heavens) but thou Lord shall endure, they shall be changed, but thou art the
same, and thy years shall have no end, Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27. He celebrates the
Glory of God in his Unchangeableness, admiring and adoring him in this
Perfection of his: The Church does the same thing in Rev. 4.8. where we read of
four Beasts which rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come: Pray mark, first, They celebrate
the glory of God's Holiness, saying, Holy, holy, holy: Secondly, They celebrate
the glory of God's Power and Sovereignty, Lord God Almighty: Thirdly: They
celebrate the glory of God's Unchangeableness and Eternity, which was, which
is, and which is to come, q. d. thou art an holy God, and we adore thee for
thine Holiness; thou art a Potent and Sovereign Lord, and we adore thee for thy
Power and Sovereignity; thou art an Unchangeable God, and we adore thee for
thine Unchangeableness; how fading soever the creatures are, thou art still the
same: In like manner should we do, we should ascribe Unchangeableness to God,
and be much in admiring and adoring him for, and in this perfection of his;
this is all that we can do, and it is indeed our Glorifying of him, to display
and make mention of the excellencies and perfections of God, and with both our
Spirits and Tongues to celebrate the glory of them, which indeed will be our
work for ever; O let us be much in it now.

3. Would we give God the Glory of his Unchangeableness? Then let us see and
acknowledge him and his Unchangeableness to be the sole Spring and Fountain of
all that Unchangeableness, that either Men or Angels do attain unto; the
Creatures, Men and Angels not excepted, in themselves are all changeable; but
yet there is a blessed Unchangeableness which some of them, I mean, the Saints
and holy Angels do at last attain unto; they are (as the Schoolmen speak of
them) in omni bono confirmati, eternally and unchangeably confirmed in all
Good, in all Holiness, all Happiness; And whence comes this to pass? Verily,
from the Unchangeableness of God, that is the Spring and Fountain of all: were
not God unchangeable, unchangeable in his Covenant, Counsel, and Love, they
would never arrive to such an Unchangeableness; to God's Unchangeableness
therefore we should give the glory of it. Look, as Christ said in another case,
because I live, ye shall live also, Joh. 14.19. So may God say, both to Men and
Angels, because I am unchangeable, therefore shall ye be unchangeable also:
Indeed, the Unchangeableness which Saints and Angels do attain unto is but a
beam, as it were, of God's Unchangeableness, emitted down upon them; they shall
be unchangeably holy, because God is so; they are unchangeably blessed, because
God is so; and they have communion with him by Christ in his unchangeable
holiness and blessedness; see therefore, and acknowledge God and his
Unchangeableness in that unchangeableness, which Saints and Angels attain unto,
ascribing theirs wholly to his.

4. Would we give God the glory of his Unchangeableness? Then let us live upon
this Unchangeableness of his: The more we live upon the Unchangeableness of
God, the more we honor it, and give him the glory of it: Now we should live
upon it under a double notion. -- 1. We should live upon it, as the sole cause
of all our preservation, expecting all from it, and ascribing all to it; This
God challenges from us in the very text; I am the Lord, I change not, therefore
ye are not consumed, q. d. it is from my Unchangeableness that you are alive,
that you are out of Hell, and it is my Unchangeableness that must keep you
alive, and preserve you for ever, and I expect you should own it and live upon
it accordingly: Our language should be, I am alive, and why? Because God is
unchangeable: I am out of Hell; and why? Because God is unchangeable; yea, I
hope I shall live, and that for ever; But why? Because God is unchangeable:
True, I am a changeable Creature, and being left to my self, I shall quickly
forfeit, Life, Soul, Salvation, and all; yea, I am forfeiting all every day and
hour by sin; but God is an unchangeable God, he is for ever the same, his
Counsel, his Covenant, his Love are all unchangeable, and therefore I do live,
and shall live, yea, live eternally: Oh, this is so to live upon the
Unchangeableness of God, as to give him the glory of that perfection of his. --
2. We should live upon the Unchangeableness of God as a sweet Spring of Comfort
and Refreshment to us under all those afflictive changes, which here in this
World we meet withal: We here meet with many afflictive changes; Changes and
War are upon us; but the Unchangeableness of God is a sweet Spring of Comfort
and Refreshment in all, and under all; and when we live upon it as such,
bearing up our Souls thereupon, then do we give this Attribute its proper
glory. This is what is called for, Isa. 26.4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever
(that is, live, rest, depend upon him: Why so?) for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength; the words are, the Rock of Ages, the Rock of this Age,
the Rock of former Ages, the Rock of Ages to come, a Rock in all Ages, and the
Rock of all Ages; that is to say, a firm, unchangeable One; and being such an
one, he is, he must be the proper object of trust, and unless we do trust in
him, and live upon him, as our life, we do not give him his proper glory: We
should, as it were, sit down, and say, Well though my estate changes, yet God
does not change, and so long all is well: Though my Friends and Comforts
change, my Friends turn Enemies, and my Comforts Crosses; yet God does not
change, and so long all is well: yea, it is true, my Spirit changes, there is no
fixedness, no stability in it, as to any thing that is good and gracious; yet
however God changes not, he is always the same, and I Will live on him; The Lord
lives, and blessed be my Rock, (says David) Psalm. 18.46. Friends dye, Trade
dies, and my self am a dying, but the Lord lives, and there is enough in that
to bear me up under all: O when thus we live upon God's Unchangeableness, as a
Spring and Fountain of Comfort to us under all afflictive changes here, then do
we give him the glory of this Attribute of his.

5. Would we give God the glory of his Unchangeablenes? then let us labor to
imitate him, and to be as like him herein, as possibly we can; let us labor,
as much as possible, for an holy Unchangeablenes, a fixednes and stability in
what is good, even here, and that in conformity to God: we cast an honor (as
one observes) upon them whom we imitate; for by our imitation of them, we
acknowledge an excellency in them, which is all that honoring in the first
Notion of it imports; sure I am, the more like to God we covet to be, and the
more we imitate him in this perfection of his, by coming up to an holy evenness
and stability in what is Good, the more do we honor him, and give him his
proper glory: But this may possibly be spoken to in a Chapter by it self in its
proper place. Thus you see how to give God that glory which is due to him upon
the account of his Unchangeableness.

CHAP. IX.
God's Unchangeableness should induce us to choose him for our God and Portion,
and to take up the rest and happiness of our Souls in him, with arguments to
quicken thereunto.

THe Unchangeableness of God calls aloud upon us all to choose him for our God
and Portion, and to take up the rest and happiness of our Souls in him, and not
in the Creatures. The truth is, to choose God for our God and Portion, and to
take up our rest and happiness in him, is what every discovery of God, in one
or another excellency or perfection of his, does challenge and call for at our
hands: Does he reveal himself to be an holy God? This calls upon us to choose
him for our God and Portion, and to get an interest in his Holiness: Does God
reveal himself to be a gracious God, a God of Grace and Love? This calls upon
us to choose him for our God and Portion, and to get an interest in his Love:
Does he reveal himself to be a faithful God, a God that keeps Covenant and
Mercy? This calls upon us to choose him for our God and Portion, and to get an
interest in his Faithfulness: so here? Does God reveal himself to be an
Unchangeable God? This calls upon us to choose him for our God and Portion, and
to get an interest in his Unchangeableness; taking up the rest and happiness of
our Souls in him; and accordingly, O that we would look and live above
changeable Creatures, taking up our rest and happiness in this unchangeable
God, which to do is even infinitely our safest and sweetest course: for pray
consider, who or what will you choose for your Portion, and wherein will you
place the rest and happiness of your Souls, if not in the Unchangeable God?
Sure I am, you have but God or the Creature to make choice of; Now what is the
Creature to God? What is the changeable Creature to the unchangeable God? Alas!
the one is infinitely short of the other: God indeed is every way, and in all
respects a most desirable Good; He is an original Good, a full Good, a suitable
Good, a satisfying Good, an unmixed Good, an all-sufficient Good; and, which
crowns all, an Unchangeable Good, a Good that never fades, never fails. He is
the Living God, and steadfast for ever, Dan. 6.26. The Creatures are all
changeable and perishing: An Heathen could say, Inter peritura vivimus. Sen.
We live among perishing things: And 'twas a great saying of one of the
Aucients; We have nothing Nulla res longa mortalium est, omnis^^^ faelicitas
saeculi, dum tenetur, amittitur.
here (says he) of any long continuance; and all the felicity of this world is
gone while we hold it, and lost even while we enjoy it; Such, and so great is
the changeableness and uncertainty of all these things: But God, (as you have
heard) and all that Good that is in him, is always and for ever the same,
which speaks him to be infinitely sweet and desirable, and so infinitely worthy
to be embraced by us for our God and Portion: This indeed crowns and perfects
all that good that is in God. Look, as the changeableness of the Creatures,
lowers and allays that good and sweetness, that is in them; so the
Unchangeableness of God does infinitely raise and commend that good and
excellency, that is in him. Had the Creatures ten thousand times more good and
excellency in them than they have, yet this one consideration, that they are
changeable, were enough to damp all, and quash all; though the Creatures had
never so much sweetness and goodness in them, and though I had never so full,
free, and ample enjoyment of them; though the streams ran never so pleasantly
on each hand of me, yet this one thought, that all this is fading, and
changeable, and will last but for a season, were enough to allay my joy, and
even imbitter all to me: So on the other hand, though God be such an infinite
Ocean of Goodness, Sweetness, and Blessedness, as he is; yet that which crowns
all, is his Unchangeableness in all; and without this, it is not the whole of
God could make us happy. Now shall the consideration hereof induce you to choose
him for your God and Portion, and take up your rest and happiness in him for
ever? Possibly you have never yet chosen God to be your God and Portion, nor
have you taken up the rest and happiness of your Souls in him; you have chosen
the Creatures, you have chosen this World, you have chosen carnal, sensual
things, and in these have you placed your rest and happiness; but as for God,
he has hitherto been far from your Reins; you have centred in changeable
Creatures, and forgotten the Unchangeable God: But will you now change your
Choice, and take up a new Rest? Oh now let an Unchangeable God, not changeable
Creatures, be your God and Portion, your Rest and Happiness. O that the
language of your Souls to God, might now be that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire
besides thee. Lord, thou, and thou alone shall be my God, my Rest, my Portion,
my Happiness, and my All for ever: Indeed, I had chosen the Creatures for my
Portion and Happiness, but now I renounce that choice, I Will have no more to do
with changeable Creatures, the World was my happiness, and I sat down with it,
so foolish was I, and ignorant; but now I have done with the World, this
flitting, fading, dying World, and thou Lord alone shall be my All for ever: Oh
that you would indeed thus choose the Unchangeable God, and take up your rest
and happiness in him this day: And you that have chosen him, and taken up your
happiness in him, make a new choice of him, and take up your rest more purely
and entirely in him; say over this Unchangeable One; This God is our God for
ever and ever, Psalm. 48.14. Oh, labor to get more above the Creatures, and
live more in God, and upon God: The more purely and entirely you take up your
rest in God, the sweeter will he be to you, and the more satisfaction will your
souls find in him. Now to quicken you thus to choose God, and live upon him, and
his Unchangeableness;

1. Consider, what a changeable World we live in; we live in a changeable
World, in a World that rings changes every day, many changes, and great
changes; the truth is, This World is a very changeable world, and it is not long
e're it will be changed once for all, the day is coming, when all these things
shall be dissolved; the Heavens shall pass away with a noise, the Earth shall
melt with fervent heat, 2 Pet. 3.10.11. and in the mean time the world is not
without its changes; and how great changes we may live to see, who knows? such
changes seem to be coming upon the world as that nothing but an Unchangeable
God will be able to bear us up under them. In Luke 21.25, 26. we read of
distress of Nations which shall be upon the Earth, with perplexity; men's hearts
failing them for fear, and for looking after those things that shall come to
pass upon the Earth: The sum of which amounts to this, that there shall be such
changes, such rendings, such shakings, such terrible convulsions and
concussions wrought in the Nations of the World; such desolations shall be
made, and such terrible storms of wrath and vengeance shall fall upon the
World, as that men shall be even exanimated, and driven to their wits end, they
shall fall under a deliquium Animi, a swooning of Spirit, they shall breath out
their very Souls; or, they shall be filled with such anguish, horror, and
confusion of Soul, as that they shall be ready to lay violent hands upon
themselves, and take away their own lives: and, my Beloved, should we live to
see such things, how good will an Unchangeable God be? O Sirs! living in such a
changeable World, who would not fix upon an Unchangeable God, as a Man's
Portion and Happiness? Who would not get upon, yea into this Rock of Ages? And
how good, how sweet will it be to have an Unchangeable God to retreat to, and
ark in?

2. Consider, what changeable things all our Creature Comforts and contentments
are: As the World, wherein we live, is a changeable World, So all our
Creature Comforts are changeable comforts; Should the World stand where it
does, and as it does, without any such changes as we have mentioned; yet our
best Creature Comforts here are subject to change every day; and how soon we
may say of one, or another, or all of them, as Jacob sometimes did of his two
sons Joseph and Simeon, Genesis 42.36. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not? How soon
we may say, this and that Comfort is not, who can tell? I have now a Trade, to
morrow, it may be, I shall have none: I have now an Estate, to morrow, it may
be, I shall have none: I have now a pleasant Habitation, to morrow, it may be,
it will be in Ashes: I have now my Friends and Relations about me, my Husband,
or my Wife lying pleasantly in my Bosom, my Children like Olive branches round
about my Table, to morrow, it may be, they will all sleep in the Dust, and go
down to the Gates of the Grave, and I shall see them no more: Alas! these
things are not, (as Solomon speaks of Riches) such is their changeableness,
that they have scarce a being; Or, suppose these things should stay with us,
yet how soon may they be embittered to us? How soon may the best of this Wine
be turned into Wormwood? How soon may the sweetest of these Comforts be changed
into bitter Crosses? Sometimes, the desire of our eyes is taken away from us
with a stroke, (as God threatened the Prophet of old) that is, suddenly; and
e're ever we are aware of it our dearest, sweetest, and most delightful
Comforts are taken from us: At other times the desire of our Eyes becomes the
burden of our Souls, our dearest Comforts are imbittered to us; that which
yesterday was sweet and pleasant, to day possibly is bitter and burthensom to
us; that which to day is the joy of our hearts, to morrow it may be will be as
a goad in our sides, and as thorns in our eyes: O how soon many times do our
most pleasant Streams turn into waters of Marah to us! Now all on this side God
being thus changeable, who would not rest in Him, and his Unchangeableness? Oh
Unchangeableness! Unchangeableness! this is to be found in God alone, and
therefore let him alone be the Rest and Portion of our Souls.

3. Consider, how near our last and great change is unto us: should the World
never wax old, nor admit of any change; and should our Creature Comforts and
contentments live and last for ever; yet we our selves must change, we are
fading, dying, perishing Creatures; we pass under many changes, and great
changes, and it is but a little while e're our last and great change will come:
Death is our last and great change till the Resurrection: So the Holy Ghost by
Joh speaks of it, Job 14.14. and this is a great change indeed, a change from
Work to Reward, from Time to Eternity; a change out of this World into another;
from these Tabernacles of Clay, to live in eternal Regions, either of Light or
Darkness; and thus shall We all be changed: a few years, a few months, a few
weeks, a few days, a few hours, yea, it may be, but a few moments more and we
shall all be thus changed changed by Death out of Time into Eternity; and how
much then are we concerned to make choice of, and take up our rest in an
Unchangeable God? Then, namely when we pass under this change, to be sure
nothing but Unchangeableness will be of any avail to us, and this is to be
found in God alone; him therefore should we choose, and take up our rest in.
This very consideration induced David to make a fresh choice of God, and cleave
more entirely to him, as his Rest and Happiness, Psalm. 39.5, 6, 7. Behold, O
Lord, thou have made my days as an hand-breadth, and mine age is as nothing
before thee: Verily, every man at his best estate is altogether vanity; surely
every man walks in a vain show, surely they are disquietted in vain: Well,
and what now? Why, says he, And now Lord what wait I for? My hope is in thee.
He saw his vanity and changeableness, as also the vanity and changeableness of
all others, both Persons, and Things; he saw both himself, and all others in
their very best state to be not only vain, but even vanity it self, subject to
change every hour; in the sight and sense of which he cleaves to God, chooses
him, centers in him as his God, his Portion, his All: Now Lord what wait I for?
My hope is in thee, q. d. Now Lord, that I have seen my own vanity and
changeableness, and the vanity and changeableness of others too, now I look to
thee, I cleave to thee, I rest in thee as my only Good, Portion, and
Happiness: I have now done with the Streams, with the Creatures, and
Creature-contentments, and I Will now bathe only in the Fountain, rest wholly in
thy self, the Fountain of living Waters. And, my Beloved, did we dwell more in
the consideration of the nearness of our last and great change, we should
doubtless cleave more closely and entirely to the Unchangeable God, as our rest
and Portion: Our thus numbering our days, deep and frequent consideration of
the shortness of our lives, and how soon we may be changed, would make us to
apply our hearts to this Wisdom, to get an interest in the Unchangeable God,
Psalm. 90.12. O be much therefore in this Work.

4. Consider, that then, and not till then, shall we be happy indeed, when we
come to look and live above changeable Creatures upon an Unchangeable God. It Is
happiness, my Beloved, that is the great interest of Souls, and it is happiness
we all desire and pursue after; now then are we happy indeed, and not till
then, when we get above the Creatures, and take up our rest in the Unchangeable
God. Pray, Sirs, let us consider things a little; Suppose you had this whold
World at will, and might enjoy as much of the Creature as your Souls could
wish; suppose you could all your days live in a Paradise of all earthly
Delights, and swim chin-deep in the Streams of all Creature-contentments; yet
what were all this? Alas! it would not make up one dram of true happiness; your
happiness must be in God still: Mind how the Psalmist speaks as to this, Psalm.
144.15. Happy is the People that is in such a case; yea, happy is that Poople
whose God is the Lord. In what case was this? Why, a case of outward
prosperity, a case of enjoying an affluence of all outward
Creature-contentments; for of these he had spoken before. But David, is this
really your judgment, and do you give it us for a divine Truth, that these
things make men happy? No (says he) I rather herein tell you what the Worlds
judgments is, and wherein they look upon happiness to consist; They think those
of all others to be the happiest People, who enjoy most of this World, most
ease, most pleasure, most of Creature Comforts: But (says he) I am of another
mind, I account them the happy People, who have the Lord for their God, that
is, who have a Covenant Relation to, and interest in the blessed God; it is God,
not the Creature, the enjoyment of whom makes happy. The former Proposition
[Happy is the People that is in such a case] shows what carnal men judge
concerning happiness, and what makes happy in their account; the latter
Proposition, [yea happy is the People whose God is the Lord] shows what true
happiness indeed is and wherein it consists, which is in an interest in God, in
the Unchangeable One: Or, this latter is (as one observes) a correction of the
former, Correctio est dicti prioris, q.d. imo vero hunc ego vere beatum dixero,
qui Deum verum, (non incertam seculi fortunam) habet propitium. Gejer.
and it is as if he should say, but I would rather say, they are the happy
Souls, who have the true God, not the changeable Creature, propitious to them.
Oh it is not the Creature, but God, an interest in and communion with
unchangeableness, that makes happy: It Is the joint-language of all the
Creatures, happiness is not in us, we are all vanity, and subject to change,
and cannot make eternal Souls happy; happiness lies in God alone, where alone
both fullness and Unchangeableness, sufficiency and immutability are to be
found: To look for happiness in the Creature, is to seek the living among the
dead; but to look for it in God, that is to seek it at the Fountainhead of all
true happiness. What shall I say? God is his own happiness, he is eternally
blessed in and with himself, (as has been before declared) and he is the
happiness of his Creatures, both Saints and Angels; and when God makes his
People, his Saints and Servants, perfectly happy, which he never does till he
takes them to Heaven, he then takes them from all their Creature-contentments,
and he admits and receives them into the full and single enjoyment of himself.
'Twere easy to show that nothing short of God, and his unchangeableness, can
possibly make happy; and accordingly that we shall never be happy indeed, till
we learn to carry our happiness above the road of Creatures, and place it
wholly and entirely in God: But I must not run out too far here. Oh, my
Beloved, that man is certainly happiest, whose heart and life are holiest, and
whose communion with God is fullest; he that enjoyes most of God, whether he
enjoys much or little of the Creature, he it is that is most happy. It Is a
great saying which I have read in Austin, speaking to those that seek happiness
in the Creature, Quaerite quod quaeritis, sed ibi non est ubi quaeritis, beatam
vitam queritis in regione mortis, non est illic, quomodo enim beata vita, ubi
nec vita. Aug. Conf. lib. 4. Cap. 12.
Seek what you seek, (says he) that is, seek happiness, but know that it is not
to be found where you seek it; you seek a blessed life in the region of Death,
but it is not to be found there, for how should there be a blessed life found,
where there is not so much as life found? And elsewhere, speaking to God, All
things are full of trouble and difficulty, Dura sunt omnia, and tu solus
requies. Aug. Conf. lib. 6. cap. 16.
and thou alone art rest and happiness (says he). Truly the Creature (as
Solomon tells us) is nothing else but vanity and vexation of Spirit; but in God
there is rest, there is happiness, there is satisfaction of Soul to be found;
and if you would be happy indeed, choose him, and place your rest and happiness
in him alone.

5. Consider, that God freely offers himself as an Unchangeable Good, in his
Covenant to you. You know how he speaks to sinners, even to sinners, Isa. 55.3.
Come unto me, and I will make an Everlasting Covenant with you. And pray what
is this Covenant? Why, I will be your God, that you know is the grand Promise
of it, Jer. 31.33. In the Covenant God offers himself to sinners in all his
glorious Excellencies and Perfections: his language therein to them is, Come
Souls, see what a God I am, how great, how good, how rich, how glorious, see
what treasures of light and life, of love and glory there are in me; and lo! I
am willing to be yours, your God, your Friend, your Father, your Portion, your
Happiness, your All for ever: Look, what ever I am, that I will be to you; and
whatever I can do, that I will do for you. Thus he offers himself in all his
glorious Excellencies and Perfections to you, and as in all, so particularly in
his Unchangeableness; Come, says he, I am the Lord, I change not, and as such
an one do I tender my self to you, my Unchangeableness shall be the Rock of
your Rest, the immutability of my Nature, my Counsel, my Covenant, my Love, is
a sure footing for your Faith, and a firm Foundation for your Comfort: While I
am, I will be Life and Blessedness to you; I Will be a never-failing Fountain of
Peace, Joy, and Satisfaction to you: I am the First and the Last, He who was,
and is, and is to come; and as such I will be yours for ever; and when the
World, and all that is therein shall be burnt up, I will be a standing Portion
for you; when the whole World is like a tumbling Ocean round about you, I Will be
a Rock of Ages to you; and be not afraid of me, I am a God of Grace and Love:
It Is true, I am the Great and High God, but my Highness shall stoop, and my
greatness shall condescend to you; yea, and nothing shall stand between you and
me, no sin, no vileness, no unworthiness of yours; I know you are poor, vile,
sinful worthless worms, infinitely unworthy of me; I know your sins are many,
and the distance between me and you is great; but all this shall not hinder you
from an interest in Me, and my Unchangeableness, if you will take hold of my
Covenant, choose me for your God and Portion, and take up the rest and happiness
of your Souls in me. Thus God reveals and offers himself in his Covenant to us;
and does he thus offer himself in his Covenant to us; and shall we not choose
him for our God and Portion? shall we stick in the Creature still and reject
the offer God makes of himself to us? God forbid! Oh let us now choose this
Unchangeable God, and let him be our Rest, our Portion, our Happiness and our
All for ever. Let us reason matters a little in our own Souls; the World that
is fall of changes, all my Creature Comforts and Contentments they are subject
to change, I am not sure of them one moment, my own last and great change is
near at hand, I know not how soon 'twill come upon me, nothing but the
Unchangeable God can make me happy; and he freely offers himself in his
Covenant to me; and shall I yet, notwithstanding all this, neglect him? shall I
cleave to the Creature, and not to this Unchangeable God? by no means; He, not
the fading, oying, Creature, shall be my Portion and my Happiness for ever. Or,
if all this does not do, than once more,

6. Consider, how sad and dreadful a thing it will be to have the
Unchangeableness of God against you. This is a sure rule, that unless we make
God ours by choosing of him, and closing in his Covenant with him, as our God
and Portion, he and all his Attributes will at last be found against us,
against us to destroy us, and make us miserable for ever: if we make not God's
Unchangeableness ours, and engage it not for us, by choosing him as
unchangeable, his Unchangeableness will stand for ever engaged against us; and
Oh how sad will that be? It Is sad to have any Attribute of God against a Man;
but to have his Unchangeableness against us how sad is that? O for a Man to
have God for his eternal Enemy, God eternally and Unchangeably set against him,
this is enough to render him completely and unchangeably miserable. Again,
therefore let me call upon you to look and live above changeable Creatures, and
to choose, rest in, and live upon the Unchangeable God, as your God and Portion;
look upon him in Christ, in whom you will find him infinitely full of love and
sweetness, in whom you will find him Love it self, God is Love, 1 John 4.8. and
accordingly let your souls choose him, and cleave to him, as yours for ever.

CHAP. X.
We are to imitate God, and labor for a likeness to him in his
Unchangeableness, by being more constant in that which is good; this, in some
measure, is attainable in this World, it is the perfection of the Soul, where
attained, and brings him near the life of Heaven.

UNchangeableness being one of the glorious Excellencies and Perfections of
God, why should we not imitate him? why should we not labor to be like unto
him herein? why should we not covet and press after an holy Unchangeableness in
our Spirits and walkings with him? Sure I am, it is what his Unchangeableness
calls upon us for. From the consideration of God's Immutability, A Dei
immutabilitate sequitur nos in his quae Dei sunt, fide, spe, charitate, debere
esse immutabiles. Schar.
(says a learned Man) it follows that we also should labor to be immutable in
the things of God, in Faith, in Hope, in Love, and the like. Look as the
consideration of God's Holiness, calls for Holiness in us; and the
consideration ration of his Goodness and Mercy, calls for Goodness and Mercy in
us; and the consideration of his Patience, calls for Patience in us, and the
like; so the consideration of his Unchangeableness, calls for an holy
Unchangeableness, at least somewhat like it, an holy evenness, steadines, and
fixedness of Spirit in our ways and walkings with him, and before him, it
calls upon us to be more constant and uniform in all holy Obedience, and in the
exercise of all Grace. True, my Beloved, there are some things so peculiarly
appropriate to God, that in respect of them, there can be no formal likness in
the Creature to Him, and it would be impious boldness for any to aspire
thereunto; such are his Supreme Dominion and Sovereign Authority, his Absolute
Independency and self-Sufficiency, etc. Now in these, while men affect to
imitate him, they (as one observes) wickedly affront him: But now some other
perfections there are found in the blessed God, not so incommunicable and
appropriate to him but that his Creatures may be said to have some
participation thereof with him, and so far to be truly like him; such are his
Holiness, his Justice, his Mercy, his Patience, and the like, wherein it is our
duty, as well as our glory, to imitate him, and to labor for as great a
resemblance, and as full a conformity to him, as possibly we can; In Mat. 5.48.
Christ commands us to be perfect, as our Father which is in Heaven is perfect
and; Ephesians. 5.1. (...). Si Filii Dei sumus debere nos esse ejus imitatores. Calv.
in loc.
we are enjoined to be followers of God, as dear Children: be yea followers of
God; the Word is, be ye imitators of God, be ye like to him, bearing his Image
upon you; and if you are his Children indeed, you will do so: We should imitate
God in all his imitable Excellencies and Perfections; yea, this observe
moreover, that where there cannot be a proper and formal likeness or similitude
in us to God, in respect of those peculiarly appropriate Excellencies that are
in him, yet even there should we labor for impressions, affections,
dispositions, and demeaners of Soul toward him, suitable and answerable to
those Excellencies and Perfections of his: As for instance, He being absolutely
Supreme, there ought to be in us an humble subjection and self-resignation of
Soul, disposing us to constant obedience to him: so he being simply and
absolutely independent and self-sufficient, there ought to be in us a
self-emptiness and nothingness, living wholly and entirely out of our selves
upon him as such a God, fetching all in from his Fountain-fulness: Thus where
we are not capable of any formal likeness to God, we should yet study his
Perfections, and labor for dispositions of Spirit, and demeanors of Soul
suitable there unto: But where we are capable of any likness to him, there we
should covet it, and press after it: God therefore being Unchangeable, we
should labor for an holy Unchangeableness in our Spirits and Walkings before
him; we should imitate him, and conform to him herein, so far as we are capable
of so doing; we should labor for more fixedness, more evenness, more
constancy, and uniformity in all Grace and Holiness, in all Heavenliness and
Obedience, in all acts of Duty and walking with God: it is what in a good
measure may be attained unto even here in this World. It Is possible my Beloved,
for these roving, inconstant, unstable Souls of ours, to be in some good
measure brought up to an holy evenness and Unchangeableness in the ways and
things of God; for this is what some of the Saints have attained unto, in Genesis
5.22. it is said of Enoch, that he walked with God three hundred years, and
begat Sons and Daughters: of others it is said, that they begat such and such,
and they lived so many years afterward: but of Enoch, it is said, he begat
Methuselah, and walked with God three hundred years; as if his whole life for
that three hundred years were one continued and uninterrupted course of walking
with God. The Deum presentem praeoculis ac familiarem habuit, Deique placito se
ita accommodavit, ut videretur perpetuo cum Deo ambulare. Tirin.
Phrase (as a learned Critique observes) seems to carry this in it; that he had
God so present always with him, and he so accomodated himself to the pleasure
of God, as that he seemed perpetually to walk with him. His life was, as it
were, one constant course and series of walking with him: This also is what God
calls for, Be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord,
1 Cor. 15.58. This is what the Apostles are ever and anon praying for, both for
themselves and others: The God of all Grace stablish, strengthen, settle you, 1
Pet 5.10. This is what being attained is the Crown and Perfection of a
Christian; so in that same, 1 Pet. 5, 10. The God of all Grace, after you have
suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen you. To be stablisht,
and settled in our Spirits, and ways, in holy things, this is our Perfection:
It Is indeed the glory of Christianity, and the honor of a Christian: Oh my
Beloved, the more even and uniform we are in the things and ways of God, the
more excellent and perfect we are, and the more amiable in the sight of God:
Oh, it is not the flashy, high-flown talking, but the even and steady Christian,
that is most excellent, most amiable in God's Eye; this is a Crown of Glory
indeed upon the Head of a poor Soul. 'Twas queen Elizabeth's Motto, semper
eadem, always the same; and truly were it more in an holy respect the
Christians Motto, he would be more glorious than he is: Rawlins you left me,
and Rawlins you find me, said that Martyr; meaning, that he was still in the
same Mind, the same Spirit, being constant to his Testimony, which was his
Crown and Glory. Quod desideras autem magnum summum est, Deoque vicinum, non
conents. Sen.
It Is an high and great thing (says one to his Friend) which thou desire,
and even bordering upon a Deity, not to be moved and changed. Sure I am, it is
an high and great thing in Spirituals, to come up to an holy evenness and
fixedness of Soul; This is that which honors the Gospel; this is that which
renders Religion amiable; this is that which makes way for full and constant
communion with God, for abiding Consolations; this is that which delights the
Heart of God, this is that which brings us near to the state and life of
Heaven; for there the Saints and Angels are fixed and unchangeably confirmed in
all Good, in all Holiness, in all Happiness: Oh, labor for as much of this
Holy Unchangeableness as possibly may be attained unto here on Earth, and then
sigh and long for that Life and State, where you shall know no change for ever,
but be perfectly, unchangeably, and etenally holy and happy, as God himself is;
for you shall be like him, and see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. It Is true, it is no
easy thing to fix our roving Spirits, and reduce them to a steadiness in what
is good; but remember the God you are to have recourse to, to do this great
Work for you, is the God of all Grace, as you have it in the prequoted place, 1
Pet. 5.10. and he therefore can do it with ease for you: Oh, look to him for
this great Blessing, this high Attainement:

CHAP. XI.
The Unchangeableness of God a sweet Spring of Comfort to his People: Several
consolatory Conclusions thence.

AS God's Unchangeableness calls for much duty from, so it Ministers much sweet
comfort to his poor Church and People: The truth is, there is scarce any such
Spring and Treasury of Comfort as this is; God's Immutability (says one) is
the best Cordial to refresh a fainting Soul. The great Cordial God sent Israel
in their distress, was this; I am that I am, I am an Unchangeable God, Exodus
3.14. and indeed that was enough for them: But more particularly there are
several consolatory Conclusions, which flow from God's Unchangeableableness,
Conclusions which do carry strong consolation in them.

1. God being Unchangeable, his Glory shall live, and in due time shine forth
conspicuously before all; for this see Isa. 42.8. I am the Lord, I am Jehovah,
I am he who was, and is, and is to come, the Unchangeable God; Well, and what
then? Why, My Glory will I not give to another, nor my Praise to Graven Images;
my Glory shall not die but live, my Glory shall not be always veiled and
eclipsed; but it shall shine forth in perfect luster and splendour. One of the
great burdens, that lies upon the People of God, is, the sufferings of his
Name and Glory: The reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me,
(says David) Psalm. 69.9. God's Glory is veiled, his Name is blasphemed, his
Worship is interrupted, his Providence is denied, all his Attributes are
obscured, and his Honor every way thrown in the dust, which makes holy Souls
go mourning from day to day: But, my Beloved, here is that may comfort the
Soul, God is Unchangeable, and therefore his Glory shall live, and shine forth
again; the Veil shall in due time be taken away, and his Glory shall appear;
yea it shall be as eminently illustrated and displayed, as ever it has been
veiled and eclipsed. You know how God speaks in reference to the Glory of his
Name in answer to Christ's Prayer, Joh. 12.28. Father glorify thy Name (says
Christ) and what answer does the Father give him? I have glorified it, and I
will glorify it again; q.d. I have hitherto taken care of my Glory, and I will
take care of it still. O, my Beloved, God's Glory has hitherto been dear to
him, and he has hitherto maintained it in the World, and he is Unchangeable,
and therefore his Glory is as dear to him, as ever it was, he is as jealous for
it, as ever; he is also every way as able to vindicate and maintain it, as ever
he was; and assure your selves, were it not that he knows how to make it shine
forth so much the more illustriously and conspicuously afterward, he would not
suffer it to be so veiled and eclipsed as sometimes he does; yea, let me say,
he is always carrying on, as the interest of his Peoples Happiness, so the
concerns of his own Glory.

2. God being Unchangeable, his Church shall be preserved and delivered,
preserved under, and in due time delivered out of all her troubles and
afflictions; and what a sweet thing is that? The poor Church of God is
oftentimes plunged into very deep and sore distresses, such as are ready to
sink and overwhelm Her; she is oftentimes afflicted, tossed with tempests, and
not comforted, Isa. 45.11. Such indeed is Her condition at this day; and as
good old Ely sat trembling for the Ark of God, a Type of the Church, 1 Samuel
4.13. so it may be some may now sit trembling for the Church of God, fearing
how 'twill go with Her, and indeed he is not one of Sions Children, that is not
concerned for Sions Afflictions. But lo! my Beloved, in the midst of all such
fears and tremblings of heart, here is is strong consolation, God is
Unchangeable, and being Unchangeable, he will certainly support and deliver his
Church, and that in the best way and fittest season: God has never yet sailed
his Church in Her afflictions: yea, it is admirable to consider, how hitherto he
has carried it toward Her under all Her distresses; how sweetly he has
supported Her, and how seasonably he has delivered Her. When they were in
Egypt, in the Iron Furnace when they were in the Wilderness; when they were in
the Red Sea, when they were in Babylon, in Hamans time, and in Herod's; when the
Neck of the whole Church of God was upon the Block at once, as it were; And
also all down along, through the times of Antichristian Tyrany and Persecution
to this very day. O how admirably has God wrought for them, both in supporting,
and delivering of them? and certainly what he has done, that he can and will do
for them again, as the case shall require: God is Unchangeable, His Hand is not
shortened, that he cannot save; nor his Ear grown heavy, that he cannot hear,
Isa. 59.1. God being Unchangeable, he is as tender of, and careful for, his
Church and People, as ever he was; being Unchangeable, he is every way the same
to his People now, as he was formerly; the same in his Love to them, his
Jealousy for them, his Sympathy with them, and his Interest in them; he stands
in the same Covenant Relation to them, that ever he did; he is their King,
their Head, their Husband, their Friend, their Father, their Shepherd now, as
well as heretofore; and he is every way as able to help them, and accordingly
will support, and in due time deliver them, and this Faith sees, and rests
assured of, Isa. 51.9, 10, 11, 12. Awake, awake, put on strength, O Arm of the
Lord; awake, as in the ancients days, in the Generations of old; Art thou not
it that has cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon? Art thou not it which has
dried the Sea, the Waters of the great Deep, that has made the depths of the
Sea a way for the ransomed to past over? etc. So again, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10. But we
had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our
selves, but in God who raises the dead, who delivered us from so great a
death, and does deliver; in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us: Mark,
Faith you see, argues from what God has done, to what he will do for his poor
Church and People; And what bottom or ground has it so to do, but his
Unchangeableness? Let Sion therefore, the Church and People of God take heed of
that language, which she spoke of old, Isa. 49.14. Sion said, the Lord has
forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me: And as Jacob elsewhere, My way is
hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over by my God; for God must
change, e're this can be: True, God may permit his Church to be sorely
afflicted, as at this day; but it is but to illustrate his own Glory the more in
Her support and deliverance.

3. God being Unchangeable, his Enemies shall be destroyed, they shall all die
and perish; I mean his incorrigible, implacable Enemies, who will not stoop to
the Scepter of his Kingdom. God may, and sometimes does permit his and his
Peoples Enemies to practice and prosper, and that for a long time together, he
lets them alone in their sins and oppositions against both himself and them;
yea, he even fills their belly with his hid Treasure, (as you have it) Psalm.
17.14. he lets them enjoy some of the best of outward Comforts and
contentments, and that in great fullness, which oftentimes proves a great
burden and temptation to his poor afflicted People, such as is ready even to
sink and bear them down: So it was with the Psalmist, Psalm. 73. beg. and it is
so many times with us; but Remember that God is Unchangeable, and being
Unchangeable, though he may permit his and his Peoples Enemies to practice and
prosper for a time, yet not always; no, they shall be destroyed, and that with
a great destruction: Pray observe how things issued at last in that very Psalm,
Psalm. 73.10. etc. Surely thou did set them in slippery places, thou castedst
them down into destruction; how are they brought into desolation as in a
moment? they are utterly consumed with terrors, etc. Pray observe, he was not
more offended at, nor was he more ready to envy their prosperity before, than
now he wonders at their ruin and destruction: So Psalm. 37.35. etc. I have seen
the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green bay tree, yet he
passed away, and lo! he was not: yea I sought him, but he could not be found;
the transgressors shall be destroyed together, the end of the wicked shall be
cut off. So Deuteronomy. 32.35, 36. To me belongs vengeance and recompense, (says
God, in reference to his and his Peoples Enemies) their foot shall slide in due
time, for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things which shall come
upon them make have, for the Lord shall judge his People, etc. Still you see,
though God permit his and his Peoples Enemies to prosper for a time, yet at
last they are destroyed, and as sure as God is Unchangeable, they shall be
destroyed. Pray compare but my Text with the verse immediately preceding, Mal.
3.5, 6. I will come near to you to judgment, (says God) and I will be a swift
witness against the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and against false
Swearers, and against all that oppress the Hireling in his Wages, the Widow and
the Fatherless, and that fear not me, says the Lord. q.d. I Will suddenly and
terribly destroy all mine Enemies, all that go on in their sinings against me:
But how shall we be assured of this? He tells you in the next words, for I am
the Lord, I change not, q.d. as sure as I am God and Unchangeable, they shall
be destroyed. O Sirs, though God permits his and his Peoples Enemies to prosper
for a time, yet he always certainly destroys them in the conclusion, and he
will do so still, because he is Unchangeable: God is every way the same that
ever he was, the same in Holiness, Jealousy, Justice, Power, that ever he was;
He is as holy now as ever he was, and so does hate sin as much, as ever he did;
he is as just now, as ever he was, and so as ready and propense to take
vengeance as ever; he is as jealous now, as jealous for his Name, Worship,
Gospel, and People, as ever he was, and so will as little bear with the
opposers and abusers of them; he is as wise and powerful now, as ever, and so
as able to deal with his Enemies: It Is a great Scripture that Job 9.4. He is
wise in heart, and mighty in strength; Who ever hardened himself against him
and prospered. O never any yet did, and never any shall: No, but Psalm. 68.21.
He will wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as
goes on still in his trespasses: Oh that all the Enemies of God and his
People, and all rebellious impenitent ones, would lay this to heart.

4. God being Unchangeable, the purposes and promises of his Grace to his
Church and People shall certainly be accomplished. God's Heart, my Beloved, has
been full of counsels and purposes of Love toward his People from all
eternity, and he has also made many blessed Promises to them, Promises that are
exceeding great and precious, 2 Pet. 1.4. because full of exceeding great and
precious things: Greatness and pretiousness do not often meet together; many
things are great, but then they are not precious; and many things are precious,
but then they are not great; but in the promises of God to his Church and
People, greatness and pretiousness do meet: Now look whatever purposes God has
had in his Heart, and whatever promises he has made in this Word to his People,
they shall all be accomplished, because he is an Unchangeable God, he is the
same now, that he was when he took up those purposes, and made those promises,
and therefore will assuredly make them all good in the due season; and so much
he tells us, Isa. 46.9, 10, 11. I am God, (says he) and there is none else; I
am God, and there is none like me, declaring the end from the beginning, and
from ancient times, the things that are not yet done, saying, My Counsel shall
stand, and I will do all my pleasure; I have spoken, and I Will bring it to pass;
I have purposed it, I also will do it: Mark, first, he asserts his Godhead and
Unchangeableness, and then he tells you all his pleasure shall stand, and be
accomplished. God being Unchangeable (First) None can turn him, or make him
alter his mind; Job 23.13, 14. He is in one mind, and who can turn him? and
what his Soul desiveth even that he does; for he performs the thing that is
appointed for me, etc. The wisest and most resolved among men may possibly be
wrought upon, and brought over from what they purposed; but it is not so with
God. (Secondly) None can hinder him from, or in his making good his purposes
and promises, Isa 43.13. Before the day was, I am he, and there is none that
can deliver out of my hand: I will work, and who shall let it? Poor Soul,
whoever thou art, that art one of the Lord's People, look back to the eternal
counsels and purposes of his Love toward thee, and thou will find them a great
Deep, a Fountain of infinite Sweetness; in them thou will see heaps of Love,
and treasures of Grace; and then turn thine eye to the promises of his
Covenant, which thou will find unexpressibly sweet, and exactly suitable to thy
condition, to all thy wants, and then know assuredly that the whole, both of
the one and the other, shall be accomplished to thee in due season: It Is true
indeed, his Counsels may seem to us to be frustrated, and his Promises may for
a time be deferred, and delayed, in so much that our hasty unbelieving hearts
may be ready to conclude, that they will never be accomplished; saying with the
Psalmist, Does his Promise fail for evermore? Psalm. 77.8. But, Soul, wait a
while, and they shall all be made good to a tittle. Has he promised to pardon
thee, to cleanse thee, to give thee a new Heart, and a new Spirit, to write his
Law in thine Heart? Has he promised to save thee, and lodge thee at last in his
own Bosom? then know it shall all be accomplished: Oh how sweet is this! Oh to
fasten upon a Promise, and see it sure to be made good, as in God's
Unchangeableness we may; there we may see all as sure, as if 'twere already
accomplished. Oh what strong consolation does this afford? what unexpressible
sweetness will this give unto a Soul?

5. God being Unchangeable, the Saints are unchangeably happy, and have a
blessed Assylum to flee unto under all those changes and emergencies, that may
at any time come upon them. Pray mark, my Beloved, God is the Saints God and
Portion: and in him does their happiness lie; He therefore being Unchangeable,
they have an Unchangeable Happiness, they are an happy People, and they will be
unchangeably so. The Counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the Thoughts of his
Heart to all Generations; and what then? Blessed is the Nation whose God is the
Lord, and the People whom he has chosen for his own Inheritance, Psalm. 33.11,
12. The Saints (as one well observes) are in all respects a blessed People,
they are blessed in the pardon of their sins: Blessed is the man whose sins are
forgiven, Psalm. 32.1. They are blessed in regard of the disposition of their
Souls: Blessed are the poor in Spirit, blessed are the Meek, blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, Mat. 5.3, 4, 6. They are blessed in
their Obedience and walking with God: Blessed are the undefiled in the way,
Psalm. 119.1. They are blessed in their hopes and expectations: Blessed are they
that wait for God, Isa. 30.18. Thus they are every way, and in all respects a
blessed People; but here lies the perfection and top-glory of their
blessedness, and what indeed comprehends all the rest in it, namely, that the
Unchangeable God is their God and Portion: Happy is the People whose God is the
Lord, Psalm. 144.15. Oh, this speaks them to be infinitely and unchangeably
happy, and accordingly they should live upon him, and that under all their
streights and difficulties. Oh Sirs, what is there that this will not support
and comfort you under? Do your Friends and Comforts here change? however God
your best Friend and Comfort changes not, and that is enough. Do times and
seasons change, and that for the worse, from sunshine to storms? Well, however
Soul, thy God changes not, and that is enough to sweeten all. Do thou thy
self change? changes and war are upon thee, and which is the worst of it, thy
Spirit changes, it will not keep even with God one hour; well still thy God
changes not, and that is enough. Do new temptations arise, and oldcorruptions
break out a new? Does guilt revive, and recur upon thee? be it so, yet thy God
is Unchangeable, and so can and will relieve and succor thee now as well as
formerly, and that is enough. Yea, do God's dispensations change toward thee?
he did smile, now he frowns; he did lift up, now he casts down; the light of
his Countenance did shine brightly upon thee, now it is veild and clouded: Well,
however, thy God himself changes not; his Heart, his Counsel, his Covenant, his
Love are still the same toward thee that ever they were, howbeit the
dispensation be changed. Oh, this one word, God is Mine, and he is
Unchangeable, has infinite sweetness in it, and it speaks me to be infinitely
and unchangeably happy. Oh you that are the People of God, labor to see and
rejoice in this happiness of yours: Which that you may the better do, let me
add only two short Words to this, and I will shut up the whole Discourse.

1. Consider, that as your God is unchangeable, so you are unchangeably
interested in him. This Unchangeable God is unchangeably your God; what though
God be unchangeable (may some poor Soul say) what will that avail me? my
interest in him I fear will change, and fail, there will shortly be an end of
that; No Soul, the Unchangeable God being indeed thine, he is thine for ever:
so the Church, This God is our God for ever and ever, Psalm. 48.14. O Soul,
thou, through infinite, free, and rich Grace, have a Covenant Interest in and
relation to the Unchangeable God, and this Interest and Relation of thine is a
firm, lasting, and Unchangeable Interest and Relation: Nothing that either Men,
Devils, or Lusts can do, can possibly break or null it: and so he tells us,
Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32. of which we have spoken before. I shall here only add a
saying or two of Austin; The chief good, (says he) which is God, Summum bonum
nec invitis confertur, nec invitis aufertur.
is neither given to such as are unwilling to have him, nor taken away from
such as are unwilling to part with him: and elsewhere, Te nemo umittit nisi qui
dimittit, and qui te demittit, quo it aut quo fugit, nisi a te placito ad te
natum? Aug. Conf. lib. 4. Cap. 9.
No man does or can lose thee, O God, (says he) unless he that is willing to
lose thee and go without thee, and he that willingly parts with thee, whither
does he go? Whither does he flee? but from thee smiling, to thee frowning; from
thee a reconciled Father to thee an angry Judge? O Soul, as long as thou art
willing to have God thine, so long he shall be thine; yea, more, thine interest
in him depends not upon thy willingness of it, but upon his Unchangeable Love
and Covenant; and his Love and Covenant both must change, e're thine interest
in him can fade and change.

2. Consider, as your God is Unchangeable, so after a while you shall
unchangeably enjoy him, and be with him, your Vision and Fruition of him shall
be Unchangeable. Beatitudo electione inchoatur, adeptione impletur.
Our happiness (says Austin) is begun here in Election, but it is perfected
hereafter in Fruition. You that have chosen the Unchangeable God, you shall
after a few days enjoy the God whom you have chosen; your happiness is great
in your choosing of him, but how much more great will it be in your enjoying of
him? Psalm. 73.24, 25. Thou shall guide me by thy Counsels, and afterward
receive me unto glory; whom have I in Heaven but thee; and there is none upon
Earth I desire besides thee, q.d. I have chosen, and I do again choose thee, for
my God and Portion, and some enjoyment I have of thee here, and more I shall
have hereafter in Heaven; I shall e're long be taken to enjoy thee in thy
Glory, fully, immediately, and for ever; for thou art mine, and I have made a
solemn choice of thee. O Saints! the Unchangeable God is yours, and some
communion you have with him here in the ways of his Grace, which is sweet and
happy; but after you have enjoyed him in the ways of his Grace a while here,
you shall be taken to the Unchangeable enjoyment of him in his Glory Above,
which will be infinitely more sweet and happy; your enjoyment of him here is
low and remote, as well as changeable, and unconstant; but your enjoyment of
him Above will be full, close, and Unchangeable: here you have now and then a
gracious visit from him; he visits you in this Duty, and that Ordinance, in
this Mercy, and in that Affliction; but Oh how short many times are those
visits of his? Alas! he is gone again in a moment: but after a while you shall
enjoy him in his Glory, and there you shall not have a short visit now and then
only, but his constant presence for ever: We shall be ever with the Lord, 1
These. 4.17. Oh blessed Souls! there he will unchangeably delight in you,
unchangeably shine upon you, unchangeably communicate himself in his Grace and
Glory to you; Oh how sweet and blessed will this be! Well, for a close of all:
Saints, the Unchangeable God is unchangeably your God, and howbeit your visions
of him be yet but dark, and your communion with him but low; yet wait a while,
and the day will break, and all your shadows shall flee away, you shall change
your ebbing Waters for a full Tide, your Glimmerings and Dawnings for a
noonday, your imperfect beginnings for a full and perfect consummation of
communion with him: Howbeit there be now a Veil upon his Face, that you cannot
behold him; yet wait awhile, and the Veil shall be taken away, and you shall
behold his Face, his Glory for ever; and that so, as to be fully changed into
the Image thereof, and eternally solaced and satisfied therein, suitable to
that word, Psalm. 17.15. (with which I Will close all) As for me I will behold thy
Face in Righteousness; I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness.
Amen.

The True Rest: OR, The Soul's Rest in GOD. Opened and improved, from PSALM.
116.7. Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul.
CHAP. I.
An Introduction to the Words. What that Rest is which David calls upon his
Soul to return unto. The sum of the words, and of our intendment from them,
laid down in one general Position.

IT is the great happiness of the Saints, that howbeit they meet with many sore
troubles and afflictions here in this World; yea, though they meet with little
else but trouble and affliction here, yet there is a Rest to come for them, a
sweet Rest, a blessed Rest, a glorious Rest, a Rest not liable to either decay
or disturbance for ever: So the Apostle tells us Heb, 4.9. There remains a
Rest to the People of God: Nor is this all their happiness; for, not only does
there remain a Rest for them hereafter, but there is also a Rest, a sweet Rest,
a blessed Rest, which they do, or may attain unto here; a Rest even in the
midst of all those troubles, which here they are exposed unto: and blessed be
God for this Rest; Rest is sweet, but Rest in trouble, Rest in the midst of
many and sore troubles; Oh how sweet, how glorious is this! Now this is the
Rest which I would a little contemplate and speak unto, as the proper subject
of these words of the Psalmist, Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul: which words
are David's Call or Command to his Soul, to return unto its Rest: And the only
thing to be enquired into for the clearing of them, and therein for the making
way to what we intend from them, is, what this Rest is which David here calls
upon his Soul to return unto; and I find it expounded two ways.

1. Some expound it of God himself, God in Christ, who indeed is the Rest, as
well as the Refuge of his People: God is centrum quietativum (as the Schools
speak) the proper quieting, ^^l^ing Center of the Soul, and in him alone can it
truly Rest: Thus Vatablus, a learned man, expounds it; Return unto thy Rest, O
my Soul; Redi ad illum apud quem summam invenies tranquillitatem, nempe ad
Deum. Vat.
that is, (says he) Return to him with whom thou will find the most perfect
Rest; to wit, unto God: Indeed with him, and in him alone is perfect Rest to be
found, as in its place may be shown.

2. Others expound it of a quiet, serene, sedate, well-composed frame and
posture of Soul; and thus Calvin and others expound it: Quod interpretes quinam
sub nomine quietis Deum intelligunt, coactum est, potius enim pro tranquillo
and been composito animi statu accipitur. Calv.
that some interpreters (says he) do by Rest here understand God, is strained;
it is rather to be taken for a tranquil and well-composed frame of Soul: and
indeed the scope of the Context looks this way; for mark, David had been in
great affliction, The sorrows of Death had compassed him about, and the pains
of Hell had got hold upon him, as you find verse. 3. and hereupon there had
followed, as is too probable, great perplexity of Spirit within, great
murmurings and tumults, frettings and discomposures in his Soul; And now he
calls off his Soul from those unquiet Motions and Agitations, and commands it
to return to Rest, that is, to a calm, quiet, serene, sedate, and well-composed
frame again. Thus also another judicious Interpreter expounds it; Revertere
etc. q.d. hactenus jactata es sursum and doorsum, inter varios fluctus and
procellas dolorum dubitationis and desperationis, es graviter afflicta, etc.
Mol. in locum.
Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul; as if he should say, O my Soul, hitherto thou
have been tossed up and down, among the Waves and Storms of Sorrows, Doubts
and Desperation; thou have been greatly afflicted and disturbed, when the
sorrows of Death and Hell did press in upon thee; and sometimes such has been
the case with thee, that thou could see no Port, no Haven, in which thou
might Rest; but now these storms being over and gone, and a Port opening it
self to thy Faith, in which thou may Rest, now put in, and return to thy
Rest; now be quiet, and joyful, as knowing where thou ought to Rest. Thus
this Rest is doubly expounded. Now I shall exclude neither of these senses, but
rather join them both together, and by Rest here understand the Souls being at
Rest in God, in whom alone Rest is to be found for Souls: Nor am I alone in so
doing; for I find a learned Man so to understand it; Return unto thy Rest, Redi
anima mea, i.e. we esto amplius perturbata sed conquiescito in Deo. Trem.
O my Soul; that is, (says he) be no longer filled with disquietment and
perturbation, but acquiesce and sit down satisfied in God, thy Rest and Portion
for ever: Accordingly take the sum of the whole, and so of my intendment in
this position;

Doct. That the Souls of the Saints should be at Rest in God, or, the frame and
posture of Soul the Saints should live in, is a frame and posture of Rest in
God.

Whatever the Saints condition may be, or whatever dispensations they may be
exercised withal, yet still their Souls should be at Rest in God: David's Soul
was for a time gone off its Rest, 'twas gone off from that sedateness,
composure, and satisfaction, which it was wont to have in God; his condition
was full of trouble and disturbance, and his Soul was filled with trouble and
disturbance too; but here tacitly at least he rebukes his Soul for this, and
expressly commands it to return to Rest again, to a Rest in God, and that as its
proper posture; for mark how he speaks; Return unto [thy Rest] O my Soul, [thy
Rest] the proper posture of the souls of the Saints is to be at Rest in God,
and that posture they should be in at all times and in all conditions. What the
Souls Rest in God is, what obligations the Saints are under to be thus at Rest
in God, the sweetness and excellency of the frame, with a call to all to live
in this frame and posture; and helps in order thereunto, are the things which
will properly fall under consideration in our procedure on this Argument.

CHAP. II.
What the Soul's Rest in God is, opened; and when the Soul may be said to be at
Rest in Him.

BUt what is it for a Soul to be at Rest in God, or to live in a posture of
Rest in God? In in general, it is for a Soul to sit down satisfied with what God
does as best, and with what God is, as all; and so this Rest of the Soul in God
lies in two things. (First) In a free and cheerful submission to the Divine
Will and Providence. (Secondly) In a full and ample satisfaction in and with
the Divine Presence and Fullness: And Oh the Beauty, the sweetness, the ami
ableness, that both these carry in them! a little of each.

1. It Is to sit down satisfied with what God does as best, and so it lies in a
free and cheerful submission to the Divine Will and Providence, the Will and
Providence of God concerning him: the Soul, through Grace, gets right
apprehensions of God's Will and Providence concerning him; he looks upon the
Will of God to be a Sovereign, a Righteous, a Wise, and a Good Will; and
hereupon he sits down satisfied with it, whatever it does with him, whatever it
allots and orders out concerning him.

1. The Soul looks upon the Will and Providence of God concerning him to be a
Sovereign Will and Providence; a will and Providence which does, which may do
with him whatever it pleases, and so he acquiesces in it. It is the Lord, (said
good old Ely) let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.18. Mark, how he bows
and submits his Soul to the Divine Will and Providence; it is the Lord, it is a
Sovereign God, a God that may do with me and mine whatever he will; and in the
sense of this his Soul freely submits. It was a dreadful and terrible message
which Samuel told him from the Lord; but so dreadful and terrible as it was,
yet having his eye upon the Sovereignty of God, he freely acquiesces. Suitable
whereunto is the Observation of a Learned Man upon this place; Magnam exprimit
patientiam, magnumque cum voluntate divina consensum; non expostulavit cum Deo,
sed humiliter concordavit. Mendoz.
Eli (says he) in these words expresses great patience, and a great consent or
agreement with the Divine Will; he did not expostulate with God, but humbly
complied and comported with him. God, my Beloved, has an absolute Sovereignty
over us all, and may do with us as he pleases: It Is what he challenges to
himself, as his prerogative; All Souls are mine, (says he) Ezekiel. 18.4. mine to
do with them, to dispose of them, as I will: And you know, how God asserts this
his Sovereignty in Jer. 18.6.0 House of Israel, cannot I do with you, as this
Potter (says the Lord) Behold, as the Clay is in the Potters hand, so are ye
in my hand, O House of Israel. Pray mark, he had before, at verse. 4. shown them
how the Potter dealt by the Clay, and what an absolute power he had over it,
making it a Vessel, and marring it again, as he pleased; and now here, in v.6.
says he, Cannot I do with you as this Potter does with his Clay? I can, behold
as the Clay is in the hand of the Potter, so are ye in mine hand; i.e. I have
an absolute power over you, to do with you, and dispose of you, as I see good,
and I may make or mar you upon the Wheel of my Providence, as I please: And you
know how God by the Apostle argues in that greatest of cases, Romans 9.21. Has
not thr Potter power over the Clay, of the same lump to make one Vessel unto
honor, and another unto dishonor? In which words God asserts his absolute
sovereignty to dispose of all men as to their eternal Estates, as he pleases:
Thus he has an absolute Sovereignty over all: Now the Holy Soul apprehending
this Sovereignty in God, falls under the awe and dread of it, and accordingly
acquiesces in his Will, whatever it be.

2. The Soul looks upon the Will and Providence of God concerning him to be an
Holy and Righteous, as well as a Sovereign Will and Providence, and upon that
account also acquiesces therein. The Lord is righteous, (said the Church) Lam.
1.18. The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against his Commandment, q.d.
It Is true, my sorrow is great, and mine affliction heavy; but God is just and
holy in it, it is no more than, nor in truth so much as, my sins have deserved:
Indeed, God's dealings with Her were very terrible and amazing, but yet,
apprehending the Righteousness of God in them, She submits to him under all: So
Dan. 9.7. O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of
Face: They saw the Righteousness of God in his dealings with them, and so were
at Rest in his Will. God is Righteous (the Scrippture tells us) in all his
Ways, and Holy in all his Works, and he is a just Lord that does, that can do,
no wrong, no iniquity, Zeph. 3.5. Now the Holy Soul gets a sight of this, and
is awed with the sense thereof, and accordingly, acquiesces in God's Will: True
(says he) this and that is sharp, it smarts sorely, it runs cross to my carnal
appetite, to my sense and reason; but I am sure God is holy and just in all, I
have deserved all and more at his hands; and in the sense of this he acquiesces
in his Will, and is satisfied with his Dealings.

3. The Soul looks upon the Will and Providence of God concerning him to be a
Wise, as well as an Holy Will and Providence, and thereupon also bows to it,
and acquiesces in it. God, my Beloved, is the only Wise God, and all his Works
are done in Wisdom, his Will is a wise Will, a Will guided and ordered by
Counsel; he works all things according to the Counsel of his own Will, Ephesians.
1.11. God is never out in what he does, but dos all as becomes an only and an
infinitely wise God; which the holy Soul getting a sight and sense of, he
freely acquiesces in whatever the will of God is concerning him, and Rests
fully satisfied with what God does: In Job 1.22. we read that in all this Job
sinned not, neither charged he God foolishly: In all this, that is, in all his
trials and afflictions, though many, though great, ( in all this Job sinned
not, neither charged he God foolishly; or (as you have it in the Margent of
some of your Bibles) he did not attribute folly to God; he sinned not by
attributing of folly to God; but he worshipped and adored the Divine Wisdom,
the Wisdom of God in all his dealings with him; He acquitted God's Providence
of folly, and bowed to the infinite Wisdom thereof, and was satisfied with all
as best for him: All this, says the Holy Soul, is the Work of a Wise Will,
regulated by Counsel; true, all runs cross to my Will and my outward Interest,
but it is all balanced by infinite Wisdom, and I am satisfied therewith: thus
he is at Rest in God.

4. The Soul looks upon the Will and Providence of God concerning him to be a
Good, as well as a Wise Will and Providence, and thus also acquiesces in it.
The Psalmist tells us, that all the Paths of the Lord are Mercy and truth to
such as keep his Covenant and his Testimonies, Psalm. 25.10. By the Paths of the
Lord here we are to understand his Providence; Now (says he) these are all
Mercy and Truth to his People; Not some, but all of them, even the hardest and
severest, the most dark, terrible, and killing of them, they are all Mercy and
Truth, Mercy it self, and Truth it self: whatever the Will and Providence of
God brings forth, yet to his People there is love in all, Goodness in all,
Faithfulness in all, and the Holy Soul, getting a sight hereof, sweetly
acquiesces, and is at Rest in whatever God does; So David, Psalm. 119.75. I
know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are right, and that thou in Faithfulness have
afflicted me. See Hezekiah also, Isa. 39.8. Good (says he to Isaiah) is the
word of the Lord which thou have spoken. 'Twas a sharp and a severe Word or
Message, which God by Isaiah sent him, as you may see in the precedent verses;
but yet he saw goodness in all, and kindness in all, and accordingly acquiesced
therein: Truly there is love and goodness in all God's dealings with his
People, and the Holy Soul seeing it, his language is, whether God fills or
empties, whether he gives or takes away, whether he lifts up or casts down,
whether he kills or makes alive; yet there is love in all, goodness in all, and
it is best for me: God chooses for me, and disposes of me better than I could for
my self, and I am satisfied with what he does. Thus the Soul gets right
apprehensions of the Will and Providence of God concerning him, and hereupon is
sweetly satisfied, and sits down at Rest in God in the midst of all he does to
him or with him. True, God may deal somewhat severely with him, he may break
him with breach upon breach, as he did Job: he may cause all his Waves and his
Billows to pass over him, as he dealt with David; but still the Soul looks upon
all to be Holy, Just, and Good, and no other than what God in his Sovereignty
may do; and so he Rests satisfied therewith, he Rests content in God and his
Will under all, there are no disquietments or perplexities of Spirit, no
distractions or discomposures of Soul; no frettings, no tumults, no murmurings,
no risings of heart against God, or his Will, but there is a sweet calm,
serenity, and Rest in the Soul, he is in a sedate, serene posture in his God;
and this Rest in God the Psalmist speaks of, Psalm. 37.7. Rest in the Lord, and
wait patiently for him; fret not thy self because of him that prospers in the
way: Resting in God is here opposed to fretting, and so must note a quiet,
sedate, wellcomposed Spirit in God.

2. It Is for a Soul to sit down satisfied with what God is, as all, and so it
lies in a full and ample satisfaction, in, and with the Divine presence and
fullness: It Is for a Soul to take up, in, and with the blessed God, as his only
and all-sufficient Portion and happiness for ever. God, my Beloved, is an
All-sufficient God, he asserts his own All Sufficiency, Genesis 17.1. I am God
all-sufficient, (says he to Abraham) q. d. I am infinitely sufficient for my
self, and I am infinitely sufficient for thee and all my People, to make the
one and the other happy for ever. God is an inexhaustible Fountain of Light,
Life, Love, Blessedness, Perfection and Glory; there is all good in God, and he
that has God has all. To him that overcomes will I give to inherit all things:
And how so? I will be his God, Rev. 21.7. He has all good, all happiness in
him, and in him we may find all as in its Fountain-fulness and purity. Now the
Soul, seeing God to be such a God, and withal looking upon him as his God in
Covenant, sits down satisfied with him alone, saying, I have enough, I have
all, and so is at Rest in him, whether he has much or little, any thing or
nothing of this worlds good; whether the streams run high or low with him, yet
here is a a Fountain of infinite sweetness and blessedness, and he drinks
there, and satisfies himself there; he sees the Fountain is so full, that he
needs not the streams to make him happy, and accordingly sits down satisfied
therewith, and is at Rest: Thus David's Soul was at Rest in God, Ps l. 16.5, 6.
the Lord is the portion of mine Inheritance, and of my Cup: Well, and what
then? Why he sits down at Rest in him, the lines (says he) are fallen to me in
pleasant places yea, I have a goodly heritage; I have enough, enough for
delight, and enough for satisfaction; I have as much as my Soul can wish or
desire; so Psalm. 17.15. As for me, I will behold thy Face in Righteousness, I
shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness; in the verse immediately
preceding he had spoken of some whose portion and happiness is in this World;
well, and pray David where and in what is your Portion, your happiness? My
Portion is in God, and my Happiness is in God, (says he) in the sight of God,
and in the likeness of God; let others take up their Rest, Portion and
Happiness where and in what they will, God is my Rest, my Portion, my
Happiness, my All for ever: as for me I will behold, etc. Again, the Lord
lives, (says he) and blessed be my Rock, Psalm. 18.46. q. d. such and such
Comforts are dead and gone, they are not, (as Jacob spoke of his sons) well,
but however God lives still, I have a living God, and he is a living Happiness,
and that is enough. So 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my House be not so with God, yet he
has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure, and
this is all my Salvation, and all my desire, q. d. God is my God by Covenant,
and here is my happiness, even all that my Soul can wish, and accordingly he is
at Rest in his God: And Psalm. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
there is none upon Earth that I desire in comparison of thee: my heart and my
flesh fails, but God is the Rock of my heart, and my Portion for ever. How
dark soever things looked with him, yet he, looking to his God, was satisfied
and at Rest in him, and with him, as infinitely enough for him. The Prophet
Habakkuk resolved upon the same course, Hab. 3.17, 18. Although the Fig Tree
shall not blossom, neither shall Fruit be in the Vines; the labor of the Olive
shall fail, etc. yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salvation: He supposes the worst that could come, and yet still resolves to be
at Rest in God, and that God alone shall be enough for him, when all other
things fail. Thus the holy Soul sits down satissied with God alone, setting
God, and an interest in God, over and against all his Wants, Losses, Burdens,
Difficulties, Temptations, as one infinitely able to relieve and satisfy him
under all; his language to God is, Lord, let others take the Word, and the good
things thereof, give me thy Self, and I have enough; run out to broken Cisterns
who will, let me have a free recourse unto the Fountain, and I am satisfied;
it is true, the Tide of Creature Comforts runs low with me, and on the other
hand, the Waves and Surges of Affliction rise high; but God is all-sufficient,
and I have enough in him; he sees a little of that glorious Fullness, Sweetness
and Blessedness that is in God, and hereupon sings an holy Requiem unto
himself, saying, Soul take thine ease, thou have Goods, Light, Life, Love,
Blessedness, Salvation enough laid up for thee for many days, yea for the
days of Eternity, take thine ease, sit down satisfied in and with thy God
alone; had thou ten thousand Worlds, without him thou had nothing, but in
him thou have all, Rest thou therefore in him. Thus you see what it is for a
Soul to be at Rest in God, and when he may be said to be at Rest in him.

CHAP. III.
The great Obligations the Saints are under, thus to live at Rest in God.
Several of these Obligations insisted on, as the first evidence of the Truth of
our Proposition.

HAving seen what it is for a Soul to be at Rest in God, our next work shall be
to show you what Obligations the Saints are under, thus to live at Rest in him,
and that as an undeniable evidence of the truth of our Position: the Saints are
under mighty Obligations thus to be at Rest in God, I shall insist only on four
which are full of weight, and I beg they may accordingly affect and influence
us.

1. The first Obligation the Saints are under to live at Rest in God, is this,
The blessed God has freely made over himself in his Covenant to them, and that
in all his glorious Riches and Fullness, that in him their Souls might be at
Rest: He has given himself to them, as their Rest and Portion; and is not this
a mighty Obligation in the case? God, my Beloved, in the Covenant of his Love,
has freely given and made over himself to his People in all his Riches and
Fullness, in all his Excellencies and Perfections, to be used, possessed, and
enjoyed by them, as an All-sufficient Rest, Portion and Happiness for ever:
This is evident in the very tenor of the Covenant, and wherever you have a
formal Mention or Record of the Covenant in Scripture, this is put in, I will
be your God: You have three great and solemn mentions of the Covenant in
Scripture, and in all of them this is in: one is Genesis 17.7. another is Jer.
31.33, 34. and the third is Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. In these places you have the
most express Records of the Covenant, God's Covenant with his People, that are
in all the Scripture; and in all there is this, I will be your God. In the two
later places we have other Promises, Promises of Pardon, cleansing, Teaching,
and the like; but in that to Abraham, in Genesis, we have only this, I Will be
thy God; for indeed this comprehends all the rest, and all the other Promises,
that are contained in the Covenant of God, are but branches growing out of this
Root, and do but open this to us: this (as one speaks) is Caput Faederis, the
Head or Top of the Covenant; Anima Faederis (as another) the Soul of the
Covenant; Substantia Foederis (as another) the Life and Substance of the
Covenant: And indeed when God says to a Soul, I Will be thy God, he does therein
say, I Will Pardon thee, I Will cleanse thee, I Will teach thee, I Will save thee, I Will
make thee happy for ever: For God to be our God, is for God to be and
communicate all good to us, that a God can communicate, and Creatures receive;
it is for God to love us, to bless us, to care for us, to make us happy for
ever; it is for God, to give us eternal Life, to be a Friend, a Father, an
Husband, and a Savior to us. It Is (as Luther somewhere expounds it) for God to
make over himself in all his Excellencies, Perfections, and Glory; his Wisdom,
Power, Goodness, Faithfulness, All Sufficiency, Unchangeableness and Eternity
to his People, as their Rest and Happiness, to be possessed, and enjoyed by them
for their good for ever. In a word, for God to say to a poor Creature, I will
be thy God, is as much as if he should say, look, whatever I am that I will be
to thee; and look, whatever I can do, that I will do for thee, so far as thou
art capable of the one or thee other, to make the happy for ever: I am a
Fountain of Life, and such will I be to thee; I am a God of Peace and Pardon,
and such will I be to thee; I am a God of Grace and Love, yea, I am a God that
is Love it self, and such I will be to thee; I am the Father of Mercies, and
the God of all Grace, and such will I be to thee; I Will beget new Mercies for
thee every day: I am a God of Comfort, yea, of all Comfort, and such will I be
to thee; I am an Unchangeable, Eternal, All-sufficient God, and such will I be
to thee. I can pardon guilty Souls, break the hardest Hearts, inlighten the
darkest Minds, cleanse the impurest Spirits; I can make unbelieving Hearts,
believing; I can support drooping Spirits, and all this I Will do for thee: I can
carry thee through Life and Death, and bring thee safe to Heaven, and there
communicate my self to thee for ever, to the filling of thy Soul with delight
and satisfaction, and this I will do for thee; and surely happy is the Soul,
that has thus the Lord for his God, and well may he sit down satisfied with
him, and at Rest in him. Now, my Beloved, has God made over himself in his
Covenant to his People, as their Rest, that in him they might find Rest, and
should they not be at Rest in him? O sirs, Is not God enough for us? has he
laid himself under bonds to us, to be a God to us, and to do like a God for us?
and should we not Rest in him, and satisfy our selves with him alone? Surely
we should.

2. The Second Obligation the Saints are under to live at in God, is this; They
have solemnly voucht and chosen, and often do vouch and choose God to be their
Rest and Happiness. As God has freely made over himself in his Covenant to
them, so they have solemnly vouch't and chosen him, and often do solemnly vouch
and choose him, to be their Rest and Happiness. When the Saints first enter into
Covenant with God, then do they solemnly choose and vouch him ^o be their God
and Portion, their rest and happiness: their language to God then is, Lord,
thou shall be my Lord, my Rest, my Portion, my Happiness, my all for ever; I
will have none in Heaven, or on Earth, but thy self. Thus David had chosen God,
and he puts his Soul in mind of it, Psalm. 16.2. O, my Soul, (says he) thou
have said unto God, thou art my Lord; thou have chosen God for thy God, thy
Portion, thy Happiness; and upon this account he calls his Soul to Rest in God,
and in him he Rests, verse. 5.6. And as at their first entering into Covenant
with God, so also often afterward, upon several occasions, do they choose and
vouch God for their Rest, Portion, and Happiness for ever; they make new
choices of God, and do lay new claims to him as theirs, in their procedure of
their walking with him. -- Sometimes upon occasion of outward troubles and
afflictions, difficulties and distresses, they make a new choice of God, and
vouch him afresh for their Rest and Happiness: So David, Psalm. 31.14. I trusted
in thee, O Lord, I said, thou art my God: here he makes a new choice of God,
and lays a new claim to him as his; and when, or upon what occasion was this?
When he was surrounded with outward troubles, as appears. v. 10.11, 12, 13. My
life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing; I was a reproach among all
mine Enemies, I am forgotten, as a dead man out of minds I have heard the
slander of many, fear was on every side, they devised to take away my life; and
being thus distressed, he flees to God, and chooses him afresh, and lays a fresh
claim to him: So again, Psalm. 142.4, 5. I looked on my right hand, and beheld,
but there was no man that would know me, resuge failed me, no man cared for my
Soul: Well, and what then? Why, he runs to God, and vouches him afresh for his:
I cried unto thee, O Lord, I said, thou art my refuge, and my portion in the
Land of the living: So the Church, in Her great troubles and afflictions, does
in like manner: the Lord is my Portion (says She) Lam. 3.24. -- Sometimes upon
occasion of some eminent mercy or deliverance wrought by God for them, they do
make a new choice of God, and vouch him afresh to be theirs: so those, Exodus
15.2. The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my Salvation: He is my
God, and I will prepare him an Habitation; my Fathers God, and I will exult
him: He wrought a signal deliverance for them, he had carried them through the
Red Sea, delivered them from Pharaoh and the Egyptians, whom he drowned for
their sakes, and now they sing a song of praise to God, and vouch him to be
their God, they renew Covenant with God, and so their choice of him, as their
Rest, their Portion, their All for ever. Thus the Church does, Psalm. 48.14.
This God is our God for ever, and ever, he will be our God and guide even unto
Death: God had done great things for Her, and hereupon she vouches him afresh
for hers. David often does the like, -- sometimes again upon occasion of some
fresh discoveries made of God in his love and beauty to them, or their being
taken into some near and intimate communion with him, then they choose him
afresh, and vouch him to be theirs afresh: So Psalm. 73.25, 26. the Psalmist,
whoever he was, did; Whom have I in Heaven but thee? (says he to God) and
there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee; thou art the Rock of my
Heart, and my Portion for ever: Here is a new choice of God made by this holy
Man; and upon what occasion was it? Why, he had been with God in his Sanctuary,
that is, he had been conversing with God in his Word and Ordinances, he had had
some new displayes and discoveries of his Love, Beauty and Excellency made to
him; and hereupon he chooses God afresh and vouches him to be his All, both in
Heaven and upon Earth. So, you know, when the Spouse had been led into the
Banqueting House by Christ, and had had the Banner of his Love displayed over
Her; when She had been feasted by him in his House of Wine, then She made a new
choice of Christ, and vouches him for hers afresh: My Beloved is mine, and I am
his, Cant. 2.6. Thus the Saints, both at first, and also often afterward in
their walking with God, have chosen, and do choose him to (...) their God and
Portion, their Rest and Happiness, and should they not then Rest in him^ Surely
this choice of theirs calls aloud, and should be a mighty Obligation upon them,
to live at Rest in God for ever.

3. The third Obligation the Saints are under to live at Rest in God is this,
God is at Rest in them: as the Saints have chosen God for their Rest, so God
has chosen them for his Rest, and his Soul is at Rest in them: Psalm. 132.13,
14 The Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired it for his Habitation; this is my
Rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it. Zion here is a Type of
the Church and People of God, and as such God's Soul is at Rest in Her; This is
my Rest: The Saints are, and to eternity will be, a delight and solace to the
Soul of God; God is indeed delighted, and at Rest in his People, above all the
works of his hands; Hence the Church is called The delight of God, Isa. 62.4.
Hence also he is said to rejoice over them with joy, to rest in his love upon
them, and to joy over them with singing, Zeph. 3.18. God is in some sort more
delighted and at Rest in his People, than in the Angels themselves; and indeed
he sees a greater beauty and glory upon them, than upon the Angels; he looks
upon the Angels, as standing in their own Beauty, their own Holiness and
Righteousness only; but he looks upon his Saints, as standing in, and clothed
with the Beauty and Righteousness of Christ, and that is much more glorious
than the Angels: The Beauty and Righteousness of the Angels, is the Beauty and
Righteousness but of Creatures; but the Beauty and Righteousness of the Saints,
is the Beauty and Righteousness of him, that is God-man, God as well as Man,
Romans 1.17. and on this account, God's Soul is more at Rest in them, God is
chiefly delighted, and at Rest in himself, and the perfections of his own
being; next to himself, his Soul is delighted and at rest in Christ, as
Mediator: Behold mine Elect, in whom my Soul delights (says the Father of
him) Isa. 42.1. and next to Christ the Mediator, his Soul is at Rest in his
Saints and People in and through Christ; he looks upon them not as they are in
themselves, but as they are in Christ; not as aapart from Christ, but as made
one with Christ, and so as shining in his Beauty, and clothed with his
Righteousness as participating in all his Amiablenesses; he looks upon them,
not so much according to what they are at present, as according to what they
are in the Counsels of his own love, and what he intends to make them, and so
they are all glorious, both within and without; and accordingly he is delighted
in them. Now is God's Soul at Rest in them? and should not their Souls be at
Rest in him? O what a mighty Obligation is this upon them alwaycs to be at Rest
in God!

4. The fourth Obligation the Saints are under to live at Rest in God is this;
They hope to, and assuredly shall live at Rest in God, and with God for ever in
Heaven: Heaven is a state of Rest; so the Apostle represents it; their
remains a Rest to the People of God, Heb. 4.9. it is a state of Rest in God,
and with God, and in this Rest the Saints hope to live, and live for ever:
Hence they are said to have this Hope: every one that has this Hope, 1 John
3.3. this Hope, that is, the Hope of seeing Christ, and being made like him in
the other World, the Hope of Heaven the eternal Rest: Saints then are persons
that have this Hope, hence also Heaven, and the Rest to come, is called Hope,
the Hope which is laid up for you, Spem hic posuit pro rc sperata, nam spes in
animis nostris, est gloria quam speramus in Caelis. Calv. in Loc.
Col. 1.5. and the blessed Hope, looking for the blessed Hope, Tit. 2.13. In
both these places Heaven, and the coming Rest, is called Hope; For Hope here
(as Calvin and others observe) is put for the Object of Hope, or the Good hoped
for: But why is it called Hope? For this, among other Reasons; because it is the
great Object of the Saints Hopes; it is what they hope, and look, and long for:
And as they hope to, so assuredly they shall live at Rest in God, and with God
for ever; it is what remains to them, and they shall, in due time, attain unto
it: Hence it is said to be laid up for them in Heaven, in that prequoted place
Col. 1.5. which (as Calvin also observes) notes the certainty of it, and of
their enjoying of it; it is what they cannot miss of, Quum dieit spem nobis
repositam esse in Caelo, significat perinde certos debere esse fideles de
promissione aeternae foelicitatis, etc. Calv.
when the Apostle speaks of an Hope laid up in Heaven for us, he signifies to
us, that the Saints ought therefore to Rest sure and certain of the Promise of
eternal Life, as if they had a treasure already bid, and laid up in a most safe
place. Now do the Saints hope to, and accordingly shall they live at Rest in
God, and with God for ever; and should they not be at Rest in God here? Surely
this is a mighty Obligation upon them to be always at Rest in him. Thus you
have seen some of those Obligations the Saints lie under to live at Rest in
God, which though but some of them, yet are sufficient to evince the truth of
our Position, namely that they should always be at Rest in him.

CHAP. IV.
The Truth asserted, further evidenced from the excellency of this frame of
Soul; the worth and excellency whereof is discovered in several particulars.

AS the Saints are under many great and weighty Obligations to be always at
Rest in God, so to be always at Rest in God is a choice and an excellent frame
and posture of Soul for the Saints to live in; it is indeed the best and most
becoming frame of Soul, they can possibly be found in this World, which may
give further evidence to our Assertion: Now I shall show you a little of the
worth and excellency of this frame and posture of Soul in a few
Sripture-Propositions about it.

1. To be at Rest in God is a very gracious frame and posture of Soul, a frame
and posture of Soul which carries much of the life and power of Grace and
Godliness in it: and O what an excellent frame and posture must this then be?
the more of the life and power of Grace and Godliness any frame or posture of
Soul carries in it, the more excellent it is; now there is no frame or posture
of Soul, that I know of, which carryes-more of the life and power of Grace and
Godliness in it, than this of being at Rest in God does: Herein indeed does the
main; if not the whole, of the life and power of Grace and Godliness consist;
for pray, what is Grace and Godliness, and wherein does it consist, but in an
holy subjection to, and acquiescence in the Blesed God? To bow and submit to
God, as our Lord, and to choose and acquiesce in God, as our Happiness, this is
Grace, this is Godliness; both which I take to be comprehended in Psalm. 6.2.
where David puts his Soul in mind, that he had both given up himself to God,
and also chosen him for his Happiness, saying, O my Soul, thou have said unto
the Lord, thou art my Lord, my Ruler, my Happiness: This, my Beloved, is Grace,
or Godliness; and the more of this there is found in us, the more gracious we
are; and what is this, but to be at Rest in God, as we have opened it? A
restless and unquiet Spirit argues much of the power of fin, and shows that
Grace has gotten but little, if any, dominion in the Soul; and therefore it is
made both the Character and the Judgment of wicked men, that they cannot Rest:
The wicked (says the prophet) are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot Rest,
whose Waters cast up mire and dirt, there is no peace to the wicked, Isa.
57.20, 21. It Is meant of their own inward unquietness, anrestlessness of
Spirit: Calvin hereby understands perpetuas animae exagitationes atque
perturbationes, perpetual tossings and perturbations of mind; and he speaks (I
remember) thus: This Similitude of a Sea, Elegans est ista maris similitudo,
and aptissima ad explicandam inquietudinem impiorum; nam in seipso
turbaturmare, tametsi a vento non impellitur, etc. eodem modo impii turbantur
intestino malo, quod in ipsorum animis defixum est.
is an elegant Similitude, and most apt to set forth the inquietude of wicked
men; for (says he) the Sea is troubled in it self, though it be not driven by
Winds, nor tossed with Storms and Tempests, but its own Waves fight own with
another, and break one another; in like manner, wicked men are troubled with
intestine evil, which is fixed and rooted in their own minds. Thus a restless
unquiet Spirit argues much of the power of sin in the Soul, and shows that
Grace has gotten but little, if any Dominion there: So on the other hand, a
Spirit at Rest in God must carry much of the life and power of Grace and
Godliness in it. This indeed is a great part of the Kingdom of God; for the
Kingdom of God (the Apostle tells us) consists not in Meats and Drinks, but in
Righteousness, in Peace, and in the Joys of the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. In
Peace, that is, (as a learned Man expounds it,) in an holy Rest and quiet of
Soul in God.

2. To be at Rest in God, is a ready frame and posture of Soul; a frame and
posture of Soul, which renders a man ready and prepared for every Call of God
to him; and must not that be an excellent frame? God, my Beloved, may call us
to what he pleases, to what services he pleases, and to what conditions he
pleases; he may call us to what services he pleases; besides the general duties
of Christianity which are incumbent upon all, he may call us to what special
work and services he pleases; he may call us to do, and he may call us to
suffer, and it is a blessed thing to be fitted and prepared for the Call of God;
and who more so, than he that lives at Rest in him? Alas, to such an one no
Work, no Duty, no Service is unseasonable; such an one is fit to Pray, and fit
to Praise; fit to Hear, and fit to Meditate; fit to search his own Heart, and
fit to enquire into the Counsels of God; he is fit to do, and fit to suffer the
Will of God: My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed; or (as you have it
the margin of some of your Bibles) my heart is prepared, O God, my heart is
prepared, Psalm. 57.7. If you look back upon the first verse, you will find his
Soul sweetly at Rest in God; For (says he) O God my Soul trusts in thee, in
the shadow of, thy wings will I make my refuge; and being thus at Rest in God,
his heart is prepared: It Is in a ready posture for duty and service; O, it is
the restlesness and discomposure of our hearts, that unfits and indisposes us
for our Work and Duty. When the Israelites were filled with anguish of Spirit,
they could not hear Moses, Exodus 6.9. and when Jonah his Spirit was off its
Rest, though he were an eminent Prophet of God, he could not pray but very
peevishly and unbecomingly, Jon. 4.2.3. A restless Spirit is unfit for the
ordinary duties of Christianity: But now take a Soul that is indeed at Rest in
God, and he is fit not only for the general Dutys of Christianity, such as
Prayer, Hearing, or the like; but even for whatever Work or Duty God shall call
him out unto, though never so difficult, or never so mean: Such an one may in
his place and station say, as, I Remember, one brings in David speaking to God,
Lord (says he) if thou will make me a Shepherd to keep Sheep, or if thou will
make me a King to govern thy People; behold, mine heart is prepared, I am in a
ready posture for the one or the other. Oh, what a sweet frame is this? God may
also call us to what Condition he pleases, to a Condition of Fullness, or of
Want, of Prosperity, or Affliction, and the like; now whatever Condition he
calls to, the Soul that is at Rest in him, is ready for it. Does God call him
to sufferings, to take up and bear the Cross? He is ready for this Call of God,
for he can rejoice, yea, glory in the Cross, Romans 5.3. He can sing in a Prison,
as Paul and Sylas did, Act. 16.25. Does God call him to Fullness? He knows how
to abound; Does God call him to Wants? He knows how to be abased: as Paul did,
Phil. 4, 12. Does God call him to Mourning? he is ready for it; for he, and
indeed he alone knows how to weep as if he wept not: Does God call him to
rejoicing? He is ready for it; for he, and he alone can rejoice as if he
rejoiced not, which is the fittest posture and carriage for each condition, 1
Cor. 7.30. In a word, he is fit to live, and fit to die; and let me tell you,
that is a great Word, yet a true one, he is fit to die, ready in a good measure
for another World; It Is a great thing to die, and it is a great attainment to be
ready to die; and that that Soul is, that is at Rest in God. I scarce know a
more desirable frame, and posture to die in than this, of being at Rest in God:
Now if it be a frame of Soul which thus renders a man ready for every Call of
God to him, surely it must then be an excellent frame.

3. To live at Rest in God, is a safe frame and posture of Soul; a frame and
posture of Soul, that secures a man against danger; and therefore an excellent
frame. There is no Soul in the World so secure from danger, as he that is at
Rest in God, such an one is set aloft, (as you have it) Prove. 18.10. The Name
of the Lord is a strong Tower the Righteous flee thereunto, (...) Significat
exaltare and in tuto collocare. Gejer.
and are safe; or (as the word is) are set aloft, set aloft above the reach of
danger: They flee to the Name, to the Nature, to the Attributes of God; they
retire there, and Rest there, and are secured against danger: This is what
guards and fences the Soul, and that against his grand enemy, the Devil: It Is a
great and sweet Scripture, that Phil. 4.7. The Peace of God, which passes all
understanding, shall keep, (...), shall guard or garrison your Hearts and Minds
through Christ Jesus; it shall fence and fortify you against temptation; and
indeed no Soul so fenced and fortified against temptation, as he that lives at
Rest in God: Those temptations, which wound others, and lead them captive into
sin, cannot fasten upon him: A true Rest in God is a kind of lifeguard to the
Soul, and no guard like it in the World; it keeps temptation from entering in,
and it keeps corruption from breaking out. It Is a sweet exposition which one
gives of that place, Pax Dei, i. e. illa tranquillitas animi fidelibus a Deo
conceditur, quasi militari praefidio custodiet ipsorum corda adversus Satanae
and Mundi tentationes, and mentes ipsorum stabiles in Christo conservet. Dix.
in loc.
the Peace of God shall keep your Hearts and Minds, that is (says he) that
Rest and Tranquillity of Soul which the faithful have in God, shall preserve
their hearts as with a military guard and power, against the temptations of
Satan and the World, and it shall keep their minds stable in Christ. And to the
same purpose also Calvin upon the place, The Peace of God (says he) shall keep
you, lest by wicked thoughts or desires you should revolt from God. O, my
Beloved, there is scarce any thing gives the Devil and his Temptations greater
advantage against us, than a disturbed, restless, discomposed Spirit: So much
is evident from Ephesians. 4.26, 27. Be ye angry, and sin not, let not the sun go
down upon your wrath, neither give place unto the Devil. Where is clearly
intimated, that by an unquiet disturbed Spirit we give place unto the Devil,
and their is scarce any thing on the other hand, that so fences and fortifies
the Soul against Satan and his Temptations, as an holy Rest of Soul in God. The
Saints in Heaven are out of all danger, either of sin or temptation; and why
so? Truly for this reason among others because there they are perfectly at Rest
in God, they find that perfect solace and satisfaction in God, that they cannot
possibly admit of sin; nor have they the least tendency to turn aside to any
thing else. What shall I say? A Soul that is off his Rest, is off his Watch;
and being off his Watch, he is in the mouth of danger; whereas it is quite
otherwise with a Soul at Rest in God.

4. To live at Rest in God is a very comfortable frame and posture of Soul, a
frame and posture of Soul, which is attended with much Spiritual Comfort and
Communion with God; which also speaks the excellency of it. A Soul, living at
Rest in God has usually the fullest Comforts, and the sweetest Communion with
God of any on this side Heaven: The truth is, the thing it self carrys
unexpressible sweetness in it; besides God's delight to manifest himself to
those that live in the exercise of it. God (you know) was in the still voice,
and there the Prophet found Him: Deus ubique presens est, sed non in vento se
patefeeit. Mart.
He was not in the great and strong Wind, He was not in the Earthquake, He was
not in the Fire; But he was in the still Voice, 1 King. 19.11, 12. The good
Prophet had been off his Rest in God, he had been in a passion, and under great
discomposure of Spirit, as you may see verse. 4; and now God gives him this
vision of the Wind, the Earthquake, and the Fire, to let him see, that that
was not the way to Communion with him; Admonetur Eiias ut sibi ab ira caveat ad
quam natura suapte ferebatur. Groti. in loc.
and so to caution him against passion, and all discom posure of Spirit, which
he was naturally very prone unto. O, God loves to dwell in, and meet with a
sedate, serene, composed Spirit, a Spirit composed and at Rest in himself; and
those that are so, are the Souls who usually have the clearest sights, the
sweetest tastes, and the fullest communications of love from him of all others;
those are they, who have the most close and constant communion with him, who
are most in his Bosom, and the embraces of his everlasting arms, who have most
of his Spirit, his Presence, his Consolations given to them: Acquaint thy self
with God, and be at peace, so shall good come unto thee, Sedatiore animo esto.
Beza in locum.
Job. 22.21. be at peace, Animum quietum habe, nec per impatientiam eum turbes.
Scult.
to wit, in thine own Spirit, be of a sedate mind, do not rave, do not rage, do
not distemper and discompose thy self, as thou have done; Acquiesce in
castigationibus Dei, satis repugnasti, satis proterveque reluctat us es, ergo
mitesce. etc.
but be quiet and sedate in thine own Soul: Well, but what shall I gain by it?
Why, Thereby good shall come unto thee? And what Good? Not only outward,
temporal Good, but also Spiritual Good, the Good of Grace, the Good of divine
Consolations, the Good of Communion with God, and the special manifestations of
his Love. O, the more a Man's Soul is at Rest in God, the more full will his
Comforts, and the more intimate will his Communion with God be: As for a
restless, disturbed Spirit, it is so like the Devil (as by and by you will hear)
that God cannot tell how to be much with it, nor yet to do much in a way of
special Grace and Spiritual Comfort for it. Christians complain many times,
that they have but little Communion with God, but little experience of his Love
and presence with them; and one reason, among others, why they have cause so to
complain is, because they are no more at Rest in God: were they more at Rest in
him, he would Rest more in his Love, his Grace, his Presence with, and upon
them.

5. To live at Rest in God, is a God-like Frame and Posture of Soul, which
greatly resembles God, and is suitable to Him, and which brings us up into the
very Life and Blessedness of God himself; and what a choice frame must it then
needs be? the more likeness and resemblance any thing carries in it to God; and
the more any thing brings us into the Life and Blessedness of God, the more
excellent it is; now, there is nothing does more resemble God, or is more
suitable to him; nothing that brings us more up into the life and likeness of
God, than to be thus at Rest in him in our own Souls: This indeed is the very
Life and Perfection of God, the posture (if I may so speak) which God himself
lives in; for he is ever at Rest in himself, he is infinitely well-pleased with
what he himself does, and Rests infinitely satisfied with his own Fullness and
Excellencies: God is his own Rest, his own Center; God is infinitely delighted
with his own Will, and infinitely satisfied with his own Fullness, and so is at
Rest in himself, which indeed is his blessedness: Accordingly the more our
Souls are at Rest in him, the more do we resemble him, and are brought into his
Life and his Blessedness. A restless unquiet Spirit does above all things
resemble the Devil, and is suitable to the Devil; it is indeed the very life,
image, and spirit of the Devil, for the Devil is a restless, unquiet Spirit,
always acting in opposition to God, and always fretting at the Dispensations of
God: He seeks Rest, but finds none, Mat. 12.43. As wicked ones cannot Rest, so
neither can the wicked one Rest, but is perpetually disturbed: Now as a
restless, unquiet Spirit resembles the Devil, and is the very Life and Image of
the Devil, so to be at Rest in God is what resembles God, and is the very Life
of God in the Soul; it is what brings us up int the Divine Life, the Divine
Blessedness; and O what an excellent frame must this be?

6. To live at Rest in God, is a God-honouring frame and posture of Soul, a
frame of Soul that does much honor God, and give Glory to Him; and therefore
must have much worth and excellency in it. Of all Frames, as well as Actions,
that is the best, that does honor and glorify God most, and what frame of
Soul does more honor and glorify God than this of being at Rest in him? This
gives to God the glory of his Sovereignty, and the glory of his Sufficiency,
two of the brightest Jewels in the Crown of Heaven: it owns and acknowledges
God to be both best and greatest, the highest Lord, and the chiefest Good, and
so it glorisies God as God, it sets him up as God in the Soul, and gives him
the honor due unto his Name, as such. Restless, disturbed, unquiet Spirits do
darken and obscure the Glory of God, they are Censores Divinitatis (as one of
the Ancients speaks of them) they censure the Blessed God, and do in effect
deny and disown the Sovereignty of God, the Wisdom of God, the Goodness, the
Faithfulness of God, the Fullness, Sufficiency, and Perfection of the Holy One;
they do in effect say that God's Will is not a Good, a Wise, and an Holy Will,
that there is not enough in God to satisfy Souls, and make them happy; and O
what an affront and dishonor is this to the Majesty of Heaven? But now the
Soul that is indeed at Rest in God, he gives him the Glory of all, he sets the
Crown where it ought to be; and Oh how much does this speak out the worth and
excellency of this frame of Soul?

7. To live at Rest in God, is an honored and highly esteemed Frame and
Posture of Soul, and that by God himself, a frame and posture of Soul which God
has a great honor for, and puts a great value upon; which also speaks the
excellency of it: there is scarce any frame of Soul that God more values,
honors and delights in, than this of an Holy Rest in Himself: this is in the
sight of God of great price: Put on the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit,
which in the sight of God is of great price: 1 Pet. 3.4. In the sight of men,
at least unholy and unspiritual Men, it is of little price, of no price, they
despise and contemn it; but God has other thoughts, and other values of it, he
highly esteems and honors it, he looks on it as one of the choicest Ornaments,
as one of the highest excellencies of any Soul; Now certainly that is best,
which God values and honors most: As that which honors God most, so that
which God most honors, must have most of true worth and excellency in it. A
restless, unquiet Spirit on the one hand, or a Spirit at Rest in the Creature
on the other hand, is what God abhors and despises; but a Spirit at Rest in
himself he highly values.

8. To live at Rest in God is a heavenly Frame and Posture of Soul, a frame and
posture of Soul which carries much of Heaven in it; it is indeed in a great
measure the Life of Heaven here on Earth; and what then more excellent than
this? Pray, my Beloved, what is Heaven, and the Life of Heaven, the Life which
the Saints and Angels live in Heaven? Heaven is a state of Rest, Heb. 4.9. and
what is that Rest? True, there is an external Rest, there is a Rest from Labor
and Trouble, from Conflict and Temptation; but the main of it is the inward
Rest of the Soul, that Rest and Complacency which the Soul injoys in God, and
shall enjoy in him, and with him for ever: there the Soul is filled with God,
he is perfectly swallowed up in the Divine Will being thoroughly conformed
thereunto, and he has the perfect Vision and Frnition of the Divine Glory and
Fullness, seeing him as he is, 1 John 3.2. And in both these he is filled with
even an infinite content and satisfaction of Heart, this is the True Rest of
Heaven: and what is the Life which the Saints and Angels live there? It Is a
Life of Perfect Rest and Solace in God, such Rest and Solace in God, as that
they never think of going out to any thing else whatever. God is all in all to
them, 1 Cor. 15.28. Thus to be at Rest in God is an heavenly frame and posture
of Soul; and O what an excellent frame must this be? Well then, lay all these
eight Things together, and you shall find an incomparable Worth and Excellency
in it, which is a further evidence of the Saints Duty and Interest to live
therein.

CHAP. V.
The Truth particularly improved. The Saints called upon to live thus at Rest
in God. Arguments urged to induce them so to do.

WHat it is for the Soul to be at Rest in God, what Obligations the Saints are
under to live at Rest in him, the excellency of this frame and posture of
Spirit, you have seen laid open before you; Now what shall we say to these
things? O, that all who profess themselves to be Saints, or would be accounted
so, would give all diligence, always to live thus at Rest in God. Possibly some
of us are quite off our Center, our Souls are full of storms and tempests,
tossings and tumblings, they are not only cast down, but also disquieted within
us, (as holy David's sometimes was) Psalm. 42.11. Others of us perhaps are at
Rest, but it is a sinful Rest, at Rest in the Creature, and not in God; at Rest
in carnal, sensible things; we are of those who are at ease in Zion; yea,
perhaps we are even singing that mad Requiem to our Souls, that that fool
sometimes did, Luke 12.19. Soul take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry, thou
have Goods laid up for thee for many years: But now this truth, and the things
declared about it do call upon the one and the other of us to return to God, as
our Rest, and to center purely and entirely in him alone: This Truth calls off
the one from all those unquiet Motions and Agitations that are within us, from
all our tossings and tumblings, to an holy Calm and Quiet of heart in God; and
it calls off the other from all our false Rests and Reposes, to an holy Rest
and Repose in God; and Oh that both the one and the other would hear and obey
this Call, taking up our Rest in God alone. O, my Beloved! are you under such
obligations to live at Rest in God, as you are? and yet will you not live at
Rest in him? On the other hand, Is the frame and posture of Soul so excellent?
and will you neglect it, and not study to be found always therein? Let me
recapitulate a little particularly: Has God freely made over himself in all his
Fullness and Riches, in his Covenant to you, as your Rest and Portion for ever,
and yet will you not live at Rest in him? Have you chosen God, and voucht him
for your God and Portion, and yet will you not live at Rest in him? Is God so
much (as you have heard) at Rest in you, and yet will you not live at Rest in
him? Shall you, and do you hope to live at Rest in God, and with God, for ever
in Heaven, and yet will you not live at Rest in him here? O me thinks these
things should constrain you. On the other hand, should not the excellency of
the frame alure you? would you live forth much of the life and power of Grace?
then live at Rest in God. Would you be ready for every call of God to you,
whether to do or to suffer, to live or to die? then live at Rest in God. Would
you be fenced and fortified against Temptation? then live at Rest in God. Would
you enjoy much Spiritual Comfort and Communion with God? then live at Rest in
God. Would you be like God? Would you resemble God, and grow up into his Life
and Blessedness? then live at Rest in God. Would you honor God? you have
greatly dishonored him; Would you now honor him? then live at Rest in him.
Would you live in Heaven, and begin the Life of Heaven here on Earth? then live
at Rest in God. O why should we think of any other Rest but God? or why should
we live in any other posture of Soul but this, of a Rest in him? is there any
so sweet, so amiable, so becoming, as this? Oh let us labor, as near as
possible, always to be found in this posture. Blessed be God, that we may Rest
in him: Two things we should bless God for; one is, that there is a Rest
remaining for us in the other World, whether we find Rest here or no; yet there
is a Rest to come, a blessed Rest, Heb. 4.9. The other is, that there is a Rest
in God for us, and that we may enter into, and live in that Rest even here;
when there is no Rest to be had in this Worlds Enjoyments, no Rest in or from
the Creature; yet then there is a Rest to be had in God, and from God, We that
have believed, do enter into Rest, Heb. 4.3. there is a Rest in God, in the
Will, the Presence, the Love, the Fullness of God, which we do, or may enter
into, even here in this World; and blessed be God for this Rest, and this is
the Rest which I am now calling you into. And yet a little further to set home
the Call upon you, consider a few things.

1. Consider what a sad and dismal thing it is for a Soul to Rest in any thing
but God alone. A Rest, one or another, the Soul will have: if God be not its
Rest, it will be taking up a Rest elsewhere: Now, it is a sad and woeful thing
for a Soul to Rest any where but in God alone. Woe to them that are at ease in
Zion, (says the Prophet) Amos 6.1. Woe to them that are quiet and at Rest in
Zion; that is to say, that are at Rest in carnal sensual things in Zion; so the
Prophet afterward explains himself; Woe to them that are at Rest in the
Creatures, that take up their solace and satisfaction in Carnal Contentments,
and not in God. To take up our Rest in the Creatures, and not in God, is for us
to prefer the Creature before God, and to be content with the Creature without
God, for our Portion and Happiness for ever: and, which is more, it is a
dreadful Argument, that a Man's All lies in the Creature, and that God intends
him nothing but the Creature for ever. Woe unto you that are Rich, (says
Christ) for you have received your consolation, Luke 6.24. Woe unto you that
are Rich, that is, you, who Rest in your Riches, (as Calvin rightly expounds
it) who take up your happiness in these things. Woe unto you: and what Woe to
them? truly a most dreadful Woe; You have received your consolation, (says
Christ) you have all the good you are ever like to have, you shall have no
more, and no other happiness or consolation for ever: Your resting in these
things, argues these things to be your All; and Oh, what a woeful, dreadful
thing is it for a man to have his All in this World, in a few, vain, empty,
bitter-sweet, perishing Vanities here! 'Twas a cutting, killing Word which
Abraham is brought in giving Dives, when he said, Son, remember, that thou in
thy lifetime receivedst thy good things. Luke 16.25. He had all his happiness
in this World, which is the woe and misery of such, as take up their Rest any
where but in God alone: tremble therefore at this.

2. Consider how impossible it is to find any true Rest, Solace, and
Satisfaction of Soul any where but in God, and with God alone. You may as soon
find Life in Death, or Light in Darkness, as Rest for your Souls any where, but
in God alone. -- Pray Friends, where will you look, or whither will you go to
find Rest, on this side God and Christ? Will you have recourse to sin, to your
lusts? to these multitudes run; they pursue their Rest, Solace, and
Satisfaction from sin, and the pleasures of sin; yea (as Solomon speaks) they
rest not, unless they sin, unless they do evil: But, my Beloved, is there Rest
to be found in sin? Can that give Rest, that is the greatest evil in the World?
Can that give Rest, that is the cause of all our troubles and difficulties? Can
that give Rest, that is the cause of all the confusions and desolations that
are in the World? Can that give Rest, that was the first and only cause and
founder of Hell? Had there been no Sin, there had been no Hell: Can that give
Rest, that makes us like the Devil, that restless Spirit, yea, and that made
him of a glorious Angel, a Devil? Can that give Rest, that is infinitely
contrary to God, that is the only Object of his hatred, and that alone can and
does separate between God, the chief Good, and our Souls? O, the folly of Souls
to pursue a Rest in sin, in the satisfaction of a lust! True, a base, brutish
pleasure and delight wicked men take in sin, (as he said) Will it not be
bitterness in the latter end? the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. ult. Yea, and
not only death at last, but many times anguish and torment here. Will you have
recourse course to the good things of this World, to Creature Comforts and
Enjoyments, to Friends, Relations, Estate, and the like? These thousands make
their Rest practically, Saying with him, Luke 12.19. Soul, take thine ease,
thou have goods laid up for thee for many years: thou have a good trade, a fair
estate, pleasant enjoyments, take thine ease, Soul, sit thou down at Rest: But,
my Beloved, can these things give Rest? Alas, it is, the joynt-language of all
the Creatures to us, Rest and Happiness for your Souls is not to be found in
us, seek it elsewhere, if you intend to find it: The Creatures (says a worthy
Divine) are not good, at least, they are not the Souls Good; nothing (says he)
but an infinite Godhead can allay your hunger after happiness, Can Wind, can
Vanity, can a Shadow, can a Fancy, can things of naught, things that are not,
things that are even made up of emptiness and changeableness, give Rest? Such
(you know) these things are in Scripture represented to be. Could these things
have given Rest; why had not Solomon found it in them? He had certainly the
fullest enjoyment of them that ever man had, and not only so, but moreover he
had wisdom and skill to extract the sweetness of them, to improve whatever they
have in them yea, and he improved this Wisdom and skill of his to the utmost;
for he set himself (as he tells us) to enjoy whatever the Creature could
possibly afford, he gave himself up to a full enjoyment of all: Well, but did
he find Rest in them after all? no he was so far from finding Rest, that he
cries out of all, All is Vanity and vexation of Spirit; and this he does often,
(you know) All is vanity and vexation of Spirit; and can vanity and vexation of
Spirit give Rest? What if a man has an affluence, an abundance of these things,
and they are also increasing daily? Will they not afford a Rest for him then?
No, he that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that
loves abundance with increase, this also is vanity, Eccles. 5.10. Silver,
abundance, increase, all is Vanity, and cannot give Rest. And, my Beloved, does
not our experience tell us the same thing? Alas, did we ever find any true Rest
and Satisfaction of Soul in these things? True, we are apt to promise our
selves Rest in this and that, in this Condition, and that Enjoyment; but did we
ever find that, which we promised our selves? Have we not always met with
disappointments? We have dreamed of a Rest in these things; but it has been but
a dream; it has been with us, as it is in the Prophet, Isa. 29.8. It shall be as
when a hungry man dreameth, and behold be eats: but he awaketh, and his Soul
is empty; or, as when a thirsty man dreameth, and behold he drinks, but he
awaketh, and behold he is faint, and his Soul has appetite: Just so it is, and
it has been with us, while we are, or have been pursuing Rest, and promising
our selves Rest in and from the Creature: yea, and others of the Saints have
experienced and asserted the same thing; Dura sunt omnia and tu solus requies.
All things (says Aug.) are full of trouble and difficulty; thou alone, O God,
art the true Rest. And it is a great Speech of his, worthy to be written upon
the Table of all our Hearts, speaking to Souls who are gone off from God:
Return ye prevaricators (says he) to your selves, Redite prevaricatores ad
cor, Haerete illi qui fecit vos, state cum illo and stabitis, requiescite in
eo, and quieti eritis; quo itis in aspera, quo it is? non est requies ubi
quaeritis eam, quaerite quod quaeritis, sed ibi non est ubi quaeritis; beatam
vitam quaeritis in regione mortis, non est illic, quomode enim beata vita ubi
nec vita? Aug.
and cleave unto him that made you; stand with him, and ye shall stand; Rest in
him, and ye shall Rest. And again, says he, Rest and Happiness is not to be
found where you seek it; seek what you seek, but know, that it is not to be
found where you seek it. You seek a Blessed Life in the Region of Death, and
it is not there; for how should a blessed Life be found there, where there is
not so much as Life it self? The sum of all seems to be this, that those that
desert God, do go from the true Rest and Happiness of Souls; and to seek Rest
and Happiness any where but in God and Christ, is to seek the Living among the
Dead. Once more, will you have recourse to your selves, and be your own Rest?
Indeed we read, that a good man shall be satisfied from himself, Prove. 14.14.
but how from himself? from himself in Union and Communion with his God: from
himself as in Communion with him that is the chief Good, that has all Good in
him, and not otherwise: and therefore observe, the good man here stands in
opposition to the back-slider, one that is gone off from God: our selves,
considered abstractly in themselves, are most insufficient to give rest to the
soul, being most vain, changeable, In omnibus quae videntur, requiem quaesivi,
and veram requiem in eis invenire non potui; deinde rediens ad me consistere in
meipso non possum, quoniam men's mea valde leris est. Ber.
and deceitful. Every man in his best state is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5.
It Is a great saying I have read in Bern. I have sought Rest (says he) in all
things that are seen; but I could not find Rest in them; then returning to my
self, I found I could not possibly subsist in my self, because my mind is most
light and vain. In nothing without, in nothing within could he find any Rest,
but in God alone. I Will close this Argument with a weighty speech, which I have
read in a worthy Divine of our own, Blessed Mr. Burroughes, Who speaking of
God's being the Rest and Portion of his People, speaks thus: Suppose (says he)
that God should cause all the Kings and Emperors in the World, to come and cast
down their Crowns at the foot of an holy Soul, and say, all these are thine; he
would answer, this is not enough, for this is not God himself: Suppose God
should bring all the splendours of all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth, and
they should be cast at the foot of an holy Soul as his; he would say, This is
not enough, this is not God himself: Suppose God should cause all the Glory of
Heaven, not only of Sun, Moon, and Stars, but also of the highest Heaven
abstract from God, to be laid before an holy Soul as his, he would say, This is
not enough, this is not God himself: Once more, Should all the Angels come, and
say, to an holy Soul, We are sent to put all our Glory upon thee; he would say,
This is not enough, for this is not God himself. O, nothing but God in Christ
can give Rest to Souls.

3. Consider what a blessed Rest God is for Souls, or that Souls may find in
God. As there is an utter impossibility of finding Rest any where, but in God;
so in him there is a blessed Rest to be found for Souls, a full, a perfect, an
eternal Rest. O, my Beloved, what can your Souls desire, or what are they
capable of, that is not to be found in God? Would you have Good? it must be
Good that can give Rest to the Soul: God is Good, he is the chief Good, the
best, the highest Good; he is Goodness it self, he is Good in himself, and he
is the Spring and Fountain of all that good that is in the Creature: he is so
Good, as that he is the Good of all Good, and nothing has any thing of Goodness
in it, but as it resembles him and participates of him. Bonus est qui secit me,
and ipse est bonum meum, and illi exulto omnibus bonis meis.
There is none Good but one, that is God, Mat. 19.17. he is Good that made me
(says Aug.) and he is my Good, and in him do I exult and rejoice before all my
other good things whatever, and in all my other good things. Would you have a
full Good? such a Good is God; there is a fullness of all Good in him; He that
overcomes, shall inherit all things: How so? I will be his God, I Will be his,
and in having me, he will have all in me, Rev. 21.7. Whatever good, beauty, or
excellency, there is in the Creature, yea, in all the Creatures put together,
it is all but a small drop or ray to that Good, Beauty, and Excellency that is
in God: It Is but a small spark to the Ocean of the Divine Goodness. Lord,
(says Austin) all those things which thou have made are beautiful, Pulchra
sunt omnia faciente te Domine, and ecce tu inenarrabiliter pulchrior qui
fecisti omnia. Aug.
but thou thy self art infinitely more beautiful. God has all kinds and all
degrees of Good in him: he is Light, and Life and Love, and Peace, and Joy, and
Holiness, and Salvation, and what not that good is, or that conduces to the
happiness of eternal Souls? Thou, Lord, Tu bonum'nullo indigens bono, semper
quietus es, quoniam tua quies tuipse es. Aug.
art that Good, where no good is wanting (says Aug.) and thou art always at
Rest, because thou art thine own Rest. That little good that is found in the
Creature is narrow, scanty, and but here and there a drop: but God has all Good
in a blessed Union and conjunction in him. O how glorious a Rest may the Soul
find in him! -- Would you have a suitable and convenient Good? such a Good is
God, he is a suitable and convenient Good, a Good suitable to the Nature, Life,
and Wants of the Soul: Among all your Creature-Injoyments and Contentments,
there is nothing suitable either to the Nature or Life of the Soul: they are
carnal, sensible things, and so are suitable to the flesh and sensual part, and
are pleasing to it; but they have nothing suitable in them to an immortal
Spirit, nothing that an eternal Soul can feed upon: the Body may as soon feed
upon Air and Ashes, as the Soul upon Creatures. But now in God there is that
Good, that is every way suitable to the Soul, to the Nature, Life, and Wants of
the Soul: the Soul is of a Spiritual Nature, and God is a Spiritual Good; God
is a Spirit, Joh. 4.24. The Soul is of a vast capacity, it is next to
Infiniteness in its capacity and desires; and God is a vast and comprehensive
Good, having (as has been shown) all good in him: Without suitableness in the
Object to the faculty, there can be no Rest. -- Would you have an original,
independent Good? such a Good is God: Dulcius ex ipso font, petuntur aquoe.
Waters drink most pleasantly at the Fountainhead: In God you have all Good,
all Sweet, all Comfort at the Fountainhead. Hence he is said to be a Fountain
of Living Waters, and the Creatures broken Cisterns, Jer. 2.13. the Fountain
has all in and from it self, but Cisterns you know have no more than is put
into them; all that Good that is in God he has it in and from himself; but the
Creatures, yea, the best of Creatures, Angels themselves not excepted, have no
more than he puts into them: Now how much is the Fountain to be preferred
before a Cistern? -- Would you have a pure and an unmixed Good, Gold that has
no Dross, Wine that has no Water in it? such a Good is God: God is light, and
in him there is no darkness at all, 1 John 1.5. All things on this side God
have their mixtures, they have a dark as well as a bright side; all this Wine
is mixed with Wormwood, this Gold with Dross: Who of us did ever meet with the
Creature-Injoyment that had not many allayes? the sweetest Rose has its
prickles, and the rarest Beauty its spots among the Creatures; but now God is
every way a pure and an unmixed Good, he is all Light, Life, Love, Holiness,
and the like. -- Would you have a sweet and satisfying Good? Such a Good is
God; yea indeed there is infinite sweetness and satisfaction to be found in
him; he can infinitely delight, ravish, solace, and satisfy the Soul for ever.
O how sweet, how satisfying are the Sights of God, the Tastes and Descents of
his Love! what an Heaven does one sight of God, one descent of his Love, make
in the Soul! David casting his eye upon God, as his in Covenant, is even
ravished with it, and cries out, the lines are fallen to me in pleasant places,
I have a goodly Heritage, Psalm. 16.5, 6. and elsewhere we read of Pleasures, of
Rivers of Pleasures; of Satisfaction, of abundance of Satisfaction, and all, as
that which Souls do, or may find in God, and communion with God, Psalm. 36.8.
and David over and over tells you of Sweetness, and Satisfaction, and
Satisfaction as with Marrow and Fatness in but the very thoughts and meditation
of God, Psalm. 63.5, 6. and Aug. (I remember) speaking of God, and to him, often
breaks out into such language as this, O, my God, my Life, Deus meus, Vita mea,
Dulcedo mea. etc.
my Sweetness! O Sirs! holy Souls, who live in Communion with God, will tell
you, that there is no sweetness like that in God, no Love like his Love, no
Comforts like his Comforts: They will tell you; that one sight of God, one
sensible token of his presence in the Soul, has more solace and sweetness in
it, than all the delights of this world; yea, than many Worlds; and they
accordingly choose and desire it. Oh how sweet is it to be led into the
Banqueting House by Christ, and there have the Banner of his Love displayed
over us, and Flagons of that Wine poured out unto us! How sweet is it to have
one sight of the King in his beauty, how much more to walk and converse with
him in his Galleryes? How sweet is it with God in his Sanctuary, and have him
revealing Himself, his Love, his Beauty, his Glory to us? O taste and see how
good the Lord is! Would you have a sure, eternal, and unchangeable Good, a Good
that never fades, fails, nor has any period? such a Good is God, and God
alone: From everlasting to everlasting be is God; Psalm. 90.2. But this has been
sufficiently spoken to elsewhere. Well, you see, what a blessed Rest God is for
Souls. Why then should we ever think of looking out any where else for Rest? O
wretched hearts of ours, that will leave this God and go out to a vain World,
and dying Creatures for Rest and Happiness! In a word, if God has all that in
him which thou need, or art capable of, to give thee Rest and Happiness,
than retire solely to him for it: Now what do thou want? or what art thou
capable of to give thee Rest and Happiness? Do thou want and desire Life?
With God is the Fountain of Life, Psalm. 36.9. Do thou want Peace? God is the
God of Peace, Romans 16.20. and frequently elsewhere is he so called. Do thou
want pardon? he is the God of pardons, so the words are in the Psalms, when he
is said to be ready to forgive: and, you know, he has promised to pardon
iniquity, transgression, and sin, sins of all sorts and sizes, all degrees and
aggravations, if Souls come to him, Heb. 8.12. Do thou want Grace? he is the
God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. Do thou want comfort? he is the God of all
Consalation. Do thou want Mercy? he is the Father of Mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3.
Do thou want strength? strength to do, to suffer, to live, to die? he is the
Lord Jehovah, with whom is everlasting Strength, Isa. 26.4. Do thou want Joy?
in his presence is fullness of Joy, Psalm. 16.11. Do thou want Salvation,
Salvation Temporal, Salvation Eternal? ^e is the God of Salvation, and as such
the Church glories in him, Psalm. 68.20. Thus no Rest ^^ke that in God; Souls
need not look elsewhere for Rest and Happiness; for there is all in God alone.

4. Consider what a restless World you live in, and what a troublesome time you
are fallen upon. The more restless this World is and the more troublesome the
times are which we are fal^^n upon, the more we are concerned to take up our
Rest in God: Now certainly the World was scarce ever more restless, nor the
times mo^^ troublesome than now. In Zech. 1.11. we rea^ of a time when the whole
World was at Rest excepting only the Church of God; but it is eve^ quite
contrary now, for now the whole World Church, and all are in a restless
troublesome state. We see, and hear of little but Wars, and rumors of Wars, and
as 'twas of old, destruction upon destruction is cried; and what, and when the
end of these things will be, who can tell? In Jer. 16.5. we read that God had
taken away his Peace from that People: I have taken away my Peace from this
People, says the Lord; and truly now he seems to have taken away his Peace
from the World. I Will leave only two Scriptures with you, one out of the Old,
and the other out of the New Testament, both which I am apt to think may have a
great aspect to the present days, and may in a great measure receive their
accomplishment in them. One is Zeph. 3.8. Wait ye upon me, says the Lord,
until the day that I arise up to the prey; for my determination is to gather
the Nations, that I may assemble the Kingdoms, to pour out upon them mine
indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the Earth shall be devoured with
the fire of jealousy. The other is that Luke 21.25, 26. There shall be signs in
the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, (and these we have had) and upon
the Earth distress of Nations, with perplexity, the Sea and the Waves roaring;
men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are
coming on the Earth; for the powers of Heaven shall be shaken. I say nothing,
only I fear, I fear, as we have seen some of these things accomplished, so there
will be a more full accomplishment of them, and that ere the present generation
passes away. Doubtless great storms are a coming, and happy they that have an
Ark to hide themselves in; God has now great Works to do, he has the Kingdom of
Antichrist utterly to destroy, the Kingdom of his Son Christ to set up in its
Luster and Glory; the final Redemption of his People to work out, his ancient
Ones to call in, and his suffering Name, Attributes, and Glory fully to right
and vindicate, and these things are not like to be brought about without great
Storms, Convulsions, and Concussions in the World: Well, and what is the
language of all this to us? Verily this, Souls retire into God, take up your
Rest in him, make him your All, both here and in eternity: and Oh that we would
do so? Then should we Rest in the day of trouble. When Noah foresaw the Deluge
a coming, he prepared him an ark to the saving of both himself and Family, Heb.
11.7. Surely he s blind indeed, that does not see a Deluge coming upon the
World, a Deluge of outward Troubles and Calamities: O why do we not enark in
God, by making him our Rest: this God invites his People unto, Isa. 26.20.
Come, my People, enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy Doors about thee;
hide thy self, as it were, for a little moment, until theindignation be
overpast: for, behold, the Lord comes out of his place to punish the
Inhabitants of the Earth for their iniquity: What is it for God's People to
enter into their Chambers, and hide themselves, but to retire more into him,
live at Rest and in Communion with him, to put themselves under his protection,
and the like? it is for them to retire from the World, and worldly Concerns,
and to make him all, living and resting wholly in him, and upon him. O let
this, viz. the restlesness of the World you live in draw your Souls into an
holy rest in God.

5. Consider what enemies you are to your own Souls by not living at Rest in
God. He that sins, ('it is said) wrongeth his own Soul; he that lives not at
Rest in God, greatly sins, and thereby greatly wrongeth his own Soul. On the
one hand, you hereby deprive your Souls of much Good; and on the other hand,
you expose your Souls to much Evil.

1. Hereby you deprive your Souls of much Good, yea of much of the best Good.
Solomon found this in experience, and tells us that pursuing Rest and Happiness
in the Creature, and not in God, he did thereby bereave his Soul of Good,
Eccles. 4.8. and what Good? Verily the best Good, the Good of Grace, of
Holiness, of Communion with God, of the Comforts of his Spirit, and the like:
and Oh how much of this Good do you bereave your Souls of daily? This is that
which has bereaved you of much Grace, much Love, much Spiritual Comfort, many
Embraces in the Arms and Bosom of Christ's Love: This, (namely, our pursueing
Rest from the Creature, and not living at Rest in God) is that which has made
us so lean, so dead, so dry, so barren in our Spirits, as we are. O my Beloved,
while we have been off our Rest in God, and have taken up in other things, what
have we been doing, but feeding upon Husks and Swill, when we might have eaten
Bread, and drunk Wine in the Fathers Kingdom? what have we been doing, but
following after lying vanities, to the forsaking of our own mercies? Oh, did
you know how sweet a Life it is to be at Rest in God, you would then know what
Good you have bereaved your Souls of, by not living at Rest in him.

2. Hereby you expose your Souls to much evil. I remember a saying of Austin,
In hoc peccabam, quod non in Deo, sed in creaturis ejus, me atque caeteras
voluptates quaerebam, atque ita irruebam in dolores, confusiones and errores
animae. Aug.
In this I sinned (says he) that, I sought my Happiness not in God, but in his
Creatures, and so I rusht upon all manner of Dolours, Confusions, and Errors of
Soul: and have not we done So? O the wounds the Confusions, the Errors of Soul,
which we have exposed our selves unto, while we have been off our Rest in God!
Sin and Satan have made great waste and desolation upon our Spirits, and it is
what exposes us to nothing but sorrows, snares, and Death: and as we would not
wrong our Souls, let us retire to, and live at Rest in God.

6. Consider that your living at Rest in God here, will be a clear and
unquestionable evidence to you, that you shall live at Rest in God, and with
God, for ever. O how sweet is it to have any one clear evidence of living at
Rest in God, and with God, in Heaven? and what would some of our Souls at some
times give for such a blessing? yea, how sweet is a small glimpse of Hope, a
secret whisper, an inward hint or intimation of such a thing from the Spirit of
God in our Souls? O, live at Rest in God here, and this will be a broad
evidence of it to you, and truly, unless you do live at Rest in him here, I
know not, however you will make it out to your Souls, that you shall live at
Rest in him, and with him in the other World. In short, my Beloved, if we do
indeed desire to live at Rest with God for ever in Heaven, why should we not
desire to live at Rest in God here? Sure I am, the thing is the same, and we
should desire the one as well as the other, and the one as the evidence of the
other. O come, come, and be prevailed with by these things, one and all to take
up the Rest of your Souls purely and solely in God!

CHAP. VI.
Several plain and proper Directions to Souls, how to attain unto this Life of
a Rest in God. With a Conclusion of the whole Matter.

TO live at Rest in God, that is a sweet, a blessed Life indeed; but how may we
attain to it? Our Souls would be at it, but how may we come up hereunto? a few
Directions in that case, and I Will close all.

1. Would you indeed live at Rest in God? Then despair of ever finding Rest any
where but in him alone. As long as we have any hopes of a Rest any where else,
we will not so purely take up our Rest in God, as we should; for woe and alas
for us! our heart is bent to back-slideing from him, Hos. 11.7. We are carnal,
and sensual, and are addicted to carnal and sensual things: as ever therefore
you would live at Rest in God, utterly despair in your selves of ever finding
Rest, yea, any thing of Rest any where else: the more we are driven out of the
Creature, out of all our false Rests and Reposes, the nearer we are to an holy
Rest and Repose in God: it has been sufficiently evidenced and declared, that
there is no true Rest for a Soul but in God alone, and you have both seen and
heard it; but, my Beloved, it is one thing to hear this by the hearing of the
ear, and another thing for the Soul to come under the sense and power thereof,
so as indeed to be dead in our hopes to all other things, and practically to
despair of Rest and Happiness any where but in God alone. Whatever we pretend
or profess, at least the most of us, we still think that there is some Rest,
some Happiness, in somewhat else besides God, and short of God; else, what mean
our eager desires after other things, our delights in them, when enjoyed, our
grief and sorrow of heart, when lost or wanting? what means the secret bent and
byas of our heart to stand off from God and cleave to other things, and the
like? But all this must be rooted out, firmly fixing this Foundation-principle
in your Souls, that there is no Rest for a Soul but in God alone, and
accordingly never have a thought of looking elsewhere. And when at any time the
heart would be going out to other things, check it with this consideration,
Rest; for the Soul is to be found only in God.

2. Would you indeed live at Rest in God? Then labor to know him much, and to
know him in Christ. The more we know God, the more we shall love him; and the
more we know and love him, the more shall we Rest in him: They that know thy
Name, (says the Psalmist) will trust in thee, Psalm. 9.10. they will Rest in
thee, depend on thee: one great reason, why we do not Rest in God, is, because
we do not know him, at least so know him, as to carry in us right notions and
apprehensions of him: labor therefore to know God more and better, labor to
know him in Christ: God in Christ is most sweet, most lovely, most ravishing
and solacing to Souls; God in Christ is a God of Love, yea, a God that is Love:
God is Love (says St. John) 1 John 4.8. God in Christ, is a God of
Reconciliation, God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses to them, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. and Oh how sweet is God
thus known! God in Christ, is the Father of Mercies, the God of all Grace, and
Comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. he is a full, free, open Fountain of all Spiritual Good.
In 2 Cor. 4.6. we read of the light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God shining
forth in the face of Christ: and indeed the Light, and Glory of God, his
Beauty, Sweetness, and Excellency shines forth no where so brightly and
illustriously, as in Jesus Christ. To know God or to look on him out of Christ,
is what rather fills the Soul with trouble, than brings it to Rest in him. I
remembered God, and was troubled (said he) Psalm. 77.3. God out of Christ is no
other than an angry Judge, a consuming fire, one that is ready to damn and
destroy the Soul; but in Christ, he is a God of Pardon, a God of Salvation to
all that come by Christ to him; Hence some of the Saints have professed that they
durst not think of God out of Christ: and (you know) what Luther's thoughts
were by that outcry of his; I Will have nothing to do with an absolute God. O
therefore labor to know God in Christ more; being known in him, he is
infinitely sweet to Souls, and they cannot but find that sweetness in him, that
shall draw and allure them to make him their Rest, and All for ever.

3. Would you indeed live at Rest, in God? Then labor to get your
Covenant Interest in, and Relation to God cleared up to you. The clearer your
interest in God is to you, the fuller and more constant will your Rest in him
be; and indeed you will never so fully and sweetly acquiesce in God, as you
should, until you come to some good sense of your Interest in him, and Relation
to him in Christ and the Covenant; In 1 Samuel 30.6. it is said, that David
encouraged his heart in the Lord [his God]; he saw God to be [his God], and
seeing him to be so, he encouraged himself in him, he sat down satisfied and at
Rest in him; and that in the midst of many, great, and sore Distresses, as you
may there see: Had he not seen him to be his, I question whether he would have
been able to sit down at Rest in him, as he did, especially in so great a
storm? So the Church, Lam. 3.24. the Lord is my Portion says my Soul,
therefore I Will hope in him: Seeing God to be her Portion, She could hope,
trust, Rest in him, and that in a case of great calamity and distress. I will
not say a Soul cannot Rest in God without a sense of his interest in him; no,
it is the Souls duty to Rest in God however things go with him; though he be in
the dark, though God has withdrawn himself from the Soul, yet the Soul should
trust in the Name of the Lord, and Rest himself in his God, Isa. 50.10. still
there is that in God, that is a full and proper matter or ground of Rest in
him; for he is, as High, as Holy, as Wise, as Good, as All-sufficient, as ever
he was; and indeed we should learn to believe in the dark: But though this be
so, yet still I say, the clearer your Interest in God is to you, the more fully
and sweetly will you Rest in him. The sense of an interest in God, is what is
most effectual to reduce a Soul to its Rest in God, when through temptation it
has been carried off from it: so we find, Psalm. 42.11. (which may be further
opened afterward); as ever therefore you would live purely and entirely at
Rest in God, get your interest in him, as your God and Father, cleared up to
you; first choose him for your God and Portion; and do it every day, never Rest,
till you can say, Lord, whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon
Earth that I desire besides thee: my Heart and my Flesh fail, but God is the
strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever; Psalm. 73.25, 26. Then Pray hard
for the sealings and witness of the Spirit; beg the Lord, with Austin, to say
unto thy Soul, I am thy Salvation.

4. Would you indeed live at Rest in God? Then meditate and contemplate him
much, dwell much in the view of his glorious Excellencies and Perfections: Deep
and frequent meditation of God and his Excellencies, does marvelously endear
God unto Souls, and withal brings them into an acquaintance with those
satisfying delights that are to be found in him, and so to a Rest in him. My
Soul, (says David) shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth
shall praise thee with joyful lips, when I remember thee upon my bed, and
meditate on thee in the night-watches, Psalm. 63.5, 6. In verse. 3. he is even
ravished with the sense and incomes of God's Love to him: Thy loving kindness
is better than Life, my lips shall praise thee; and here he speaks of
Satisfaction, the sweetest Satisfaction, and all that which came in a way of
holy meditation; and again, my meditation of thee shall be sweet, Psalm. 104.34.
Holy meditation of God produces many sweet experiences of God in the Soul,
experiences of his Grace, of his Love, of his Sweetness, of the Blessedness of
Communion with him, and the like; and these experiences issue in the Soul's
Rest in him: every new experience of God, draws the heart further into God, and
makes it center more in him: every taste, every sight of God, every new
emamanation of his Glory before the Soul, (of which in the holy meditation of
God the Saints have not a few) weans and works the heart off from carnal,
sensible things, and makes him to cleave more closly and entirely to God,
gathering in about him, as his All. O, be much in the meditation of God: it is
not enough for us to know him, and to know him in Christ; no, nor to know him
as ours, as our God in Covenant; but we must study him, we must meditate what a
God he is, and single him out, now under one, and then under another Notion or
Consideration, to meditate upon, begging God to help us in our meditetions of
him. The most know, and enjoy little of God; because they meditate him so
little, they are little in holy meditation.

5. Would you indeed be at Rest in God? Then improve all your experiences of
the Creatures vanity, for the carrying of your Souls more into God, as your
Rest and Center. Holy David did so, and it is indeed a great piece of a
Christians skill. Psalm. 39.7. And now Lord (says he) what wait I for? my hope
is in thee: If you veiw, either the foregoing or following part of the Psalm,
you will find that David was under great experiences of the Creatures vanity;
he saw the vanity of worldly Enjoyments they are all but a vain show; he saw
his own vanity, he saw the vanity of others, he found every one, and every
thing, nothing but vanity; and what is the issue? What use does he make of it?
this, he gathers in more to God, as his only Rest and Happiness; now, Lord,
what wait I for? My hope is in thee, q.d. Now I have done with the Creatures, I
see what they are, and what all persons and things are, and I have done with
all, thou thy self only, O Lord, art my Rest, my Happiness, my All. Thus when
at any time you meet with fresh experiences of the Creatures vanity, improve
them for the carrying of your Souls more into God, as your Rest. You scarce
live that day wherein you do not meet with new experiences of the Creatures
vanity, this is lost, and that is imbittered to you; now you meet with
disappointments, and then with sorrows, wounds, and snares; and that, where, it
may be, you expected your chief Comfort and Satisfaction; now in all such
cases, what should we do? retire the more into God, as our Rest and Happiness:
say with the Psalmist, Now Lord, what wait I for? My hope is in thee; I have
done with the streams, I Will cleave only to thee, the Fountain; the Creatures
ever serve me thus, they leave me under sorrows, snares, and disappointments,
thou Lord shall be all in all to me, thou art my only Rest for ever.

6. Would you indeed live at Rest in God? Then pray for much spirituality of
Heart, much suitedness of Spirit to God and Christ. The more Spiritual you are,
the more are you suited to the blessed God, and the more you are suited to God,
the more fully and genuinly will your Souls Rest in him. I suppose you to have
a new heart, (for I speak unto you as to Saints) the old heart to be sure will
never Rest in God, the old heart is wholly avetse from God, and at enmity with
him, it hates him, it is wholly carnal, sensual, and unclean, and delights only
in things suitable to it self; Let all therefore that would Rest in God, first,
get a new heart, such as God promises in his Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.26. and having
gotten a new heart, pray for much spirituality of heart and affection. Alas!
alas! we are carnal, (as Paul charged his Corinthians) and being carnal, we
lean to, and hanker after carnal things, and till we get more spirituality, we
shall not Rest so fully in God, as we should; therefore pray unto God hard for
more of this, pray for more of his Spirit, to act and influence you; and not
only so, but to change you more and more into the Divine Life and Image.

To conclude all; Live at Rest all that even you can in God here, but withal,
look, and long and hasten to that Rest which remains for Saints with God in
the other World: True Rest in God here is sweet; but we shall never be fully
and perfectly happy, till we enter that future Rest: that indeed carries a
complete happinss in it: O, to be wholly swallowed up in the Divine Will, the
Divine Life, the Divine Fullness, the Ocean of Divine Love, to have every
faculty, and every affection perfectly suited to God, and filled with God, this
cannot but be perfect Rest and Happiness; especially considering, what an
enlargement there will be of all the Faculties, and how much of God they will
then take in: But till we reach this Rest, we cannot have any complete Rest;
therefore breath and suspire after the future Rest, keep your eye much there,
and let your eye affect your heart, look and love, love and long, long and
hasten to that sweet, that holy, that heavenly, that inviolable, that
unchangeable, and eternal Rest, which remains for Saints in God, and with God,
in the other World, crying out, both in your Spirits and lives; Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

FINIS
The Author has two other Treatises: VIZ.

The Best Match: or, The Soul's espoulal to Christ; Opened and Improved.

The great Concern: Or, A serious Warning to a timely and thorough Preparation
for Death. With Helps and Directions in order thereunto. Being the last that
ever he preached.

There is now published an Eccellent Treatise, Entitled; The Harmony of the
Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of Man's Redemption by
the Lord Jesus Christ: Or, Discourses, wherein is showed; How the Wisdom,
Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power and Truth of God are glorified in that Great
and Blessed Work. By William Bates, D. D.


