THE Quakers Charity ABOVE INGRATITUDE: In Answer to a Malicious Pamphlet,
ENTITLED, The Quakers Cruelty presented to the KING and PARLIAMENT, And
subscribed by Thomas Boyce.

Manifesting the Spirit of Enmity and Madness, which works against the Truth,
and seeks to reward those that live in it EVIL for their GOOD.

Sent forth in Pursuit of the said Malicious Pamphlet from that People whom he
bath grossly abused, who are called QUAKERS.

Printed in the Year 1675.

THE Quakers Charity ABOVE INGRATITUDE, etc.
AMongst the many Enemies that have appeared against us and the precious Truth
professed by us, whom many of them has exercised a large Measure of the Wisdom
of this World; at last we have met with one Thomas Boyce, who is attempting to
see what Folly and Distraction will do against us (though we doubt not but
diverse endewed with more Craft then himself are his Assistants herein) in which
Folly and Discomposure of Mind, he has made a Book called, The Quakers Cruelty,
etc. in which one main Endeavor is, to call the King and the two Houses of
Parliament, as Arbitrators between him and the Quakers, which we judge no Man
in his right Senses would have done, or if they had it, would have been judged
of all Men to be high Impudence and Folly.

And further take notice, That this Appeal or Request for Arbitration is made
after the greatest Endeavors that he could make of executing his own Rage and
Enmity upon us by the Laws and inferior Magistrates, and because they appeared
to be sensible of the Innocence of our Cause, and of the Malice and
Discomposedness of this Complainant, and thereupon found no Cause to be
Executioners of his Fury; therefore he reflects upon them, as if they through
false Informations had been drawn aside from the Line of true Justice, and had
stopped him from his due Proceedings to recover Satisfaction for the great Wrongs
and Injuries which he pretends to be done to him.

Now that he is a Composure of Madness, Malice and Folly, no greater
Certificate is requisite to prove, then his own Book, together with his daily
Practice both in Meetings and upon the Street, and almost where ever he comes,
sometimes Roaring, sometimes Singing, Striking People on the Face and Head with
his Fist, running upon others in the Street, with his Elbows punching them in a
dangerous Sort, when no Word past of either Side, and kicking others on the
Belly, and diverse other gross Abuses, which too many have already felt; and
because of this his mad and dangerous Behavior, some People who come to our
Meetings have sometimes endeavored to lead him out, upon which he has fallen
down, and very hideously cried out many Times together, Marder, Murder, when no
Harm was done nor intended to him by any. As for his Malice, whoever reads his
Book, can never be in Doubt of it, especially when they consider how he has
sworn the Peace against some, and offered to do it against others, who none of
them had ever any Thing to do with him, but exhort him to that which is good,
admonish him of what was Evil, and to extend their Charity to him for the
Relief of him and his Family, which are all far contrary to either Acts or
Signs of Corporal Harms; his Folly is sufficiently manifested, in that he who
says, He wa^, and is Poor, and knows how largely our Bounty and Charity
extended toward him, as a Person in Necessity, amounting to about 7. of 8.
Shillings a Week for a great while together, besides six Pounds, thirteeen
Shillings, four Pence halfpenny disbursed to his Relief at sundry Times by
Walter Miers, whom he has so salsly accused; and then four Shillings a Week
for a good while after his Recovery, till he manifested his Wicked Spirit, for
which he was at one of our Meetings, held at Horsly down, on the 5th of the 6th
Month called August, 74. denied by us, as having no Fellowship with him, until
he should come to Repentance, as may be seen by our Paper printed in his own
Book; and after all this, for him to Imagine, that the King and the two Houses
of Parliament should concern themselves with such a Person to enquire out the
Cause of his Distemper, is the greatest Folly of all.

Now for the Truth's sake, we shall touch at some of the Matters charged by him
against us, and first in the 7th Page, wherein he renders us a People hiding
such horrid Incest as we believed would procure Death, and not only so, but
marrying the Man to a Lass, who we judged, would prove a Whore, which Charge in
every Part of it is false and wicked, and is from the Father of Lies, as will
appear by the Testimonies of those whom he has falsely scandalized, given under
their Hands; the Truth of the Case is as follows: A certain young Man in
Southwarke, Kinsman to the said Thomas Boyce, being his Brothers Son, came to
our Meeting to propound the taking of a young Woman to Wife; certain Friends
were appointed (as is usual in such Cases) to enquire of their Clearnes from
all others, and of their Conversations, which said Friends met with a Report,
that the Young Man should have lain with his Mother; they being poor, and
living but in one Room together, we believe had given Ground to the Report,
whereupon the Matter was enquired farther into, but we never found Just Cause
to believe that they were guilty of Incest or Vncleaness, nor never did pass
any such Sentence upon them, but after long and deliberate weighing the Matter,
the young Man and the young Woman were permitted to take each other in
Marriage; and after they were married, some Strife or Contention arising
amongst the Kindred of the young Man, of which we fear this T. B. to be a great
moving Cause; for when some Friends were called to hear the Difference, this
Boyce as he confesses in his Book, page 7. said, She was not his Wife, upon
which, and diverse other Manifestations of his Evil Ranting Spirit, the Paper
aforementioned was given out against him.

So here follow the Certificates of the Parties which he mentions.

WHereas I Thomas Padley am accused with saying, that if the World should know
it, to wit, the Woman and her Son being unclean, they would be both hanged, p.
7. This is a deceitful Insinuation, as if we did conclude they were Unclean,
and so liable to suffer, which is falsely suggested; for we never did declare
nor conclude that they were Unclean, but only I speaking by Way of Supposition
(in Indignation against Vncleaness it self) if they were so, and the World
should know it, they would suffer; and this was upon our Enquiry in Order to
prevent Scandal and Reproach from coming upon us, or our Meeting.

Tho. Padley.

WHereas I Walter Miers am accused by T. B. in the 7th Page as being chiefly
concerned in putting two Persons together in Marriage; This is an absolute
Falsehood; for I do deny that I was Instrumental in bringing them together; for
I never spoke to them about it, nor was any Ways in the least concerned in it,
until that they of themselves were contracted and agreed, and had declared it
in Public.

W. Miers.

WHereas T. Biddle is accused by T. Boyce with saying, That she, the said
Woman, was of a bewitching Spirit, and that he feared she would prove a Whore,
so that they were willing to let her have a Husband. Tho. Biddle does deny that
he ever said that she was of a bewitching Spirit; neither did he ever say that
he was afraid she would prove a Whore; but does acknowledge that he did say,
she had drawn out the Affections of a Servant of his, being an Apprentice,
whereby he became Negligent in his Business, but he dyed in the Time of the
great Contagion in London; but he does not charge her with the Cause of his
Death; these Things proceed from the Spirit of Spite and Envy that rules in
him, and in this Spirit of Cain that Murderer, Guilt and Fear possesses him,
and that Voice of Cain is heard, It shall come to pass that whosoever shall
meet me, shall slay me; and by this Spirit he has been led to swear, he went
in Danger of his Life because of me, who never had a Thought in my Mind to hurt
him, and caused me to be bound over to the Sessions; when he was asked before
the Magistrate if he had not forsworn himself, he said, If he had, be it upon
him, and if he had, he was but damned: I know no other Cause on my Part of this
his Envy, but because when Contention and Difference arose between the
young-married Persons, who are his Relations; he being present when a Composure
was endeavored; in Order to make the Breach wider, he did affirm, as now he
says in Print, page 7. that she was not his Wife, and being reproved for
speaking so unadvised and rash, he produced this Argument to prove what he
said, bringing Solomon's Words; he that finds a Wife finds a good Thing; but
she is not good, therefore not his Wife; for this he was judged of me and all
present, and ever since he has grown worse and worse, and increased in Rage
and Enmity against his best Friends, who have endeavored his Good and
Preservation inwardly and outwardly; herein he has brought Vengeance upon his
own Head, and he shall bear his own Judgment.

Tho Biddle.

Concerning subscribing to our Form, mentioned page 6.

All that he has said upon this Account we do utterly deny, as being totally
false and malicious, and do declare, that we did never prescribe any such Form
of Words as he has set down, or any other to those who propound their Marriage
among us, or thatever we lent any Money on any such Subscriptions or
Acknowledgments.

As to his Charge against Tho. Padly of speaking about turning him down Stairs,
those Words were disowned by us at that present, and Tho. Padly being spoken to
about it, did forthwith acknowledge that the Word was spoken in Haste, and
thereby gave reasonable Satisfaction in that Matter.

And as to what he says relating to W. Penn, take the Testimony following.

SInce Tho. Boyce has mentioned W.P. in his abusive Pamphl^t who deserved it
not at his Hand, W. Penn being enquired of, does deny that ever he acknowledged
that Tho. Boyce had been wronged by Friends, that he found him so full of
Distraction mixed with Spite and Envy, that unless he had been as discomposed
and envious as himself, he could not have said what T.B. charges upon him; but
this W. P. says, he remembers that he exhorted him to be Calm in his Mind, and
demean himself soberly, as became his Pretenses, and he with G. W. who was by,
would endeavor to incline Friends to assist him, and do him Right in Case he
were wronged; but this Condition, to wit, to be sober and quiet, he tells the
World, was against his Conscience, and further says, That he utterly abhors to
bribe a Man to a Thing that is Just, much more to stop the Mouth of one
oppressed, as he pretended to be; and the said T.B. complaining of his Poverty,
in mere Compassion he gave him ten Shillings, but not upon Condition of
concealing any Thing, further telling him, that he going under the Name of a
Quaker, if he did not walk in God's Fear, and be Cool and Quiet, he would
furnish malicious Persons with Occasion against the Truth, not having any Cause
of Fear of T. Hicks or any else, as he falsely insinuates; neither does he
remember that he named any Persons to him, since which it does appear, his Aim
was Base and Mercinary, and not only that he is under a kind of Distraction at
Times, as his Neighbors certify, p. 10. of his Book; he continued in a
distracted Condition for some Months, but that he is also evidently
Hypocritical; for whereas he judged Friends to be fallen from their Integrity,
and justifies himself as one more saithful, he has unworthily offered to swear
the Peace against diverse peaceable Men that never sought his Harm, pulling of
his Hat to the Justice, saying, May it please you Sir to tender me an Oath,
pray Sir give me my Oath, etc. taking Advantage at our Contrary Practice,
hoping thereby to have his Revengeful and Mercinary Ends upon us, and all this
because our Friends would not feed him in his Lazyness, nor mantain him when he
was able to work; nor are we Insensible who they are that make Use of these
Slanders and Envy to bespatter us, which to be sure does not become their
Pretenses to Religion.

This short and candid Account of the Matters contained in his malicious
Pamphlet, directed to King and Parliament, we thought meet to give forth for
the clearing of the Truth, and the undeceiving of any Persons, whether high or
low, who might be in Danger to believe any of his wicked Insinuations; and if
any notwithstanding give themselves over, rather to believe Lies, then to
believe the Truth, when both are presented to their View, we are clear, and the
Evil thereof will redound unto themselves, and unto those who ministered the
Occasion thereof.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHat concerns T. Boyce his Turbulent Rude and Bedlam like Behavior, roaring
and belching out his Outrage in our public Assemblies, signified in the
aforesaid Account, many hundreds can testify the Truth thereof; so whether his
thirteen Witnesses testifying that he is both an Honest Man and a Peaceable
Liver where he dwells, will clear him or not, let the Impartial Readers Judge;
yet his Neighbors Testimony of him, That he continued in a distracted
Condition for some Months, is probable enough.

THE END.

