Querela Geometrica: OR, GEOMETRY'S Complaint Of the Injuries lately received
from Mr. THOMAS WHITE In his late Tract, Entitled, Tutela Geometrica.

In the end you have some Places at large out of Mr. White's TUTELA, and
Gulden's CENTROBARYCA, Reprinted, and faithfully Translated into English.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. 1660.

The Publisher TO THE READER.
HAving in the following Letter from my Friend, received a brief account of Mr.
Whites so much famed and expected Geometrical Treatise, I thought fit to
publish it for satisfaction of many, very desirous to understand the success he
has had therein.

Know then, that the Letter consists of two parts. The first demonstrates the
many and gross Errors against Geometry, committed by Mr. White in his Tutela
Geometrica: which yet he terms his Chrysaspis, or Golden Shield, wherewith to
defend all his other Works.

The latter part lays open his most unworthy proceeding against a famous
Mathematician, by charging him with many and evidently false imputations, on
purpose to disgrace him. From all which he is here fully vindicated, as well in
the ensuing Letter, as in the Additionals.

Querela Geometrica: OR, Geometry's Complaint Of the Injuries received lately
from TUTELA GEOMETRICA. OR, The Copy of a Missive, etc.
SIR,
I Have, according to your request, perused the small Geometrical Tract lately
published by Mr. Thomas White: whereof accordingly I give you here this brief
account. The intent and occasion of his present Writing, as on this Subject,
(having scarce hitherto appeared in that kind) is (as is manifest by the
Title) to make known to the world the great light he has received particularly
from God in that noble Science of Geometry; as having never studied it, nor
much applied himself that way: that thereby other men, conceiving this so
excellent a Piece must needs have been conveyed to him by particular light
from Heaven, may learn thence more to prize and esteem, then hitherto they have
done, his Works already published. For so he tells his Reader in the end of his
Preface, that the things he is now to declare, ought to be sufficient to give
esteem to all his former Labors. For if (says he) they came from the Author,
and from that force and vigor of Wit, by which he is able to perform many more
equal to this, then his precedent Works are not to be contemned, as proceeding
from such a Father, quia de tali exorta sunt Patre: But if it come from Heaven,
then much more are his other Works worthy consideration, to wit, as coming also
from Heaven before it.

Now that they come not from himself, he openly avouches, as having never had
any Master in Geometry, nor much applied himself to that Science, or read so
much as Euclide. Yea, he freely acknowledges himself so little versed in
Geometry, that he plainly affirms, no man will call him a Geometrician, if he
be one himself: Intuere me hominem, quem nemo Geometram salutet, modo ipse sit.
Whence he concludes, that the things he is now to deliver, must assuredly come
from Heaven: Talis cum sim, non a me haec habes, sed ab eo, qui ex legibus
Providentiae suae, ea gubernationi Ecclesiae suae, in hoc rerum articulo,
opportuna and fecit, and vidit. Being I am such a one; (to wit, so little
versed in Geometry) thou have not these things from me, but from him, who
according to the Laws of his Providence, both saw and made them fit for the
Government of his Church, in this present conjuncture: give him the thanks,
etc. Wherefore he exhorts the Reader, not to neglect his own good, nor contemn
a wonder fallen to him from Heaven. Quod superest, tibi consule, and ostentum a
caelo ad te delapsum ne contemnito.

All this with some other such expressions has Mr. White in his Preface;
whereby you clearly see, how highly he values this his Tract, as fallen from
Heaven, and accordingly desires the like esteem should be framed of all his
other Works: that so his Readers considering and weighing with themselves, that
it is impossible so learned and subtle a work should come from one that never
studied Geometry, must necessarily conclude that it came particularly from
Heaven: and by consequence also have a better esteem, then hitherto, of his
former Labors, as undoubtedly coming from the same place.

This is the aim and drift of Mr. White in this his Tutela; wherein truly he
seems, by so far expressing himself, to have given a very great advantage to
whosoever will impugn his former Writings. For now his Adversary has no more
to do, but to show (as easily he may) that this Geometry never came from
Heaven, and by consequence, that neither any of his former Works, (whereof Mr.
White would have this to be a pattern according to which they are to be
measured) ever came from thence. This I say he will easily make manifest; for
it is impossible, that ever so weak a piece, as this is, and with so many
Patent and open errors against Geometry (as we shall presently see) should ever
come from any Geometrician, much less from Heaven. Which that it may appear, we
will briefly run over the Propositions, as they are in the Book, to see which
of them may deserve to be thought to have particularly descended from Heaven:
and then note only some more patent and obvious errors, such as you your self
may easily conceive: by which you may guess at the rest, and what can be here
expected.

His Treatise then contains in all thirteen Propositions; of which the two
first only explicate the terms he is to use. The two next are taken out of
his Brother, Mr. Richard Whites Book called Hemisphaerium dissectum, as he also
acknowledges; so that certain it is, that these first four came not from
Heaven. The five following aim at the Quadratura Circuli, but perform no more
then a hypothetical, or conditionate Quadrature: that is, if such or such a
proportion were known, it were possible to square a circle; but of such
Quadratures as these, we have enough already, and books are every where full of
them. For the rest, I find nothing in these propositions truly demonstrated,
that may not be found in other Authors: so that in these nine first
Proposititions, we have nothing that may be thought a wonder fallen from
Heaven, as was promised.

In the Annotation before the tenth Proposition he endeavors to demonstrate,
that a Spiral line of the first revolution is precisely equal to half the
circumference of the including circle. For example that the Spiral, noted here
by the pricked line EABCMGHID, is equal to the half circumference, DQR. This
Demonstration indeed seems to have somewhat of the extraordinary in it: but yet
it is neither new, nor true; and so impossible it should come from Heaven. For
this self-same Demonstration was found out above thirty years ago by one Gulden
a Jesuit: and is to be seen in his Book, called Centrobaryca, or, De centro
Gravitatis; as Mr. White here also acknowledges. This Demonstration, I say,
Gulden found out, and shows in the said Book, lib. 2. c. 2. prop. 6. But
afterward, before the Book was printed, being advertised of the falsity found
out by calculation, and perceiving it to be so, he presently recalled the same
in the next Chapter, and clearly shows, that not only the Spiral line it self
is bigger then the said half circle, to which before he thought it was equal;
but also evidently shows, that the sides of an inscribed Polygone of twelve
Angles is also bigger then the said half circumference, as I shall afterward
declare.

Of this Guldens recalling Mr. White (as himself testifies) was by some friends
informed; but not being able, as it seems, to examine Guldens calculation, nor
to see the force of it, he presumed to print the said Demonstration, as his
own, and to maintain it to be good, and evident, and Guldens calculation, or
retractation, to be manifestly false, as we shall presently see.

This Demonstration I say, Mr. White let pass to the print; yet conceiving, as
it seems, that people would still think it to be taken out of Gulden, it being
the very same with his, he thought good to join thereto another of his own,
demonstrating the same assertion, in a different way from the former; which he
performs in the tenth and eleventh Propositions. And certain it is, that this
Demonstration is wholly his own, that is, that it neither came from Heaven, nor
from any other Geometrician; it being impossible, that so many and patent
errors should come from any that ever studied Geometry, or read so much as
Euclide; or even knew but how to resolve a plain Triangle.

For in the tenth Proposition he affirms and pretends to demonstrate, first,
that if in a Spiral line of the first revolution, be inscribed a Polygone with
equal angles, (as in the adjoined Diagram, you see here inscribed the Polygone
EABCMGHID, with eight equal angles) that then the sides of the said Polygone
shall equally exceed each other: that is, as much as DI exceeds IH, so much
precisely shall IH exceed HG, and HG exceed GM; and so of the rest.

Secondly, he affirms this common excess to be equal to the least side of all;
viz. to the side EA. These two Assertions he puts in the Title of the said
tenth Prop. which is this, Latera Polygoni inscripti spirali per aequales
angulos exuperant sese invicem per excessus minimo lateri aequales.

Thirdly he likewise affirms, that having let down from the points I, H, G, M,
etc. Perpendiculars to the opposite Semidiameters, (as here you see let down
the Perpendiculars IK, HF, GL, etc.) that then the parts of the said
Semidiameters, intercepted between the Perpendiculars and the Spiral, that is,
the parts KD, IF, GL, and so of the rest, shall be equal. This third he
inferres (though falsely, as presently we shall see) about the middle of the
said tenth Prop. in these words, Aequales itaque sunt rectae KD, IF, and HL.
all which three Assertions are evidently false, as I shall briefly show.

For if we put the Semidiameter ED (which according to the construction of the
Spiral, is here supposed to be divided into eight equal parts) to contain 800
equal parts; the next EI will contain 700: and EH will have 600, and EG 500,
and so forward: So that the first EA will have 100, and EB 200, etc.

Whereby we have now in every Triangle EDI, EIH, EHG, etc. two sides known,
together with the angle comprehended.

For example, in the Triangle EDI, we have the side ED 800, and E I 700,
together with the comprehended angle DEI of 45 degrees. So likewise in the
Triangle EIH, we have E I 700, EH 600, and the angle IEH 45 degrees as before;
and so of all the rest. Which being known, we may presently by resolving the
said Triangles, find the two last sides of the inscribed Polygone, to wit DI,
and IH, to contain the one 581, and the other 505, whose difference or excess
is 76. But if in the same manner we resolve the first Triangle EAB, we shall
find the second side AB to be only 147; from whence being taken the first
side EA 100, shows the difference between the first and second side to be only
47. And so in like manner will the difference between the second and third, AB
and BC be only 65. Now these three differences or excesses, 76, 47, and 65,
are far from being equal, as Mr. White would have them. Wherefore in this he
must needs confess himself quite mistaken, and his demonstration thereof to be
false.

Neither is his error less notorious in affirming the said excess, (which he
also falsely supposes to be common to all) to be equal to the least side, that
is, to the side EA: for EA being 100, is bigger then any of them all, as we
have seen. Yea, he is so inexcusable in this, that his very eyes might have
discovered the error.

His third Assertion is also as false and unexcusable, to wit, that the lines
KD, FI, LH, etc. are all equal. For resolving the Triangles EIK, EHF, and EGL
(in which you have a side with all the Angels) you will find EK 495. OF 424.
and EL 353 which being respectively subtracted from ED 800 EI 700. and EH 600,
leave KD 305, FI 276, and LH 247. which three numbers are also far (as you see)
from being equal, as Mr. White pretends to have dedemonstrated. Wherefore we
must needs here conclude, that such Demonstrations as these never came from
Heaven, as Mr. White persuades himself, and would have us believe. And ^ruly
whosoever reads this his tenth Prop. will clearly see his want of Principles,
and that he was fallen upon a business he understood not: wherein he was so
puzzelled, that he quite forgot what he had said he would prove, to wit, that
the said common excess was equal to the least side: for of this, after he had
put it in the title, he makes no more mention, nor once goes about to prove it.

Now out of so weak and false a ground as this of the tenth Prop. he
demonstrates in the eleventh (at least he thinks so) that the Spiral line
EABCMGHID, is equal to the half circumference DQR: but again performs it so
unskilfully, that although the ground now laid in the tenth were true, yet
follows not his intent. For by showing only that it is not bigger, he inferrs
it to be equal; which is no consequence, although the Antecedent were true: but
both the one and the other are false, as we shall presently see.

Now after so weak and false a Demonstration, by which he thinks he has
concluded the said Spiral and half circumference to be equal, he proceeds in
the twelfth Prop. to refute Gulden; who recalling (as was said) this very
Demonstration, (which now Mr. White pretends to be his own, and maintains to be
good) clearly shows, that not only the Spiral it self is bigger then the said
half circumference; but also an inscribed Polygone, for example of twelve equal
angles, is considerably bigger.

To confute this assertion of Gulden, Mr. White puts his twelfth Prop. wherein
he pretends to demonstrate against Gulden, that the sides of such a Polygone
being added together are less then the said half circumference: but truly with
a Demonstration like the rest, that is most false and frivolous. For having put
the line EC in the Diagram of the said twelfth Prop (which Diagram I have here
adjoined) to be the greatest side of a Polygone inscribed with twelve equal
angles, he supposes that the same longest side EC being taken six times, will
be equal to all the sides of the said Polygone added together: for so he
writes a little after the beginning of the aforesaid twelfth Prop. Clarum est
itaque, EC sexies repititam, hoc est figuram inscriptam spirali, esse majorem,
etc. Whereby you see that according to Mr. White it is all one, to take the
longest side of such a Polygone six times, or to take the whole inscribed
figure, that is, all the twelve sides added together: which notwithstanding is
most false. For if we put the Semidiameter DB, or DC to be 12000, we shall have
in the Triangle DEC two sides known, to wit DC 12000, and DE 11000, together
with the angle EDC grad. 30. From whence is evidently concluded EC to have
6031. (I omit here always the Fraction as making not to our present purpose)
which number taken six times makes only 36186: whereas all the twelve sides,
found out in the same manner and added together, make 40003, as appears in the
Table here adjoined. So that in this supposition Mr. White is quite out.

Yet notwithstanding this false supposition, he goes forward to demonstrate
against Gulden, that the sides of such a Polygone added together are less then
the half circumference; which he performs so confusedly, and unskilfully, that
it is impossible to infer any thing to his purpose out of such a discourse. But
be the discourse what it will, at last he strongly concludes against Gulden,
that the sides of the said Polygone are less then the half circumference.

But this his conclusion is most false, as Gulden has evidently shown, lib. 2.
c. 3. prop. 1. and may be so apprehended by any man that knows but how to
resolve a plain Triangle. For by finding every of the twelve sides of the
Polygone in such manner, as we now found the twelfth or longest side EC to be
6031. we shall have all their numbers, as appears in the here adjoined Table;
12 6031 11 5520 10 5011 9 4505 8 4001 7 3501 6 3006 5 2522 4 2053 3 1614 2 1239
1 1000 Summa lat 40003 Semiperiph 37715 Differentia 2288 all which added
together, make, as you see, 40003. Whereas if according to Archimedes, you
number the said half Circumference, by taking the said Semidiameter ED 12000
thrice with its seventh part, we shall find the said half circumference to
contain at most only 37715: which is far less then 40003. And by consequence
the sides of a twelve angled Polygone inscribed in a Spiral, are absolutely
longer then half the circumference of the first circle, as Gulden truly and
learnedly shows against Mr. Whites so weak a Demonstration for the contrary, as
we have seen.

By these discoveries of so many undeniable errors in his Ageometricall
Demonstration, one would judge that Mr. White had the least reason of all
others to censure any one; yet such is his passion, that he falls bitterly upon
Gulden, censures, vilifies, and reviles him insufferably, calling his
Computation unskilful, and that he has not a jot of Mathematick or Geometry
in him; terming him one of those half Scholars, who stealing diverse excellent
things out of other Learned men's Writings, endeavor to make them seem their
own. This bitter invective has Mr. White against Gulden, a man who never had
in the least offended him, perhaps never heard of him, being dead many years
since, and so not able now to answer for himself. Take Mr. Whites own words at
the end of his twelfth Proposition. Calculus itaque Guldenianus imperitus est,
and qualem ab ipso acceptari (neque enim vel talem ipse instruxit) decebat:
Homine prorsus Amathematico, ut legenti ipsius scripta pronum est patere. And a
little after having taxed his want of humility and candor, he concludes him to
be, Hominem officij Geometricij prorsus ignarum; and ex eo semidoctorum genere,
qui cum ex magnorum virorum scriptis egregia multa depeculati fuerint, ut sua
faciant, additis quibusdam levibus, justi voluminis ostentatione se vulgo
discentium ostentant, etc. This gall, whilst Mr. White flourished amongst his
admirers with his new Demonstration, might have affixed some seeming blemish
upon Gulden, amongst such Ageometricians as Mr. White is, but now appearing by
what is said, to proceed from so unskilful a hand, it cannot tend to the
disgrace of any, save the censurer, who condemns that which he understands not.
For certainly no Geometrician would or durst have said so much; the Computation
being performed according to the 47. 1. Euclidis, by the extraction of the
square Root; then which there can be none more exact and manifest. As for that
he calls him Semidoctus, a half Scholar, one utterly void of all Mathematick;
that he has stolen out of other men's works; and all this immediately after so
many errors committed by himself, he has put the lash into the hands of such,
who if they please, will quickly know to use it; especially being so justly
provoked by seeing one of their own Order so wrongfully abused; and will not
fail to retort upon him all that he imposes upon Gulden. And truly whosoever
shall read this Geometrical Treatise (which Mr. White esteems the masterpiece
of all that ever he has writ) and Guldens Book called Centrobaryca, will find
so main a difference, that Mr. White without any prejudice, by what appears in
his, may be scarce thought fit to be Guldens Scholar.

And whereas he calls Gulden one of those half Scholars, who steal out of
other Books, they will easily make it appear, that, whatsoever it be of Gulden,
certain it is, that Mr. White has stolen that Demonstration out of Gulden. For
even by his own confession it came not from himself; Non a me haec habes, etc.
and to say it came from Heaven, were a blasphemy, it being manifestly false, as
we have seen: Wherefore it must necessarily be concluded, that Mr. White took
it out of Gulden, who printed it many years ago, as a particular invention of
his own; neither can any other Author be cited, who published it before him.

Truly a man would think Mr. White to have already said more then enough in so
vilifying, and even trampling upon this Author, especially there appearing no
cause for such bitterness. But he is not satisfied to have thus disgraced him,
as much as lies in his power, with the note of ignorance in the Science he
professes; but he falls upon his Moral Virtues, taxing him of Vanity, want of
Humility, Candor, and the like, affirming him to be so vain, that although he
thought he had committed an error, (to wit, in his Demonstration of the
Spiral) yet he could by no means be induced to cover it, by blotting it out, or
heartily to confess the same, but goes on, framing excuses, as if in the very
error he had carried himself gallantly. Master Whites words are these in the
place now cited: Et (quod faedissimum est) tantae vanitatis est, ut cum
erravisse se putaverat, neque delendo tegere, neque candide confiteri
sustinuerit; sed excusationes texere, quasi in ipso errore egregie se gesserit,
ostentare pergat, etc.

O most unworthy and false calumny! when I had read these in Mr. white, and
compared them with what Gulden says in recalling the said Demonstration of the
Spiral, I was amazed, how Mr. White did not even blush when he writ so foul and
evident an untruth. For of all that, which he so maliciously here imputes unto
this man, there is not one word to be seen in Gulden, nor the least ground or
shadow in his writings; yea, the just contrary to what is here so shamefully
avouched, does manifestly appear, as any man may see in his Book called
Centrobaryca, cited by Mr. white. Where lib. 2. c. 3. retracting the said
Demonstration, he plainly tells the occasion of it; viz. that being informed
that a certain Mathematician had by Calculation discovered an error in his
Demonstration, although at first it made no great impression in him, for he
thought himself so secure, that he hoped sooner to find a thousand errors in
that Mathematicians Calculation, then one in his own Demonstration: Mill
potius sperabam me in Calculo hujus examinis, inventurum errores, quam vel
unicum in meis inventis; sed contra quasi accidit, etc. But I found, says he,
just the contrary. For having examined the said Calculation, I clearly saw the
error, and was forced to confess it, Victus debui dare manus. Whereupon he
presently retracts it, and is so far from excusing the error, or refusing to
confess it, or bragging as if he had carried himself gallantly therein, (as Mr.
White most falsely and injuriously imposes upon him) that he plainly and
heartily confesses it, saying, that he had rather follow the example of other
worthy Authors, who in like case have, to their own praise and profit of
others, revoked their errors, then of such as had rather accuse Archimedes,
Euclide, yea, Geometry it self, then once acknowledge the errors of which they
were convinced.

As to that whereof Mr. White most wrongfully taxes him (in those words neque
delendo tegere) for printing the said Demonstration, although he thought it to
be false, Gulden gives there also the reason, why he printed it: to wit, that
others seeing how he had erred in a Demonstration, which at first sight seemed
so current, might beware of the like fallacy: Ut sciant sibi cavere a scopulis.

By all which is most evident, that it was ignorance, and passion, and neither
knowledge, nor reason, which extorted these ugly censures from Mr. White
against Gulden: and how far that Author was from that vanity and stubbornness
in maintaining what he had once asserted, though he thought it to be false, as
Mr. White would make the world believe. For I dare maintain, that there is not
an Author to be found, who in the like case has carried himself more modestly
and heartily then this man has done: as any, who shall read the said third As
you may see at the end of this Letter.
chapter, will, to Guldens praise and Mr. Whites confusion, plainly discover.
And God grant Mr. White may but with as much humility recall and acknowledge
what he has written amiss in matters of more concern, as this man does retract
his Mathematical error.

Wherefore in this so much vilifying of Gulden, he has again put the lash into
his adversaries hands, who may use it at their pleasure, and make known unto
the world, that no man that had any worth in him, conscience, or moral honesty,
would ever so unworthily have carried himself as Mr. White has in this. Yea,
they may, if they please, retort all that he so wrongfully lays upon Gulden,
most justly upon Mr. white: making it appear, that he is rather to be taxed of
vanity, as having gotten only some few Terms of Geometry, (and yet more then
he knows well how to use) would fain have the glory of a Mathematician. For
although with the one hand he seems to drive it away, yet with the other he
draws it to him, as any man but reading his Preface will clearly see. For
although he tell his Reader, that he is no Geometrician; and that these so
great things (as he fancies them) come not from himself but from God; Non a me
haec habes, etc. yet he would have him withal to take notice and well
understand, that he is also able even by the force of his natural wit, to
perform as great things as these are. For speaking of himself and what he is to
deliver in the said Geometrical Tract, he writes thus: Author vel sua industria
perfecit quae offort, vel privilegio magnae Providentiae accepit. Si a se, and
ingenij ea virtute, qua plura ejusmodi conficere in parato habeat, certe is
est, ut non sint contemnenda illa caetera, quae in publicum usum elaboravit,
etc. Whereby you see, he plainly tells his Reader, that he has now already in
store diverse other things, as good as these. Plura ejusmodi in parato habet.
And these also found out by the vigor and strength of his own wit. Ea ingenij
virtute, qua, etc. Yea although he tells his Reader, that he most only thank
God for these wonderful things; and that in thanking the Author he shall do
him injury, and lay a burden on his shoulders more then he is able to bear:
Mihi si grataris, injuriarum te postulo, quod plus in me oneris aggeras, quam
cui sim ferendo. Notwithstanding he plainly shows by what you have heard, that
he is ready and able to bear more thanks, then I believe his Reader will give
him: especially when he shall perceive himself deluded in the Preface, with
expectation of wonders from Heaven, and when all is done, finding nothing worth
the reading.

But Mr. White is not content with so much depressing this Author, but passes
further, branding him with the badge of an Hereretick, or worse; intimating him
to be one of that pernicious Sect of Pedants, who by their prating, labor and
endeavor to destroy not only all humane Sciences, but even Christian Faith it
self, by taking all certainty from them. For giving a reason why he so much
enveighs against a man wholly unknown to him, he presently adds, Quantumvis
operae pretium erat, lectorem monitum reddere de exitiali hac sciolorum secta,
quae sub professione facultatis garriendi, omnem certitudinem, tum e scientiis,
tum ex fide Christiana tollere molitur. Here Mr. White stops; and truly it was
time: for having forgot what he first intended, to wit, to draw out a perfect
picture of Gulden, he has mistaken the colors, and goes on drawing forth his
own, as any man that ever knew them both, will evidently discover.

Now if you ask me what was the main cause, that moved Mr. White to this height
of passion, he himself tells you, to wit, that he was forced and compelled to
utter those censures. And why? Because the shadow (as he says) of Guldens
great Tome did hinder his Scholars from embracing the truth (he should have
said the falsity) he proposed to them. For so he writes in the place before
cited. Haec coactus sum de homine caeteroqui ignoto prodere, quia umbra Tomi
illustris, per opinionem consequam, officiebat veritati, quam ejusdem studiosis
offerebam. In which words I should rather think Mr. White to have wronged his
Scholars, in making them such as should be frighted with a shadow. But it seems
more probable, that his Scholars better understood the force of Guldens
Computation, then their Master either would or could, and saw clearly that it
did conclude. Howsoever it is most strange, that any wise man for so frivolous
a toy as this, should so highly offend both Almighty God and his Neighbor, and
so evidently expose his own reputation to the unavoidable stain of a notorious
Detractour.

Truly, as it seems to me, in this the particular hand of God shows it self, as
well for his own good, (if he will make use of it) as for the good of others:
in permitting Mr. White so to cross his own designs, that whereas he thought in
this Tract to advance himself and his former writings, in the repute of every
one, he should find the quite contrary. For whereas he thought thereby to have
got the name of a great Mathematician, he has clearly showed that he is none;
and that he is indeed only furnished with such general Terms and common
Notions in the Mathematics, as being with confidence and boldness pronounced
in the company of such, as do no more thoroughly understand them then himself,
are apt to produce in their minds, an opinion, that the pronouncer is
certainly a learned man, and understands exactly what they hear so strongly
assevered by him: whereas if some learned Mathematician should perhaps over
hear him he would smile to hear so much Geometrical Nonsense. Nay, whereas he
assured himself to conciliate an immovable authority to all his former
Dictates amongst his admirers, by this unparalleld Demonstration, even some of
them (as I am certainly informed) have discovered the weakness of it, and both
blush to see it, and labor to hide it. In like manner, whereas (by virtue of
his said Tutela) he aimed to be accounted a person whom Almighty God
particularly designed to use as his Instrument for the governing of his Church
in this present conjuncture; and to this effect, to have received great light
and Infused knowledge from him, as we have heard him speak in his Preface; he
has now given such a Character of himself, that it is impossible, that any man
should be so simple as to think, that the wisdom of God would particularly make
choice of such an Instrument for so high a Work; to which men of far greater
Charity and Perfection of Virtue then he can with any reason or ground be
supposed to have, are wont to be called.

This unworthy proceeding of Mr. White had made me almost forget to refute his
Quadratura Circuli, pretended to be shown in the first nine Propositions:
which I deferred to the last, because he in his thirteenth and last Proposition
has put the last hand thereunto, and so confirmed as he thinks the ground
thereof, that he supposes it now as evident (to use his own phrase)as that a
Boat is a Boat.

Wherefore in this thirteenth Prop. he again affirms, what he had before
averred in the sixth; to wit, that the Segments, or Portions of unequal
circles, having the same Chord, (so that they be less then a Semicircle) are
proportional to their Axes. Portiones circulorum inaequalium, semicirculo
minores, quarum subtensae sunt oequales, sunt in ratione suorum axium. For
example, in the adjoined Diagram, he affirms, that the greater Segment BFCB
has the same proportion to the lesser Segment BDCB, that the greater Axis F G
has to the lesser DG. This is the ground of his Quadratura, which we will now
show to be most false, and by consequence, the whole building to fall. Which
that it may the more clearly appear, let us suppose EB or OF the Semidiameter
of the greater Segment BFCB, to be 1000, and his angle at the Center, BEC, to
be 120 degrees, or the third part of the whole circle BFC: which being supposed
we have.

1. EG 500, as being the Sine of the angle EBC 30 degrees, and by consequence
the greater Axis GF is also 500. 2. By the usual proportion of the Diameter to
the circumference we shall find the Sector E B F C, being the third part of
the whole circle, to contain 10476191/21. 3. By the Perpendicular EG 500, and
the half base GB 866, or Sine of 60 degree. We shall find the Triangle EBC to
contain 433000: which being subtracted from 10476191/21 the whole Sector,
leaves 614619^ for the greater Segment BFCB.
In like manner, if we put AB the Semidiameter of the lesser Segment BDCB to be
2000, that is, double to EB, we shall find

1. By the 47. 1. Eucl. AG 18027/9 proxime: which taken from A 2000, leaves
1972/9 for the lesser Axis GD. 2. By what is known in the Triangle ABE we shall
find the angle BAE, whose double shows the whole angle of the Sector ABDC, to
be 51 degr. 19 30 from whence by proportion thereof to 360 degr. is found the
Sector ABDC to contain 1792126. 3. By the Perpendicular AG 18027/9, and the
half base BG 866, is found the Triangle ABC to contain 15612051/9 which being
taken from the whole Sector 1792126, leaves 2309204/9 for the lesser Segment
BDCB.
So that now we have the said Segments and their Axes, all four in numbers, to
wit, the greater Axis 500, the lesser 1972/9 the greater Segment 6146191/21 and
the lesser 2309204/9 which four numbers are by no means proportional, as they
should be, if Mr. Whites Demonstration were true. For by saying as 500 to
1972/9 so 6146191/21 to a fourth, there will not be found (as was expected)
2309204/9 but another number far bigger, to wit, 2424331/3 the difference being
(as you see) 115128/9. Which great difference shows evidently the falsity of
Mr. Whites Assertion. Yea, if we put the greater Segmentto want but very little
of a Semicircle, for example only one Minute, or one Second, etc. the error
will be yet more notorious, and the proof more easy. For then the greater Axis
will be 1000 Proxime, and the greater Segment will be 1571428: the lesser Axis
will be 268: and the lesser Segment 363238. which four numbers are yet far more
disproportional: for by saying as 100 to 268: so 1571428 to a fourth, we shall
find 411142, which is greater then 363238 by 47904, almost an eighth part of
the lesser Segment. So Mr. Whites Demonstration of the Quadratura comes to just
nothing. But this is like the rest: for with him Demonstrations are nothing but
stout and undaunted asseverations, proved by a company of Terms (that make a
show of learning to the unlearned) jumbled at a venture together.

Some perhaps, to excuse this so gross an error of Mr. Whites, will say, that
by Portiones Circulorum he meant not the Segments, as we have said, but only
the Arches or Circular Lines BFC and BDC. But this explication will not
suffice: for neither had this been to his purpose for the Quadratura: nor in it
self is it true. For neither are these Arches proportional to the said Axes;
the one BFC being 20955/21 and the other BDC being 17921/2 which numbers have
by no means the same proportion that 500 has to 1972/9 as a blind man may
see. Wherefore Mr. White must be content to lay up this Error with the rest.

And thus much, Honored Sir, concerning such things as Mr. White pretended
here to demonstrate, but has not performed. But if you ask me what he has in
this little Treatise truly and clearly demonstrated, I can only answer, that
he has demonstrated, first that he has a great deal of vanity: secondly, that
he has very little or no Geometry: and thirdly, that he has as little or less
charity. For the rest, I have no more to say at present, but hoping you will
rather reflect upon what is here said, then upon the rude and unpolisht Style
by which it is expressed, I remain

Your humble Servant.

The Publisher TO THE READER.
HAving Printed the precedent Letter, and understanding before the publishing
of it, that Mr. Whites Tutela so often mentioned, was suppressed, no more Copyes
to be had, whereby the Reader might receive satisfaction in conferring what is
here said, with the Authors own words: I thought good to annex such places,
verbatim out of Mr. Whites Book, as are touched in the said Letter. To which
purpose I have also adjoined Guldens Retractation of his Spiral, taken out of
his Book, de Centro Gravitatis, the Book it self being dear, and scarce to be
got. I have put both these, first in Latin, as they were written by the
Authors: next in English, because the precedent Letter mentioning them, is
also in English. And first I will set down Mr. Whites Preface to the Reader,
there being first mention made of it in the precedent Letter. Which Preface is
to be seen in the beginning of the said Book, to which he frames this Title,

CHRYSASPIS, Seu Scriptorum suorum in Scientiis obscurioribus Apologiae vice
propalata TUTELA GEOMETRICA Ad Lectorem Cordatum and Serium.
ARistotelis (dicam, an Naturae?) pomaeria extenderat Digbaeus Eques, coactis
in pellucida stativa Naturae partibus, quas turbide miscuerat generationum
necessitas. Solum, fundatura Substructiones, occupaverat quanti ipsa moles,
rari densique supra serpentium ludis tessellata. Proximo sese exposuit gradu
fraterna elementorum acies, primis (ut appellant) armata qualitatibus. Haec
obnixis in alternam internecionem frontibus, consanguineo cruore quanti aream,
ad inexhaustam mixtorum ubertatem per admirandos and inscrutabiles plexus
ebulliendam irrigant and faecundant. Ornabant mixta Phrygionatae secundarum
qualitatum Texturae; accendebant Actionis and Passionis emicantia and humanum
contuitum obtundentia lumina. Sed neque Electricorum assultus and resultus,
neque Magneticorum in Homogeneo corpore mutabiles quasi consulto leges; neque
Sympatheticorum ex insidiis dolosa and tenebricosa e longinquo Sagittatio,
origines and semitas suas a tam acri vestigatore celare valuerunt. Quin and ad
superiora sedilia mixtorum capita plantae ascenderunt, and gradum ad animalia
promoverunt. Hic se objecerunt scrutino sensus and sensuum metae, venenerandi
quodammodo naturae limits: and superati scrutatoris oculum in arcana Animae,
and invisum orbem trajecere. Substitit in hac altitudine Digbaeus, materiam and
materiatorum universitatem tanto a se intervallo in imum dissitam, non sine
horrore despectans; and nobilissimo operi, cui de Immortalitate Animae nomen
fecerat, columnas apposuit. Tantus erat Scientiae fulgor, ut lippitudini
saeculi caecitatem adjiceret, and furebant vanitatis, quae in multiloquio
efflorescit, amatores veritatis imaginem non sustinentes, and potioribus haec
scientiis adversari jactiabant.

Propterea necessarius erat aliarum Disciplinarum consensus, and rudem
acceptaverat ingentis illius opificii Author. Inventus sum, qui etsi
Eloquentiae Decessoris impar and compendio natus, auderem desideratorum
Epitomen aggredi, and contractis, quae fusius Digbaeus, and pro rerum qualitate
disputaverat; adjectisque Metaphysica tum corporum tum incorporeorum
delineatione, Institutiones Peripateticas conderem. Adjeci and Sacras, and
opuscula (quamvis nihil meum opusculi molem excedat) nonnulla Philosophica, de
Mundo Dialogum, and praefationem ante Latinam Editionem operis Digbaeani.
Theologicam quoque Buccinam de Fidei and Theologiae Natura; and ejusdem
defensionem adversus errorem cujusdam Regularis de Personali Infallibilitate
Papae. Praeterea de Gratiae cum liberate consensu, and medio Animarum statu
singula Commentariola. Non mirum, si haec durius excepta sint, quam Digbaeani
labores. Cum and infaeliciori stylo sint exarata, and iter caecioribus obfessum
scopulis and magis affectuum tempestatibus objectum terant. Sed idcirco maxim,
quod in omnibus Physicam, Metaphysicam, and ipsam Theologiam, inaudito conamine
ad severiores Disciplinas adjungere, and Architectonicam contignationem
perspectabilem in toto processu, and dictorum consensum and consequentiarum
fidem (nihilominus citra rigoris Geometrici ostentationem) in eas inducere
tentaverim. Quare hunc desiderari suspicatus duos Euclidas, Physicum majorem
natu, adolescentiorem Metaphysicum effudi, non vanae spei futuros vades. Verum
enim vero etiam hanc evidentiam obstinata incredulitate opprimi sum expertus.
Quid super mihi reliqueram? Memineram a Novatoribus fidei posci miracula. Sed
ad ea quae sua evidentia stabilienda erant, flagitare argumenta ultra vim
naturae posita propudiosum erat: attamen si quae in Scientiarum Thesauris
admiranda laterent miraculis supparia, non immerito ad difficiliorum fidem
adhiberi consentaneum erat. Conjeci itaque oculos in Geometriam, cujus si qua
dogmata hujusmodi veneratione consecrata laterent, ea neque alienis ad famam
praesidiis indigerent, and suo munitis sigillo fidem conciliarent. Et adverti
reservata quaedam ab ipsa usque Disciplinae infantia arcana, quae maximorum
ingeniorum labores passa in impossibiliam transiverant classem. Pappus and
plerique posteriores Geometrae tres Problematum ordines declaraverant; quorum
infimus regula and circino perficiebatur; medius corporum sectilium vi;
supremum non nisi fictitiis lineis subjiciebant. Et in posterioribus haec
arcana recondiderant. Vieta etiam adjectis argumentis quaedam (...)
demonstravisse visus est. Cartesius desperatam rem agnovit. Plerique proposito
Problemati satisfecisse sibi visi sunt, si ad hoc redegissent, ut eo soluto
monstrarent aliquod clausorum istiusmodi esse reseratum. Te testem invoco,
Maxim Archimedes, in secunda secundi de Sphaera and Cylindro, nisi mendax
imponat memoria, Hinc itaque captandam scriptis meis umbram censui. Tu modo
apud temet in consilium se vocatum hoc pensi habeto. Author vel sua industria
perfecit quae offert, vel privilegio magnae Providentiae accepit. Si a se and
ingeniiea virtute, qua plura ejusmodi conficere in parato habeat, certe is est,
ut non sint contemnenda illa caetera, quae in publicum usum elaboravit; imo hoc
nomine trutina acri aigna, quia de tali orta sunt patre. Sin ab exorti (...)
vigilantia profectum hoc munus suspicaris, expende quanto fortius te ad
reliquorum examinationem allegatum comperias. Me aspicis? Intuere me hominem,
quem nemo Geometram salutet, modo ipse sit. Neque enim Geometrices plenitudinem
vel appetivi. Prelectorem non audivi; studium non sum professus; magnorum
Authorum nullum perlegi, non saltem Euclidem. Aliarum Disciplinarum ambitio me
semper traxit and defixit: Geometricorum hunc fructum and speravi and tuli, ut
eorum rigorem ad Metaphysica traducerem. Caeteroqui oblectamento mihi erant,
cum deforet potiorum commoditas. Talis cum sim, non a me haec habes, sed ab eo,
qui ex legibus providentiae suae ea Gubernationi Ecclesiae suae in hoc rerum
articulo opportuna and fecit and vidit: Illi accepta refer. Mihi si grataris,
injuriarum te postulo, quod plus in me oneris aggeras, quam cui sim ferendo:
and in Deum, a quo avertis quale quale a te debetur benignitatis praemium. Quod
superest, tibi consule, and ostentum a coelo ad te delapsum ne contemnito.

In English thus. A GOLDEN SHIELD: OR, A Geometrical Defense As an APOLOGY for
all his other Writings in the obscurer Sciences.
By Mr. Thomas White.


As for the Preface, the first part thereof concerns not our present purpose,
as speaking only of the profound research made into nature by that worthy
Gentleman, Sir Kenelme Digby, (whose learning and respects to Mr. White would
never certainly have suffered this Geometrical Treatise to pass abroad, had he
seen it before it was published) I shall only English the second, which Mr.
White falls upon by occasion of an objection that some things touched in Sir
Kenelmes Philophy seemed not fully agreeable to Sciences of higher consequence.
The refutation of which objection Mr. White undertook, and so gives a brief
account of such writings as he had published to that effect: and comes at last
to this present Tutela which he is about to publish, intending it as a defense
of all he has hitherto written, and whereof he speaks to his Reader in these
words, Tu modo apud temet, etc. as we saw just now.

In English thus.
TAke gentle Reader this into thy serious consideration, either the Author
(meaning himself) has performed the things he here presents thee with, by his
own Industry, or by Gods peculiar Providence. If they be the fruits of his own
industry, and proceed from that vigor of wit, by which he is also ready to
perform many the like: certainly he is a person whose other writings formerly
published for the common good, ought not to be contemned. Yea, for this very
reason, they deserve a profound consideration, as proceeding from such a Father.

But in case thou consider them as coming from the Almighty, then think with
thy self; how much greater thy obligation is to examine the rest of his Works.
Look thou upon me? Behold the man, whom no man will call a Geometrician if
he be one himself. Neither did I ever desire to complete my self in that
faculty; I was never taught it, nor did I ever profess to study it. I never
read over any chief Author in that Science, no not so much as Euclide; but was
always delighted with other studies. From Geometry I both expected and
attained sufficient for transferring its vigorous proceedings to the
Metaphysick. Otherwise it was only my recreation when I wanted better
employment. Since therefore I am such, thou have not these things from me, but
from him, who in his Divine providence, both saw and fitted them for the
Government of his Church in this present conjuncture. Give him the thanks; for
if thou apply them to me, I shall expostulate the injury done me in laying a
greater weight upon me then I am able to bear; and thou will lose the reward
thou should receive from God. It remains that thou neglect not thy own good,
nor contemn a wonder come down to thee from Heaven.

Thus Mr. White in his Preface. By all which, and by the Title of his Book, he
plainly shows, that according to the clearness and solidity of the following
Demonstrations in Geometry, men must take the just measure of the solidity and
strength of his other Demonstrations in Philosophy and Divinity. And thus much
for those places of the Preface mentioned in the precedent Letter. I will now
set down those that concern the dispute between Mr. White and Gulden, which are
only two; the former is in Nota secunda before the tenth Proposition: the
latter in Nota Quarta at the end of the twelfth.

Ex Tutela Geometrica ante Prop. 10. Nota Secunda.
Finieram, and regulam cum circino consecraturiebam; cum ab amicis monitus sum,
quam in Exercitatione Geometrica exhibueram spiralis ad Peripheriam Circuli
aequationem, a magni nomin^ Mathematico, and prius excogitatam, and eadem
demonstratione confirmatam, and posterioribus consiliis repudiatam fuisse, and
opposita demonstratione reprobatam. Conscius eram, non indiligenter apodixi
meae invigilavisse. Terruit tamen hominem (cui omnia alia prae Mathess
praehabita fuerant) tot notis veritatis impressus rumor. Tollo de Tabula manum,
and cum typis mandavissem, quae sunt praemissa, caeter a usque ad examinationem
hujus improperii sustinenda decrevi.

Author oppositionis erat quidam Paulus Guldenus, ex Societate Jesu, editor
justi voluminis, quod pro Geometrico suppositum Centrobaryca appellavit. Quid
agerem? ubi degebam, opus illud non apparebat, and negotium quod illic gerebam,
ad umbilicum perductum erat, and jam egelidum ver monebat aestivam sedem
Ciconiarum monitu^ vestigare. Contuli me itaque Lugdunum Batavorum, and gratia
clariff. Mathematum ibidem Professoris Examinationem Problematis mei aggredior.
Primo ipsam revisi; apparuit constantissima: summam tibi sic accenseo, and.

In English thus.
I Had even now ended, and began to lay my Rule and Compass aside, when I was
admonished by my friends, that the equation of a Spiral to the circumference of
a Circle, which I had demonstrated in my Exercitatione Geometrica, had been
found out before and confirmed with the same Demonstration, by a famous
Mathematician: who afterward retracted it, and by a contrary Demonstration,
showed it to be false. I was conscious to my self that I had not slightly
examined my Demonstration: nevertheless a rumor with so many marks of truth
somewhat frighted me, being a man that esteemed all other learning before the
Mathematical. I presently made a stop, and having printed the precedent part de
Quadratura, I deferred the rest, till I had examined this reproach.

The retracting Author was one Paul Gulden of the Society of Jesus, who had
printed a complete Volume, which he pretending to be a Geometrical Work,
called it Centrobaryca, What should I do? Where I then lived. this Book was not
to be had, and my work in hand was even now finished. Besides the Spring
drawing on, did invite me by the crying of the Storks, to seek my Summer
habitation. I went therefore to Leyden in Holland, and with the favor of the
most famous Professor of Mathematics there, I begin to examine my Problem; I
revised it, and found it most solid, Take here the sum thereof, etc.

This is Mr. Whites relation of the beginning of the Dispute between him and
Gulden, handsomely, as you see, contrived, that he may not seem to have stolen
the said Demonstration out of Gulden, but to have fallen upon it himself, or
had it from Heaven. Yet all this will not serve his turn, but still the Reader
will imagine those words in his Preface, where (speaking of this Demonstration
together with the rest) he says, Non haec a me habes, sed ab eo qui ex legibus
Providentiae suae, etc. are to be changed thus, (applying them to this
particular) Non haec a me habes, sed a Paulo Guldeno, qui ante trigintafere
annos ea primo invenit, and postea retractavit, etc. After this relation Mr.
White proceeds to confirm the said Demonstration and infringe the Retractation
of Gulden, showing his computation to be false, as he imagines: which done, he
makes his Nota Quarta, or invective against Gulden in these words.

Nota Quarta.
Calculus itaque Guldenianus imperitas est, and qualem ab ipso acceptari (neque
enim vel talem ipse instruxit) decebat, homine prorsus Amathematico, ut legenti
ipsius scripta pronum est patere. Nam dum proportionem Spiralis ad circulum ad
struere conaretur, assumpsit sine probatione propositionem prorsus
improbabilem, nempe, lineas intra aliam ductas esse minores illa. Et si enim
videatur de Inscriptis velle loqui, tamen quas ipse scribit nihil minus sunt
quans Inscriptae, cum circum scriptam non accedant nisi altero duntaxat
termino. Rursus aequali temeritate vult Arcus circuli esse proportionaliter
medios inter arcus Spiralis aequalium angulorum. Sed (quod foedissimum est)
tantae vanitatis est, ut cum erravisse sese putaverat, neque delendo tegere,
neque candide confiteri sustinuerit, sed excusationes texere quasi in ipso
errore egregie se gesserit, ostentare pergat, Quae (utpote de sumptae ex locis
Logicis vel Rhetoricis) clare docent hominem officij Geometrici (quod hac
respust) esse prorsus ignarum, and ex eo Semidoctorum genere, qui cum ex
magnorum virorum scriptis egregia multa depeculati fuerint, ut sua faeciant,
additis quibusdam levibus, justi voluminis oftentatione se vulgo discentium
ostentant: and (quod perniciosissimum est) mixtis incertis, sacrum Scientiae
nomen denigrant, ut abunde egit noster Guldenus; Saltitationem telluris circa
centrum, and consistentiam Centri in puncto imaginario, in Geometricum
tractatum inferciens. H^c coactus sum de homine caeteroqui ignoto prodere quia
umbra Tomi illustris, per opinionem consequam, officiebat veritati, quam
ejusdem studiosis offerebam. Quantumvis operae pretium erat lectorem monitum
redaere de exitiali hac Sciolorum Secta, quae sub professione facultatis
garriendi omnem certitudinem, tum e Scientiis, tum ex Fide Christiana tollere
molitur.

In English thus.
WHerefore Guldens calculation is unskilful, and such as was fit to be received
by him (for he made it not himself But he there made another more accurate.
) a man no way versed in Mathematick, as his Reader will easily perceive. For
endeavoring to give the proportion of a Spiral to a Circle, he assumes without
proof a proposition wholly improbable, viz. that lines drawn within another
line, are less then it. For though he seem to intend to speak of lines
inscribed; yet those he describes are nothing less then such, since they touch
the circumscribed but with one end only. In like manner with equal temerity he
will have the Arches of a Circle to be mean proportionals between the Arches of
a Spiral of equal Both these are retracted by Gulden, prop. 4.
Angles. But that which above all is the most detestable, his vanity is so
great, that when he thought he had erred, he could neither endure to suppress
it, nor heartily to acknowledge it, but proceeds framing excuses, and brags, as
if therein he had carried himself very gallantly. All which, being but
flourishes of Rhetoric, clearly show him to be a man wholly ignorant of what
belongs to Geometry; which uses no such Arts: and that he is one of those petty
Scholars, who having stolen diverse excellent things out of other men's
Writings, that they may make them seem their own, add some few trivial
matters, and then boast themselves amongst their Scholars as the Authors of a
great Volume: and (which is most pernicious) by mingling many uncertainties,
defile the Sacred Name of Science; as this Gulden has done to the full,
thrusting into a Geometrical Treatise the Dancing of the Earth about its
Center, and the Consistency of the same Center in an Imaginary Point. These
things I was forced to publish of a man otherwise unknown to me, because the
shadow of so fair a Tome, through the opinion it had gained, hindered the light
of that truth, which I proposed to those that sought it. Nevertheless it was
worth the labor, to admonish the Reader of this pernicious Sect of Sciolists,
who under profession of the Faculty of Prating, endeavor to remove all
certainty, as well from Sciences, as from Christian Faith.

Hitherto we have heard, or rather seen Mr. Whites gall against this Author,
through whose sides he unworthily seems to endeavor the wounding of his whole
Order, under the title of Exitialis Sciolorum Secta. Truly a man would wonder
to see, how studiously and completely Mr. White here acts the part of a
malicious Detractor, seeking every way to defame his Adversary: for besides
what we have already heard in the precedent Letter, he intimates him here to be
so little versed in the Mathematics, as not to be able to make even the
computation of a Polygone of twelve sides: for speaking (as we have heard) of
such a Calculation which he terms unkilful, and calls it Guldens, (though he
tells us withal, that Gulden made it not himself, but received it from another)
he maliciously inserts in a Parenthesis, Neque enim vel talem ipse instruxit,
thereby to insinuate, that Gulden was unable to frame so trivial a Computation,
as he (Mr. White) esteemed this. Wherein yet he could not be ignorant of the
great injury he did this Author; who having set down the said Calculation of
twelve sides, acknowledging it to be none of his own, but sent him from
another, he examines and approves it in prop. I. c. 3. lib. 2. Which done, he
presently in prop. 3. exhibites another of his own far more accurate, as
consisting of a thousand sides, and performed by a different way of
computation, with laborious Tables expressing the quantity of each particular
side: thence also probably inferring that the proportion of the said Spira^ to
the half Circumference is as 1961 to 1818 proxime. Yet Mr. White would take no
notice of this Computation, although it were so near the place from whence he
took that other of twelve sides.

But having attained his end in this he proceeds, finding a means to asperse
him with a censure of absolute ignorance in the Mathematics: where that the
Reader may see Mr. Whites malicious way of proceeding, he must know that Gulden
(as we shall presently hear in his own words) having (before the printing or
publishing the often mentioned Demonstration of the Spiral) discovered by help
of a Friend an error therein, thought good notwithstanding to print it, not as
a true one, but as erroneus. This he performs in c. 2. lib. 2. and presently c.
3. shows and refutes all the particular errors committed in c. 2. to the end
that others advertised of the errors committed in cap. 2. might beware of
committing the like; Vt sciant (says he) sibi cavere a scopulis.

Now here Mr. White plays his game, and taking no notice at all of this,
plays upon Gulden, as if he had affirmed the contents of cap. 2. to be really
true; which, as I said, Gulden did publish as absolutely false: then which a
more unworthy proceeding can hardly be imagined, as will now appear.

For in the above named Nota Quarta, Mr. White terms him, Hominem prorsus
Amathematicum, a man utterly ignorant of the Mathematics, in assuming (as he
says) without proof a Proposition wholly improbable, viz. that Lines drawn
within another are less then it.

But in this Mr. White extremely wrongs the Author, who only sets down cap.
2. Prop. 3. the said Proposion as erroneous, which he took at first sight to be
true; and afterward cap. 3. Prop. 1. at large declares the error. Which had
he not done, I dare boldly affirm, that all Mr. Whites Geometry would never
have been able to discover. But by this proceeding Mr. White thinks to attain
what he aimed at; viz. the depressing of Gulden, and the exalting of himself.
For by concealing Guldens refutation of the said Proposition, on the one side
he would give the world to understand, that Gulden was not able to see and
rectify the error: on the other he would gain to himself the opinion of a
sharp wit, and deep insight into the Principles of Geometry, in being able to
detect what so great a Mathematician (as he reports in his Nota secunda that
Gulden was esteemed) could not perceive: whereas indeed if Gulden had not put
it into Mr. Whites head, it had never been there. But to seek the glory of a
great Wit and profound Mathematician, as also to purchase an esteem to all his
other Writings by such Arts as these, is a thing most unworthy of a Gentleman.
And though such Artifices may for a time, by some more affected to him then
learned to discover them, be received with applause; yet at last they will be
discovered, as here they are, and instead of the hoped glory, bring nothing but
shame to such as use them.

Lastly, he accuses Gulden of rashness for affirming (as he says) the circular
Arches to be mean proportionalls between the Spiral Arches of equal Angles.
Wherein he uses the like artifice as before, by making Gulden assert even what
he absolutely denies. For this Assertion corresponds only to what Gulden says
in the said cap. 2. Prop. 8. where he delivers it as false, and after proves
the falsity, cap. 3. prop. 4, n. 6.

Thus much for Mr. VVhites invective against Gulden; let us now, if you please,
hear Gulden speak himself, and see whether there appear in his words that great
vanity, stubbornness, want of candor, and such ostentation as Mr. White
reproaches him with: and thereupon frame a judgment of them both, accordingly.
Gulden therefore in the Preface to the cap. 3. gives a full account of his
retracting the Demonstration of the Spirall: which is as follows.

De Centro Gravitatis, Lib. 2. Cap. 3. Page 58.
Examen eorum quae proxime praecedenti capite tradita sunt.
HVcusque ergo, amice Lector, novae haec, and non minus jucunda quam pulchra,
de lineis Spiralibus speculatio non tam traxit, quam tum equis quam velis
suavissime nos provexit, nullum sive in aequore sive in montibus nobis timentes
vel periculum apertum, vel insidias latentes. Nam regia nos incedere via
scivimus potius, quam arbitrati sumus; and solum intenti fuimus qua ratione,
Scopum videlicet nostrum intuendo, nobis paulatim semitam ad indagandum Lineae
Spiralis Gravitatis Centrum commode praepararemus. Occurrer at saepius quidem,
dum haec tractaremus, non levis cogitatio; quae tamen ob certas rations nos in
caepto retardare minime visa est: nimirum si haec Spiralis Lineae dimensio tam
obvia, tam commoda, tamque ordinata est, ut nos eam invenimus; tam facile etiam
progreditur, tamque firmis potest roborari Demonstrationibus; cur came non
Magnus Archimedes, qui ea, quae alii de Linea Spirali proposuerant, ipse
admirabili (ut cum Pappo loquamur) quadam aggressione demonstravit; cur eam
(inquam) Dimensionem libro suo De Spiralibus non inseruit? Sed facile nobis
ipsis responsum dedimus: ipsum videlicet Archimedem plura alia, quae tamen alii
post ipsum tractarunt, velneglexisse, vel studio ac volens praeteriisse; vel
etiam jam ab ipso tractata, injuria temporum, intercidisse. Quemadmodum etiam
fecit, cum ae Planorum centro ageret gravitatis: omisit enim Tractatum de
centro Linearum. Et sicut nos non absterruit illa objectio ab indagatione
Centri Gravitatis Linearum, praesertim Circularium; sic and hic nobis ipsis
fecimus animos novi aliquid circa Spirales inveniendi, quod vel ipsum
Archimedem fugere, aut posteros nos latere potuerit.

Et nostro quidem judicio rem tunc feliciter and incepimus, and in eadem magnis
etiam itineribus perreximus. Sed ecce dum hoc loco in medio quasi essemus
cursu, portumque etsi valde procul adhuc positum, jam a long tamen jam jam
conspiceremus, vela repent and erant contrahenda, and securitatis causa ad
legenda littora prora convertenda. Incidi enim tunc primum in Examen quoddam,
per numeros institutum, dimensionis Lineae Spiralis; de quo ante quidem
inaudiveram, sed qualiter ant qua ratione dimensio illa progrederetur, cum
rectane, an cum curva, aut pure circulari, Spiralis illa linea conferretur,
omnino nesciebam: tantum abest, ut ips^ justam proportionem, a nobis inventam,
inde redargui posse suspicarer. Quare ex primo illius aspectu nequaquam sum
territus; quippe qui meis fidebam Demonstrationibus, tam Geometricis quam
Arithmeticis, quas irreprehensibiles esse judicavi. Hostem tamen qualem qualem
saepe audivi spernendum esse minime: quippe qui, quando minime putamus, vel
obesse vel nocere possit.

Examinavi igitur examen illud; quo in labor mill potius sperabam me
inventurum in calculo hujus examinis errores, quam vel unicum in meis inventis.
Sed contra quasi accidit. Reperi enim Lineam Spiralem primae Circulationis
majorem esse Semiperipheria primi Circuli; and tacit victusque manus dare
debui. Quid facerem? Dissimularemne? Tacerem? Mordicus mea, instar Circuli
Quadratorum supra nominatorum, defenderem? Et Archimedem ipsum Euclidemque in
jus vocarem, accusarem, condemnarem? Nequaquam. Sed servandum mihi duxi id,
quod ipse Jos. Scaliger sibimet quidem servandum praescripsit; at minime
servavit. Sic enim in Appendice ad sua Cyclometrica habet. Primum, aio, in
omnibus Scientiis and Artibus posse saepe tolerabiliter peccari: in
Mathematicis ne semel quidem debere. Nam ut ait quidam vetus Scriptor, (...)
Itaque cum Mathematicus errorem suum deprehenderit, primus occupare debet Me,
Me, adsum, qui feci. Postquam autem per alium id cognoverit, si non statim
Castigatori gratias agit, male de homine; si non corrigit, male de Mathemetica
meritus est. Verum bonus ille Scaliger praecipuos errores suos, atro and rubro
color jam editos, non solum non correxit; sed and majori inscitia animique
tumore pertinaciter defendit. Conclusi ergo, in meis inventis alicubi peccatum
esse. At ubi lateret anguis in herba, non it a facile neque statim videre aut
judicare potui. Quare Scripta mea amico in Mathematicis been docto dedi
perlegenda, ut an ea sibi constarent animum diligenter adverteret, suumque mihi
de iis judicium candide aperiret, eundem rogavi.

Verum enim vero dum ille differret lectitandi operam, ipse errorem meum
reperi, and digito (quod aiunt) demonstrare potui. In eo solum haesi, an totum
illud Caput praecedens, cum principi meo intento ac fini nihil tolleret; parum,
etiamsi omnia vera essent, adferret, omittendum esset, totumque negotium
mensurationis Lineae Spiralis dissimulandum: an vero, prout jam scripta essent
omnia, una cum hoc Examine edenda. Occurrebant rations plures and variae, pro
and contra: Vicerunt tamen illae, quae in bonum aliorum laborem horum, partem
saltem aliquam, ipsis communicandum esse, caeteris praelatae sunt, suaserunt
and persuaserunt. Praesertim cum non defint exempla Auctorum, qui and cum laud
sua and cum utilitate Lectorum idem factitarunt: qui si nullum alium hinc
auferrent fructum, is saltem satis esse posset, quod inveniant cautionem, ut si
curiosius sive de Spiralibus, sive de alijs inquirere velint, sibi sciant
cavere and a scopulis, and ab alijs incommodis, in quae facillime incurrere
possent. Geometria profecto ipsa, secundum judicium Josephi Scaligeri supra
cap. primo Propos. 4. number. 7. adductum, sibi inprimis gratulabitur, quod
accessione saltem novorum aliquot Epichirematum locupletata sit.

Primum igitur indicandum est, qualiter in cognitionem venimus inventa nostra
lubricae esse fidei; deinde, vbinam haereat error, ostendendum: tum singulae
propositiones examinandae, and pro meritis approbandae vel reprobandae, and
siquidem id fieri commode poterit, erroneae corrigendae. Omisimus autem plurima
jam conscripta, bonoque ordine ac methodo digesta; quae si rationibus suis
solid nixa fuissent, Lectori plurimum oblectationi esse potuissent: cum vero
vacillantia ea inventa fuerint, ne fastidio potius essent, jure merito ea
praeterivimus. Non esset autem abs re cogitationem suscipere, qualisnam aut
quae sit illa flexuosa linea, and qua art illa compendiose describi possit,
quae illas haberet proprietates, quas frustra Spirali attribuimus. Id quod in
aliud tempus, vel potius aliis faciendum reservamus.

Propositio prima. Occasionem Examinis hujus ac Dubitationis pressius declarare.
FVisse quendam, qui Dimensionem Lineae Spiralis ante nos instituerit, memini
me aliquando audivisse ex P. Hieronymo Kinig Societatis nostrae Mathematico,
and olim in Ingolstadiana, Dilingana, ac Pragensi Academiis earundem
Mathematicarum Disciplinarum Professore accuratissimo, mihi and Romae and alibi
notissimo; imo eundem Lineam illam alicui alteri aequalem, sine tamen ulla
Demonstratione, pronunciasse; quod assertum dictus ille Professor examinaverit:
cui vero Lineae illam adaequaverit, non solum tunc scire, verum an aliquando id
sciverim plane meminisse non potni. Cum ergo versarer in scriptione superioris
Capitis, venit in mentem Examen illud quod diximus, recordatione tamen satis
confusa. Existens ergo Graecii in Stiria scribo Viennam, ubi Mathematicus ille
manebat; and siquid haberet his de rebus in Scripto, ad me mitteret rogavi: non
quod incertus essem de meis jam inventis and scriptis, aut ullo modo de iisdem
dubitarem, sed ut illud ipsum cum meis conferrem. Annuit ipse, and sequens ad
me misit, sive Examen, sive contra Asserta instantiam and reprobationem: quam
cum examinassem, ut supra diximus, eam veritati consonam esse, manifest
deprehendi. Sic autem se habebant illa.

2. Propositum sit demonstrare, Lineam Spiralem majorem esse
Semicircumferentia; Intellige Circuli primieam comprehendentis.

The same in English. OF The Center of Gravity. Lib. 2. Cap. 3. Page 58.
THus far (Courteous Reader) had this new, and no less specious then delightful
speculation on the subject of Spiral Lines rather swiftly advanced me, by Sea
and Land as I may say, then slowly drawn me, who apprehended nothing either of
apparent danger, or unexpected surprise. For indeed I rather knew, then
imagin^d, that I traveled in the High Road; and looking steadfastly on my main
design, I was wholly attentive to the means whereby to tread out a commodious
Path for the Discovery of the Center of Gravity in the Spiral. True it is,
while I was plodding thereon, a serious reflection came often into my mind,
which yet, for certain reasons, was not sufficient to retard my course, viz.
That if this Dimension of the Spiral Line were so obvious, easy, and
commodious a thing, as I found it to be; as also strengthened with such firm
Demonstrations, how came it to pass that the great Archimedes, who (to speak
with Pappus) did with admirable Dexterity demonstrate those Proprieties of the
Spiral Line, which other men had only hinted at; how came it, I say, to pass
that he did not insert this Dimension into his Book of Spirals? But I easily
answered my self; to wit, that Archimedes had either neglected or purposely
omitted many other things, which have since his time been treated by others; or
else it must be, that what he wrote thereof, has perished by the injury of
time. The like he did when he treated of the Center of Gravity in Plains; for
he omitted the Tract of the Center of Lines. And as that objection deterred me
not from enquiring the Center of Gravity in Lines, especially Circular ones, so
here I encouraged my self in hope to discover something new concerning Spirals,
which hitherto had escaped both Archimedes and all that had come after him.

And truly in my opinion I began the business happily enough, and had made a
great progress therein; but on a sudden when I was half way on my Voyage, and
came within Kenning of the Port, I was fain to strike Sail, and for security,
to make directly toward the shore: for I then first lighted on a certain
Examen of the Dimension of the Spiral Line, performed by numbers: whereof
indeed, I had heard before, but could not tell how or which way that Dimension
proceeded: or whether that Spiral were to be compared with a right Line or
crooked, or a pure Circular Line. So far was I from suspecting, that the exact
proportion I had already discovered, could be disproved thereby. So that I was
nothing at all troubled at the first sight of this Examen, as being very
confident of my own Demonstrations, both Geometrical and Arithmetical, which I
thought to be irreprehensible. Yet I had often heard, that an enemy, how mean
soever he seems, ought not to be contemned; for when we lest think of him, he
may hap to stand in our way, if not do us a mischief.

I took in hand therefore to examine that Examen, promising my self to discover
a thousand errors in his Calculation, rather then one in my own Inventions.
But it happened far otherwise; for I found that the Spiral Line of the first
Revolution was greater then the Semi-circumference of the first Circle: so that
I saw I was fairly to submit. See how unjustly Mr. White charges this Author of
obstinacy, for not confessing his error.
For what should I do? Should I dissemble the matter? should I hold my peace
and conceal it? Or should I, with those Squarers of the Circle abovementioned,
obstinately defend my own Assertion, though I knew it to be false? Should I
dare to question, accuse, yea and condemn Archimedes and Euclide himself, to
maintain my own opinion? By no means. I resolved therefore to observe the Rule,
which Joseph Scaliger once prescribed to himself, but never observed. It is in
the Appendix to his Cyclometriques; where he thus speaks. I grant, says he,
that in all other Arts and Sciences, error may be tollerably committed
oftentimes: but in the Mathematiques it ought not so much as once. For as an
old Writer says, (...), etc. All things digested by Art ought to have an
unreproveable evidence. So that a Mathematician observing his own error, ought
before all others to cry out, It Is I, it is I, here I am that did it. But if he
comes to know it by means of some other person, unless he presently gives
thanks to his Correctour, he is ill-deserving toward the man; but if he do not
presently amend his error, he wrongs the Science it self. Yet this honest
Scaliger was so far from correcting his own over-sights, published both in
black and red, that with greater ignorance and animosity he still obstinately
defended them. I concluded therefore with my self, that something was amiss in
my Deductions. But where this Snake (the error) lay, I could neither so easily
nor so presently perceive. Wherefore I gave these my Writings to a Friend well
skilled in the Mathematics to read them over; entreating him to consider as
attentively as he could, whether they were consistent or not; and that he would
impart his judgment of them to me with all candor and clearness.

But to tell you the plain truth, while my Friend deferred somewhat the pains
of reading my Writings, I in the mean time discovered the error my self, and
was able (as the Proverb says) to point it out with my finger. Only I could
not well resolve, whether I should now wholly lay aside the foregoing Chapter,
(seeing that to do so would not be any prejudice to my principal intent, as on
the other side it would not have added much to it, though every thing therein
had proved true) and so dissemble the whole matter concering the measuring of
the Spiral Line; or otherwise should publish whatsoever I had written on that
Subject, together with this Examen. Many and various Reasons occurred to me Pro
and Con: but at last those prevailed, which for the Sea if this Authors not
expunging his error proceeded out of pride, as he is accused.
good of others inclined me to think that some part at least even of those my
Labors, was not to be denied to the public. Especially seeing there wanted
not the examples of Authors, who to their own praise, and the benefit of their
Readers have done the like; who though they should happen to reap no other
profit by it, yet were this alone sufficient, that they have here a Caveat
given them, that in case they should themselves desire to search more curiously
into this Subject of Spiral Lines, or any other of like nature, they should
proceed warily and advisedly in the Where is now that great vanity Master White
would pin upon this Author?
business, for the avoiding of those rocks of inconveniences and error, which
otherwise they will most easily run upon. And lastly, that Geometry it self,
even according to the judgment of the same Joseph Scaliger, (cap. 1. prop. 4.
number. 7.) should rejoice, being enriched thereby with the Addition of some New
Endeavors.

The first thing therefore here to be done is to declare, how I came to know
that my Inventions were but doubtful and uncertain; next to show where the
error lies: and lastly to examine all the several Propositions, with
approbation or rejection of them according to their merits; yea (where it may
conveniently be done) by rectifying and correcting those which are erroneous.
Yet many things I have omitted, though already written, and digested by me into
due order and method; which had they been built upon good and solid grounds,
would have given great delight to the Reader. But finding them loose and
slippery, (to avoid offense) I have justly laid them aside. However, it might
(perhaps) be matter not unworthy our consideration, to think what manner of
Bending Line that is, (and also how it may be compendiously drawn, and
described) which might be found to have all those properties, which in the
Spiral Line we have hitherto but vainly sought. But that is a thing I must defer
to some other time, or rather leave to other persons to perform.

The First Proposition. More particularly to declare the occasion of this
following Examen, and of Doubting.
THat there was one, who before me had attempted the measuring of the Spiral
Line, I remember well to have heard long since from the mouth of Father Hierome
Kinig, a Mathematician of our Society, and formerly a most accurate professor
of those Sciences in the Universities of Ingolstad, Dilingen, and Prague; whom
I knew very well both at Rome and elsewhere; yea, that the abovesaid person had
affirmed (but without any Demonstration given) that the said Spiral Line was
exactly equal to some other Line: which Assertion of his the said professor did
also examine. But to what Line he made the Spiral to be equal, I cannot
possibly call to mind, whether I did either then, or any other time know it in
all my life. Whilst therefore I was writing the precedent Chapter, I happened to
think on the before mentioned Examen; yet remembering it but confusedly, and in
gross. Whereupon being at Gratz in Stiria, I wrote to Vienna where the said
Mathematician then was, and entreated him, that if he had any thing of this
Subject, he would send it in writing to me; not that I was then any way jealous
of my self, or did in the least measure doubt of my own writings and
discoveries; but only that I might communicate what I had written, with those
of my own profession. He forthwith yielded to my request, and sent me this
following Examen, or rather refutation of the things I had asserted; which
having my self examined, (as I said before) I manifestly found it agreeable to
truth. Now that which he wrote was as follows.

2. The second Proposition may be to show, that the Spiral Line is greater then
the Semi circumference to wit, the Semi-circumference of the first Circle that
contains it.

Though I had here ended my additional Vindication of a worthy Mathematician by
the name of Gulden, because I found him so written by the Author of the
precedent Letter, as following Mr. White, who names him Paulus Guldenus; yet I
thought it not amiss to advertise the Reader before I took Pen from Paper, that
his Adversary could not be ignorant that he calls himself Paulus Guldinus in
his own printed works, not Guldenus. Whereby one may probably conjecture, that
this was a mere affected mistake in Mr. White, to confirm his Reader in the
belief of that incredible story he delivers, that he had never either seen, nor
heard of this Authors Work, till his own was ready for the Press.

FINIS.

