THE QUAKERS Art of Courtship: OR, THE Yea-and-Nay Academy OF COMPLEMENTS.
Calculated for the Meridian of the BVLL-and-MOVTH; AND May indifferently serve
the Brethren of the Windmill Order, for Noddification in any Part of
Will-a-Wisp Land.

By the Author of Teagueland Jests.

-- Qui Curii simulant, and Bacchanalia vivunt.

Juv. LONDON Printed, and are to be Sold by most Booksellers, MDCLXXXIX.

In Public see the Zealot seems a Saint, Green Apron'd Sisters whine, and
Brothers pan^ But when retired, the Case is out of (...)* I see Courts in Cant,
and Bully like new



THE PREFACE TO THE Unprejudiced READER, By Way of DIALOGUE, Between Gent. and
Prefacer.
IT is Obvious to every days Observavation, that to the well furnishing a
House, pieces of Paint (wherein the Pencil has naturally described Anticks and
Mimmicks) are as much valued by the Curious, as some Originals of renowned
Faces: The true proportion of the Figure, and lively deciphering (as much as
possible) the very Air of every Motion, making Art do the Business of Nature;
whilst the Eye is entertained with the divertive Figure of a Scarramouch or
Pantalloon, behind the door of a Parlour here in London, as if they beheld him
Acting in an Opera at Paris.

Books, therefore, that (like Pieces of Paint) represent unto us Things and
Persons (otherwise) out of our Kenn, and too remote for our Observation, may
claim the Privilege of using natural Colors, and designing Postures proper to
the Figure they set before us: Or else how can the Description Answer the end
for which it was designed, and give a true prospect of the proposed Object?

So the Artists, in describing Apollo, paint him with large Rays round his
Head, and sometimes Circling the whole Body. Diana is known by the Crescent, on
her Forehead; a Fountain, Dogs, and Bow and Arrows: But if he that exposed the
Story of Guzman, had clapped him on a Lawyers Gown; or Don Quixot had been
dressed up in a Cloak or Cassock, it would so vastly have altered the Figure,
that the Entertainment had been lost; and the Buffoon could not so well have
been discerned through the Formality of the Garb: Though it is impossible but a
strict Judicious Eye might observe a Step, a Glance or Motion that might betray
the Mechanism of the Puppet, and discover the Ass in the Lions Skin. Yet all
the while, a thousand others (who had seen no further than the Vizor) might
have been imposed upon by the Imposture, and take the Cobbler for the Vicar.

Enter Gent. Gent. But you will say (perhaps) if you were for exposing either
the Fool or the Knave, why could you not (too) have gone into some Foreign
Country for the Habits, and have made them speak French, Dutch or Spanish? Did
ever any Man, as yet, hang up the Pictures of his Family and Kindred in Fools
Coats, or dress his Friends in the Equipage of Anticks? Were there none for
thee to let loose thy wild Satyr upon, but a harmless, meek, inoffensive sort
of People, that would not Injure so much as a Fly, that came in their way?
Had thou none but such as these to worry and abuse at this barbarous rate? I
can assure you, that diverse sober well-meaning People can by no means think
well of it, at this time.


Prefacer. Why, look ye Gentlemen! give me but the allowance of a few words,
and I will convince you, That it was not any Pique or Animosity against Friends
in general that first gave Occasion to the writing hereof; and that the matter
herein contained, ought not in any wise to Affect a sober Man, of what
Profession soever; for it is not the Christian, but the Pagan that is exposed.

Suppose I have a Friend whom I much esteem and value, and the Devil get on a
Suit of his Apparel, may I not beat, thrash, and cudgel the Fiend to force him
thence? Nay, I take my self to be the more obliged to Bastinado him, for
attempting the Garb of a Friend. So that you are not to imagine that it is the
demure, close, or honest Yea-and-Nay-man that is here exposed; but the Devil,
or some Fiend as bad, that has put on the Habit, Figure, and Mein of a
Sanctimonian. If you should see a Bear run through the Street with your
Brother's Coat on, would you not Baste and Cudgel the Beast, notwithstanding
the Kindness you might have for his Coat? Let me ask you that Question.


Gent. Ay, and to very small purpose; when it is not the Beast that thou have
been beating of, but the Brother: Else when thou proclaimest to the World the
vicious, debauched, and licentionu Actions of Friends; why do thou not say,
It Is the Devil or the Bear in the shape of a Friend? Or else thou may well
imagine the most of Men will be under a mistake, which it is thou meanest.


Pref. I tell you once more, That the Devil does not only put on the Habit and
Ear-mark of Friends; but, sometimes, their very Name too; and yet for all, that
shall be a mere Devil still; however he be Dignified and Distinguished: So that
for the time to come, whenever you see the Cloven-Foot, you may be assured it
is the Fiend, whatsoever other Figure he appears in.

Though it is unquestionably true, That the Devil has haunted, and does still
haunt the World in Forms much differing from that of Friends; yet, (since It is
a Masquing Habit he has often taken up and worn) it is to be hoped the Tailors
will not fall out about it.

One of the greatest Difficulties will be to reconcile (...) and Complement,
and make a Suit of Clothes of the Yea-and-Nay Stamp, without Feather, Lace or
Ribbons, sit well upon the Back of a Devil dancing to a Serenade, or plunging
himself into a Debauch: And this (in plain English) is the highest part of the
Devilism. But (since there has hardly been any other Habit or Profession but
the Fiend has Masqueraded in) the wonder may abate, if we him clad in this,
especially if we consider the closeness of the Disguise.


Gent. Besides this, there is much fault found with the scurrilousness of the
Style, which in many places is so fulsome, that it quite overcomes a weak
Stomach, and your Book is brought up immediately. If the design be allowed to
be tolerable, it is not to be imagined that a Style so Luxuriant will pass
amongst Men of Judgment and Temper, but that it will be hissed off as an
insufferable Indecency.


Pref. Sir (between you and I) if Books should be only Calculated for the
Meridian of the Grave and Wise, the Stationer as well as the Author may go hang
themselves; what can any Man suppose must become of a Bookseller that deals in
such a Commodity? What is there that turns to Account, like Farce and Comedy?
You may keep a Philosophical Discourse by you all days of your Life; when a
trifling piece of Drolery shall bring in the Pence, and the Bookseller now and
then call for his Bottle of Wine.


Gent. But supposing all this, it argues great Levity in the Author, to make
use of so much Smut, when the same end may be attained, and yet the Matter
wrapped in cleaner Linen.


Pref. But again, if you please to con^sider, That a red Color is not to be
dyed in a green Fat, nor a yellow Sign to be painted with blue Colors; you
will discern a sort of Necessity (when you are to paint one that has ^allen in
the Channel) to let the dirty Spots appear. Besides, if the prevalencies of
Nature, Genius, and Education be considered, it will easily appear, That there
are many extraordinary Things to Concur in making a Man Master of a Style: A
Copia verborum, is what few can boast of: It Is a rare thing to find, even the
Excellencies of Nature, clothed in such a pollish'd Elegance of Phrase, as in
the Witty Scarron, or the Profound Quevedo; and this is a Misfortune which will
be always Irreparable, amongst People of my Size and Standard.

I could heartily have wished the Language had been more refined; but then, I
am apt to believe, it would not have relished half so well with those for whose
Pallates it was designed; nor have answered the Ends of the Bookseller in
publishing it, which I can very well assure you, was not to abuse Friends, but
to get Money by the Bargain.

I have further to add, That if some of the Passages seem to be too particular
and reflective, I have taken all imaginable care to keep the Stones from any
one Man's Windows; and none can be touched or agrieved by it, unless it rub
upon some old Sore: which (in some Cases) proves the means of a Cure. Nor is
there any one passage purely Fictitious, but such as have been Collected out of
the large Volume of Immoralities, wherewith the Lives of some called Friends
(as well as others) have abounded.

The Reader is further to be admonished, That it is no part of the design of
the ensuing Papers to encourage those Debauches therein Exposed; but to
Convince the Men of the World, That if Vice look ill and detestable in the Garb
of a Friend, it cannot assume any Quality to recommend It by being dressed up in
any other Habit whatsoever.


Farewell.
An Enthusiastic PREFACE, By way of Greeting, unto Friends.
Friends,
THIS is to give you to Wit and Understand, That the Devil of Complement is
come amongst some called Friends, and has drawn them into wretched Snares and
Inconveniences: For, by reason of the Tufting of the Men of the Worlds Buttons
with Silk, the price will so advance, that Friends may not think it convenient
to Line their Raiment with Venetian or Tabbee for the future. And why may not
Friends have as much right to the Toylings of the Creature, as those that are
without? Shall the poor little Worm Spin out her Bowels, only to make Satin
and Velvet, Flowered Silks, and Sarsnets for carnal Men, and their Women? And
shall not Friends put in for a share of the outward Enjoyments? I tell thee
Yea, as long as Friends have any thing of the outward or old Man l^ft, they
have a right to be accommodated with outward Things, Yea marry have they. And
therefore in Subordination, and consequential to what was said before, Friends
will not be buttoned out of the Linings of their upper Garments.

For if the Devil of Complement be entered into certain People, by the World
called Friends; it may be very likely he may grow unruly and disorderly, unless
he meet with as much Respect and Entertainment amongst Friends, as amongst the
Wicked.

Why may not Complement find as good Lodging under a Holland Shirt, or a Silk
Wastcoat on the back of a Friend, as well as another Man; especially since
Friends outward Man is made of Flesh and Blood, as well as (...)? Well then it
is allowable, that Friends (...) (not only common Silks, but) the richest they
can get, as one step to the entertaining of Complement; and who knows but by
Conversation he may be brought over to Friends, or Friends to him.

Then if Complement be thirsty, it may be convenient for Friends to make him
drink, not Water (which they call Adam's Ale) but Wine, generous Wine, edifying
Wine, Friends Wine, that which shall make him drop his Hat off from his Pool by
way of Complaisance.

And again, Complement may be as well fed at the Table of a Friend, or (if he
thinks meet) at a Tavern, or French Ordinary, with Ragousts, Oglio's and Soops,
as at any other Man's Table whatsoever.

We can allow him his Brace of Gueldings, or a Coach to rumble him to his
Country House, where he may Epicurize in that which the World calls Luxury from
one First Day to another. And what should make this Devil of Complement to lead
Friends astray into Snares and Inconveniences? What should make him so Sullen
and Ill-natured after all this Entertainment and Caressing?

Some are of Opinion, It Is only because Friends will not allow him to wear
Point de Venice, a laced Hat and Feather, and have two or three Footmen at his
breech with gaudy laced Liveries: Why! and if this be the matter that is stuck
at, Friends are resolved never to Condescend to it. Nay, they will rather be
contented to be condemned to swallow Heathen Plum-broth and Minced Pie at the
time called Christmas, to pull off their Hats in the Steeple-house, to wear
Swords, laced Bands, and Pantaloons hung round with Ribbons, than ever comply
with the Devil of Complement upon such Terms.

By the following Discourse it will appear, That Friends have been no Strangers
to the thing called Complement, as it relates to Courtesy, Entertainment or
Conversation between Man and Man; or (as I may say) between Man and Woman. And
if it must be insisted upon (after all this) that because some called Friends
have arrived to such great Seize by means of somewhat that looks as it
were Complement: I say, that therefore the Devil of Complement must be thus
Equipped at the Charge of Friends, we think it so unreasonable, as to enter our
Protest against it.

But if by reason of this Contest betwixt us and the Devil aforesaid, any of
them (by the World) called Friends, have had their Light so far Extinguished,
as to be led into Snares and Difficulties; must presently a Printer take up the
matter, and publish the Banes of Ma^rimony between us, to the World? Commend me
to our Brethren the Turks, who (being of the same Enthusiastic Order, in some
respect) will not permit the Carnal Art of Printing in their Dominions; so that
the Inquisitive World cannot be so easily informed of Amities contracted upon
the accoun of what they call Complement; nor understand what progress the
Freshmen of our Tribe have made in the Acquisition of modish and complemental
Seize. But hang it! it relates not at all to any of Us, but only to
those, who either had not the Light, or suffered it to be Extinguished; and
then they are none of Us. So

Fare ye well.
THE Yea-and-Nay ACADEMY OF COMPLEMENTS.
CHAP. I.
Of the Word and the Thing, by the World called Complement. The Sense of the
Friends concerning it.

HUMH! Humh! Humh! Friends, It may not be amiss, when a Friend undertaketh to
speak as touching a Thing, the Nicity of the Thing, the Subject of the Thing,
the Nature of the Thing, the Matter of the Thing, the Consequence of the Thing;
how far the Thing may be according to the Light, and how far not according to
the Light* which is the main Thing in Question. The Thing that we are now upon,
is, concerning the Word or the Thing called Complement or Courtship, which is
all one in that which the Carnal call the Original. For though Friends do not
think fit to set forth their own Original before the Wicked ones; yet they do,
and may think it lawful to declare their Thoughts, as concerning the rise and
first derivation of the Words and Fashions used by the Wicked.

Humh! As for concerning and touching the word Complement, it is of a base,
filthy, polluted, and carnal Original, it being found in the Language of the
Beast, or the Roman Language, which few Friends are acquainted withal; as thus,
they teach the poor deluded Youth in their carnal Schools, Complement,
Complementior, Complementissimus, which sounds so filthily, as is enough to
turn the Stomach especially of a She Friend; for what can tissimus and issimus
signify, unless they have a profane meaning? So again, they derive it from
Complementare, Complementiri, and Complete-mentiri, which the Carnal Ones
themselves say signifies no other than a downright Lie; so again, the Vain Ones
say, I must pay a Complement to such a Lady (as they call 'em) or such a
Person; as if Lying were a Debt which they owed, and must pay to one another.
So again, says one of them, I received a Complement from such a Lord or
Gentleman, (as they call one another) which is as much as to say, I received a
Lie, a Sham, an Untruth, or the like. Whereas Friends make no use of such Words
as look one way, and mean quite another, but leave them to the carnal Ones. For
the Language of Friends is after this sort, I have heard from Thomas, or so;
or, I have received a Message from Abigal, which commonly carries ten to one
more in it than their vain, puff-past Airy Words can pretend to. So they say in
their Teachings, Second-Lye, Third-Lye, and Fourth-Lye; wherein many times they
speak much according to Truth; but therefore Friends say,

Again in the second place, If a Friend out of pure Simplicity and Tenderness
should go to one of these young Whipper-snappers, and taking him by the Hand,
and twinkling his Eyes, should speak unto him after this manner;

Friend, I have great Yearnings for thee, and wish I could prevail with thee to
lay by thy overgrown Perriwig of Harlots Hair, thy carnal Sword, thy painted
Habit, and become a Friend of the Light; it is pity such a well-featur'd Youth,
and one for whom Nature has done so much, should cast himself away, by
following the evil Manners of the Wicked: for if thou did but know the sweet
Enjoyments that are to be had amongst Friends, I dare say thou would find
them much safer, and more suitable to thy Inclinations, than this profuse and
open way of Gallantry (as thou call it) for I am greatly moved toward thee,
and could wish thou would leave that frothy carnal Way of the World called
Complement, and become as one of us. What reply may we think would be returned
to such a courteous, sweet and friendly Invitation? Alas, alas! let me see
whether I can for once set my Mouth in such a Beastly Figure; why look thee,
thus it would come out, for I have seen it so.

'Slid what does this Impudent, Quakering, Ca^ting Fellow mean by all this
damned Harangue? What does he think to make the World in Love with Yea's and
Nay's, with crop'd Ears, antic Grimmases, nonsensical Whinings, and ridiculous
unbred Impudence? Hark thee, Friend! I would advise thee to remove thy
nauceous Address to some (...) place, for if thou do again abuse my Ears
with thy absurd Declamations, I shall go near to lay the weight of my Cane over
your unsanctified Loggerhead; you b^se uncourtly Coxcomb! This, or much to like
purpose would be the ungrateful return of one of these poor deluded Youths.
Which brings me to the

Third Thing, which was just-now hinted in the Word Vn-courtly; for it is from
this Fountain, that all the other Mischiefs do slow, as our Right trusty Friend
James Naylor heretofore Witnessed; and it may appear from considering the Word
nakedly in it self, and figuratively as they call it (that is to say) clothed
with such a Sense as they please to put upon it. The naked word Court has been
considered by Friends to have been applied unto many Things. There were two
Courts in the Temple of Solomon, the Outer Court, and the Inner; but the Houses
of worldly Princes were ^ot then called Courts, but Houses or Palaces: But
afterward, when they had large places of Entrance walled in before them with
Gates, for profane Coaches and Chairs to enter, they were Y^leaped Courts. Our
Friends have not said much upon this Subject, they having had little Business
in such Places, unless it were to complain of Grievances; and sometimes in
friendly manner to Upbraid and Rail at their Governors, and to denounce
certain Woes against such as have opposed what Friends call the Light; and
therefore I shall not meddle much with that Matter. There are likewise Courts
in Westminster Hall, where Friends have the benefit of Sueing and Impleading
the Men of the World, that would Deceive and Defraud them of the things
belonging to their outward Tabernacles; and the Men of Law, that belong to
those Places, will (upon the appearance of Friends Angels) say as much, and
fill the Hall with as much noise on behalf of Friends, as on behalf of the
Wicked. To this Court it is not only lawful but expedient for Friends to
Travel, as I said, for securing the Advantages of their outward Man. And
Friends are often observed to be great Followers of these Courts, drudging
after the Green Bags, the Gowns and Coifs, and bringing as great a Harvest to
the Men of the Robe, as other of their carnal Clients.

It is easy for any that have the Light to observe from hence the Original of
the word Courtly, as if I should say Court-Lye; and though it be allowable upon
the account of Friends, yet ought the Wicked by no means to take Advantage
thereof. This word Courtly is in such great request among the carnal World,
that some of their heathenish Poets have made a Play thereof; and have
insolently dubbed it with the vain glorious Title of, Sir Courtly Nice: which
is one of the most Paganish Inventions that ever blasted the Eyes of Friends.
For as Friend holding forth at Bull-and-Mouth oftentimes extends his Voice,
distends his Lungs, casts up his Eyes, distorts his Mouth, erects his Ears, and
puts himself forth in such Postures as extorts Laughter from the unthinking
part of the Auditory; even so is this poor thing, Sir Courtly, exposed on a
profane Stage, until he become the very A notable heathen Word.
Ridicule of the Spectators: which calls to mind a Scrap of the Beasts Language
that I once learned at School, O Tempora! O Mores!

But what shall I say now I come to speak of another Court, which is not far
from Paul's Church (as they call it.) Court, Court, Court, where Friends have
been long at School, and undergone diverse sorts of Discipline; I say, They have
been Counted long and often, but all to no purpose; for Friends are Friends
still, and so they will continue, notwithstanding all the means used to the
contrary. And as heretofore Friends chose to wear Gray Clothing out of a
dislike to Brown, because it bore the Name of a certain man of Abbington, that
had stuck close upon the Skirts of Friends thereabouts: Even so will the Name
of Court be ever distasteful to Friends upon account of the Place called the
Commons, on the South Side of Paul's Churchyard, beforementioned. So much
concerning the Original and Acceptance (I mean among Friends) of the Words
Court and Complement, in such request among the Wicked. I shall next show thee
the way of Address that is allowable amongst such as the World calls Quakers.

CHAP. II.
Of friendly Salutations used by the Yea-and-Nay People.

HAving kicked the carnal Complements of the Wicked out of Doors, it may not be
amiss to acquaint thee with the manner of Greetings used amongst Friends, and
the reason thereof; and therefore I shall begin (as is usual amongst the
Brethren of the Windmill) at the wrong end, and treat of the last thing first;
that is to say, the Reason why Friends may Greet one the other.

In the first Place, Because Friends have the Light, and can by help thereof
discern the difference between Person and Person, and betwixt one Thing and
another; Yea, I say unto thee, Friends are Lightheaded, which makes them wear
Hats of the largest Size, that may depress and keep them fast upon their
Shoulders: Sometimes Friends have been so Lightheaded (especially after some
Creature-refreshment) that they have not been able to stand alone without the
help of some fellow Creature; as one profanely Sings, A Candle of himself
cannot stand upright,
The reason is, because his Head is light.
Yea many times He-Friends have been so very Light above their Shoulders, that
She-Friends have been compelled to graft on brow-Antlers, and Prongs of the
largest size, to keep their Airy Craniums from being puffed off with every
blast; and this Commodity has abounded so much amongst Bull-and-Mouth People
of late, that it has been thought, the price of Utensils at horn Fair has
been much abated on that Occasion.

There is another sort of Lightness besides, to which She-Friends are much
addicted, and that is when their Heels are Light Yea verily, and some of them
are Light indeed.

For it has been observed, that when a Female Friend has come into a Room
with a Bed (that is to say, whereon the outward Man uses to be stretched,
especially if some powerful Friend has been in the Chamber) that then, I say,
She-Friends Bowels have fallen a Yearning, and such a Lightness has seized her
Neither Parts, that streightways Female Friend has been overcome by the weight
of Affection.

Thus the Light of the Brethren lies (as thou may see) in their Heads, and
that of the Sisters (by Another word of the Beasts Language.
Antithesis) in their Heels.

Again, some She-Friends have been observed to be so Light of Members, that
they have been blown down by a blast from the mouth of the Wicked, having not
been able to resist that slender force. Now whether this may be imputed to the
Lightness of the Sex, or to their Complaisance, is not much to the purpose; for
either way it may pass for an obliging Complement.

But the Light that more particularly has influenced Friends, is that which
the Beasts Language calls an Ignis fatuus, and some of their Modern Authors
render, Will-with-a-Wisp, which leads Friends into many Inconveniences, that
some of them have been over Head and Ears in foul Pollutions, by running after
it. It was this sort of Light that led Friend Green astray to Court the Mare at
Colchester; and diverse others into Feasts of like Nature: And this Light
Friends have been much observed to follow, by which they have found out new
Complements, and forms of Address, in use amongst them; whereof some particular
Forms are here Inserted.

Forms of Salutation used by Friends, which show their great Improvement in
Courtship.
Here follow certain Titles which Friends have thought sit to bestow on them
the World calls Great-men, or Grandees. When Friends are in a good Humor, and
the Magistrate behaves himself to their liking, then Friends can sweeten them
with an O King, Ruler, Magistrate, etc.


And when very good Natured Charles, or Henry. But when Friends are out of
Humor, then woe be to their Magistrates; for then out comes Tyrants, Wolves,
Evil Shepherds, etc.


For the Clergy, Yea-and Nay Men pay them no respect at all, but have wholly
left them out of the List of Courtship; for the kindest Word a Clergyman shall
get of them, is, Priest or Parson: But more ordinarily they bestow on them the
Titles of,

Baal's Priests, Blind Guides, Idol Priests, Circingle Men, etc.
Parish Churches are called, Steeple Houses, Synagogues of Satan, and the like.

Cathedral, or Collegiate Churches are called, in the Language of Friends, Mass
Houses, Houses of Baal, Houses of Rimmon, Idol Temples, Play Houses,


Piping-houses, and many other rhetorical Names, according as Friend stands
affected; for Friends have no small faculty in bestowing Names, though they
refuse to be Godfathers. But to proceed; when the Bishops come athwart us, they
are sure to meet with High Priest, or Ananias, Caiphas, Bishop Bonners, Whores
of Babylon, etc.


Judges, Justices, and Magistrates, are Complemented according to the Dialect
of Friends, with Pontius Pilates, Centurions, Task Masters, Gown and Coi^e-men.


As for Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, Friends bestow them promiscuously
amongst all Sorts and Conditions of Men, that are not of their own make, and so
for Foxes, Vipers, Serpents, Cockatri^es, Bears, Tigers, and the like: It has
been thought meet by the Naylorians to affix all the names of venomous,
ravening and hurtful Creatures on the rest of Mankind, and to dress them up in
the greatest Deformity imaginable; whilst the sweet alluring Names of Lambs,
Doves, Patridges, Pheasants, and the like, are only retained and bestowed on
Friends, in token of their Usefulness and Excellency above the rest of the
corrupted Mass of Mortals.

By the same Figure, may Male Friends be called Codlings, Apricocks,
Pound-pears, Parsnips or Carrets; and Female Friends may be named Cherries,
Strawberies, Musk-melons, Musk-plums or Open-arses; all being delicious and
wholesome Fruit; whilst the Wicked are Thorns, Wild-goards, Thistles,
Cankerberries, Darnel, Cockle, Tares, or any thing else that is useless and
rejected amongst Men. Yea, I say unto thee, that are useless and rejected; for
only the Friends are the useful, the valuable Creatures amongst Men; for if it
were not for Friends how should so many thousand poor Families be kept on work
for the Weaving and making of Ribbons, Laces, Flowered Silks, Fans, Feathers,
Vizors, Bulls, Beads, Nose Jewels, Farthingals, Pickadiles, and the like;
Jewellers, Tailors, Lace-men, Embroiderers, Sword-Cutlers, Armourers, Guilders,
Picture-drawers, Fringe-makers, Dancing-masters, Singing-masters,
Instrument-makers, Fencing-masters; and in short, half the Town, and half the
People therein might go hang themselves, did not Friends support their Trades,
and lay out their Stocks for the Maintenance of their Families. So ends the
Second Chapter.

CHAP. III.
Certain Examples of friendly Greetings toward Great Men.

ABOUT the Year 1667, certain She-Friends took an occasion to pass a Complement
on the then Pope Alexander the Seventh. They followed the Light, or the
Will-with-a-Wisp that I told thee of, until they came to the City of Rome: In
their Passage they traveled through the French Army, then on the Borders of
Flanders (though I cannot remember that they left any sign of their Light
behind them) but they pursued their Course through diverse Regions and
Principalities until they arrived at the Apostolical See; there, after many
days Seeking and Attendance (having declared unto diverse, that they had a
particular Message to the Man called the Pope) at length they were admitted
into the Palace; whereupon (like true Friends) they began to open, saluting his
Holiness by the Names of the Man of Sin, Whore of Babylon, The Scarlet Whore
sitting on a Beast with Seven Heads, with many other Apocalyptick Greetings,
which the Holy Father thought very improperly applied to him; at length the
good Father demanded of them, What Profession they were of? They told him that
they were Friends of the Light, whom the Carnal abusiveely called Quakers; and
that they had come from far on purpose to pass those Complements, and to pour
their Vials on the Seat of the Beast, with abundance more of their quaking
Rhetoric, and figurative Nonsense. At length the good Man began to apprehend
they might be troubled with some sort of Hypocondriack Distemper, much like
that which haunts Oliver's Porter, and his Housemates, on the South Side of
Moorefields; whereof the Witty Hudibrass Sings: As Wind in the Hypocondria pent,
Is but a F -- t, if downward sent;
But if it upward chance to fly,
Turns to New Light and Prophesy.


So they were compassionately delivered over to the care of diverse able
Physicians, who having prescribed them frequent Bleedings, and a mortifying
Diet for a considerable time, our Females at last begun to feel an Inclination
to return to their Native Country, whither they were dismissed, having left
much of their Disease behind them, but bringing back much more Light than they
carried out; for they returned not only with light Heads, light Purses, light
Bodies; but not a little Light-hearted that they had escaped the Discipline of
the Doctors.

Where are there now amongst any other sort of People but we of the Yea-and-Nay
Tribe, any whose Civility shall lead them through so many hazards and dangers
of losing their Light to pass a Complement upon a Stranger? Where are there, I
say, amongst the Wicked and Carnal any that are buoyed up to such a height of
Courage, and seared with such a friendly hardness, to carry them through such
an Adventure as this? Nay, nay, it is not to be expected that their Lights
should last them half the way, especially meeting with so many puffs and
count^e-puffs as Friends met withal. But you must know that all this while
Friends carried their Light in a dark Lanthorn, with the Box so close shut upon
it, that none could possibly discern it; and was not this a Politic as well as
a Courtly trick of the She-Friends, Judge thee?

Another Relation touching the Courtship of Friends.
In the Days of Oliver (when preferment went by Merit, and Friends were made
Just-Asses, and the Brethren of the Light enstrusted with the Staff of
Authority) when Friends of the Enthusiastic Order saw Plots in the Air by way
of Vision; and the Revelation of a Conspiracy was enough to Chop off the Heads
of all the Loyal Party: About that time an Order was Issued out to Robert
Tichbourne, called Lord Mayor, to double the Watches of the City, for that it
was feared the Lions would run away with the Tower of London on their backs;
Tichbourne sent out his Warrants to the Constables in pursuance of the said
Order: Amongst the which one came to the hand of one of our Friends of the
Windmill, who was then called Constable of Smithfield; he was charged thereby
to apprehend all Persons that passed in his Rounds betwixt the hours of Nine at
Night, and Six in the Morning, unless they gave a very satisfactory Account of
their Business. Accordingly Friend with his carnal Beadle and Watchmen took
their Post at the time appointed, and about One in the Morning a Party of
Oliver's Horse-guards (who had Orders to have an Eye on that side) came athwart
Friend's Rounds. Whereupon Friend demanded of them what they were? and they
replied, they were of the Guard; but it being the depth of the Night, Friends
Light happened to fail him (for Friends Light does not always serve them in the
Dark, though they can discern in the Dark as well as without Light) so that
Friend supposing they might be Enemies of the wicked Cavalier Party, put them
into Custody, until the next morning the Captain of the Guards having notice of
it, sent a Party for them, and complained thereof unto him they called the
Supreme; whereupon Oliver sent for Friend-Constable, and having demanded of him
the reason why that affront was put upon his Guards? Friend in most Courtly
Phrase returned this or the like Answer.

Since thou have sent for me, O Oliver, upon this Occasion, I shall acquaint
thee with the best of my Knowledge concerning it, according to the measure of
Light that is within me. Therefore thou may understand, O Oliver, that thy
Servant Robert Tichbourne sent unto me, saying, Take unto thee a Band of Men,
and get thee into one of the high Places of the City, namely Smithfield, and
there keep thee diligent Watch and Ward from the hour of Nine in the Evening,
until the Sixth hour the next Morning, seizing on such as give not account of
themselves. And accordingly I took unto me a Band of Men, and went into the
high Place of the City, namely Smithfield; and behold about the Second Watch
there appeared unto us as it were some of the Sons of Men Armed, and riding
upon Horses; and I said unto them, Who are ye? and they answered and said, We
are the Guard: And I answered and said unto them, Nay, bu^ we are the Guard.
Whereupon (a dispute arising touching that matter) I smote them Hip and Thigh,
and laid them in Bands. Now if there be any fault in this matter, thou can
not take it to be in me who received the Order, but in Robert Tichbourne who
sent it.

After Friend had passed this Extraordinary Complement on his High and
Mightiness, it took such Effect with the Ruler, that Friend was not only
dismissed without Chastisement, but was told, He had done well in what he had
done. By this we see the great Power that is in Friends Rhetoric, how it
brings them off the Bilboes, and lays those Storms that gather in the Forehead
of Authority, and not a Hair of Friends Head shall be in danger by the breaking
thereof. O Complement! Complement! (I mean only Friend's Complement) thou art
certainly descended in a direct Line from the Light, thou have such noble and
generous Effects in laying the Passions even of unruly Men.

Another Complement by a Friend of the Order of the Grape, on a famous King of
B. M.
Though Friends of the Yea-and-Nay Tribe are much addicted to find fault and
fall out with the Creature, yet it is found by Experience that some Creatures
are of great Advantage of Friends, and amongst the rest Friends ought to speak
well of the Creature called Wine, which is a beneficial Creature in many
respects. It is said the heathen Poets have made many profane and wicked
Ballads in Praise of this Juice of the Vine, and have called it Nectar, and the
Fountain of Helicon, and have Dedicated it to their Heathen God Bacchus (as
they call him) a most debauched and loose Companion, whom themselves always
paint with red a Nose, and fiery Face, a tun Belly, and Bunches of Grapes round
his Head, with a great Goblet of Wine in his Hands, sitting a-stride a great
Tun or Vessel; all which are lewd Intimations of their beastly Inclinations:
But Friends have found out greater Advantages by the Juice of the Grape, than
these Heathen People could ever pretend to; for Friends have not set themselves
upon Tuns in that carnal naked manner, without Clothes on their Backs, but
Friends have got Clothes to their Backs; yea, I say, Clothes to their Backs,
and City-houses, and Country-houses (nay, some have had the vanity to be
hurried about in t^^^r Coaches too, after the manner of the Wicked) and all by
virtue of this same Juice of the Vine, whilst the beastly Poets (who have
pretended to be Inspired by it) have sung themselves out of all they had: And
is not this a vast difference? I say then, That they are only the Friends of
the Light that know how to put a value on this so excellent and beneficial a
Creature, having got the right knack of improving themselves thereby.

I speak not this that thou should think Friends know not the use of its
Virtue in other respects; for to deal plainly with thee, there are a sort of
Wet-friends, who perhaps have been as sensible of the warm Effects of the
Bottle, as the great hectoring noisey Pretenders: But what then? Does it follow
that if a Brother have a little Eclipsed his Light by taking too much Liquor
into his Vessel, and happen in that Condition to stumble over a Female Creature
in the Dark, must he presently send a Note of it to Doctors Commons, and get
all the carnal Wasps called Parritors about his Ears? Nay, nay, Beloved!
Friends have more of the Serpent than so to expose themselves. But I had almost
forgot I promised thee an Account of a passage between Friend B. and a certain
King; and it was thus;

Friend B. was a Vintner, and I need not tell thee his Dealing was in that sort
of Juice I just now spoke of; it happened that one day some of the King's
Servants belonging to the Cellar, drinking at his house, so much approved of
the Wine, that they agreed for several Vessels of it, and marked them up,
having agreed to send for them the next Morning; and taken with them some
Bottles, whereof the King having had a Taste, so far liked the Wine, that he
commanded it to be kept for his own use. But behold, when the Carts came in the
Morning to carry off the Vessels, they were all Enchanted, not one of them
could so much as be moved; for Friend B. had laid an Imbargo on them, because
the People that agreed for the Price of them, had not sent the Praemium which
had been determined between them; whereupon the King became acquainted that
Friend B. had refused to send the Wine by the Carts, so that in fine the
Vintner was sent for, who at his Entrance into the Presence, was accosted by
one of the Ushers who endeavored to take off his Hat, which the King
perceiving (who was a Prince of a very excellent Humor) commanded to let his
Hat alone; whereupon Friend drew near, and making a complemental Nod (which
amongst Friends passes for a Bow) the King demanded of him, Whether he were the
Quaking Vintner, that had refused to trust him with the Wine his People had
marked up? To which Friend replied, He was one of those the World called
Quakers, but that he had not refused to trust the King with the Wine; for if he
thought fit, he should have all the Wine Friend had; But, continued he, to deal
plainly with Thee, Thou have a sort of People about Thee, that I do not care to
have to do with. This Jest so pleased that gracious Prince, that Friend was
ordered his Money, and presently the Enchantment was dissolved, and the Vessels
had leave to depart out of Friends Custody.

So that as I was saying to thee, Friends are Wise in their Generation, and
know how to make more advantage of the Creature, than the pretended
Grape-admirers can pretend to.

CHAP. IV.
Certain Instructions for such as would learn to Accost after the most refined
Manner, in use among the Bull-and-Mouth People.

FRiends may be observed to distinguish themselves into diverse Sorts, and
accordingly have several ways to Address, and Greetings used amongst them.
There are a rough-hewen, stubborn, stiff-necked sort of Yea-and-Nay People,
that are of a more morose, sullen, and reserved Temper: There are a sort of
sinical, spruce, dapper, Periwig-friends, that are of a more refined Cut. And
there are another kind of Wet-Quakers (so called) because they will Soak up
abundance of the Creature, and lie dabling in a Tavern, or ^ Friends House, for
diverse hours together, and never shrink a Hair for it. These are of a more
Sociable, Wicked Words.
Complaisant, and Wicked Words.
Debonnaire Make than the rest of the Profession, and rather than fail will
Associate themselves with the Publicans, and Men of the Times, to beget in them
a good Opinion of the Genius and Humor of Friends; that they may see that
Friends are not so far removed from the Influences of Flesh and Blood, but that
they can relish the Refreshments of the Creature, and take a share in the
liberal use of her Bounties.

As for the first Sort of these, as their Temper is more rugged, so is their
way of Greeting more Blunt, Stiff and Inflexible; for their Posture is
ordinarily with their Arms folded upon their Breast, their Hats somewhat of a
larger Size, less Hair on their Heads, and less Linen appearing in their
Neckcloths than the rest; a walk slow, starched and severe, and out of that
Posture they will not put themselves upon the account of any Person whatsoever;
for as for carnal Men, they pass them by, either wholly neglected, or at best
allow them but an Innuendo. Upon meeting an Acquaintance, they shall just stop
in the same Posture, and stare ye full in the Face with,

How do thee, Edward, or William?

How fares it with thee?

How it is? or so; and then casting their Eyes down on the Ground, of a sudden
walk off with a Humh, Fare thee well.

The second Sort accosts thee after a much different manner, with an Air and
Grace very obliging, having their Hats more Fashionable, their Cravats larger,
their Apparel of a more gentile Cut, of very fine Cloth, and richer Lining;
with an inviting Bow, inclining pretty low, a gentle Elevation, and a courteous
Grasp by the hand; with,

Friend Samuel, how is it with thee?

Sometimes (if Gloves are off) a soft touch in the Palm, and a pretty sort of
grin, twinkling the Eyes; Friend how do thee do? or the like, holding thee by
the Hand in friendly manner; and sweetly Leering in thy Face all the while,
shall ask thee, Art thee free to take a Dish of Coffee, or a Walk upon Change,
or the like; where these mortified Self-deniers shall be surrounded with
Brokers, Chapmen, Masters of Ships, Messages, etc, as if they had Engrossed all
the Trade of the River: But if thou art not free to go, thou art dismissed with
a Humh, I am very busy: Well, I should be glad to see thee some time, etc.
This the base Censorious World may be apt to interpret Ostentation, or so; but
Friends well know the Advantage of this way of Courtship.

But now it fares much otherwise if one or so of the prettier sort of
She-friends happen to come athwart these second kind of Friends; for then the
pretty Simpers are made, the Face dressed with friendly Smiles. Then it is fit
that business should give way, that Friends outward Man may take some Creature
refreshing: Then Humh, Alack, alack, Susan, I am glad to see thee; why, when
wast thee in Town before? How is it with John, or Robert? (If she be a married
Woman) When do thee expect him home? or, How is it with thy Family? etc.
She-friend replies, Indeed I think it may be a pretty while since I saw thee,
but I rejoice to see thee so well tho; why, thee look very well; I am in
some doubt whether I may see John yet this month or two; but when wilt thee
call at Hors^y-down, or Lime-house? Verily thee may come if thee did think
it convenient, if it may so stand with thy Business. Yea verily, Susanna,
(continues Male-friend) I think it may very well stand with my Business at this
time; I warrant thee may be thirsty with walking so far, therefore I would
have thee accept of some Refreshment at Friend M's, I use to go there with a
Friend sometimes? Well then, quoth Female, since thee be Free unto it, I
shall be Free to go with thee for some time.

Then (because Friends cannot Epicurize) the pint of Old-Hoc is called for, and
the ^arrel of Oysters; then up comes the Florence, Tuscane and Canary, the
Sturgeon, Lobsters, Pigeons, Westphalia Bacon, cold Capon, Anchovies, Caveare
or cold Salet, according to the Season; and being very mellow, the Door is
fastened, and Friends endeavor to wear off the Fumes of the Banquet; and being
known to be Friends of the Light, the Drawer disturbs them not until the
Streets are pretty Dark, then the Coach is privately called to the Door, and
Friends gentily slide in, and rumble home after the Ceremony of a private
holding forth. Next I come once more to the Wet-Brother, who is an indifferent
Sociable Animal, and of a more Complaisant way of Address; for he commonly
greets his Acquaintance not altogether unsuitable to their Quality, for he is
heard to say to a Lord, Lord P. or Lord S. how is it with thee? to a Military
Officer, Colonel P. or, Captain W. thee art a Man of a good humor, and thee
talkest very prettily, or so: I could be glad to drink a glass of Wine with
thee sometimes, but thou art so given to swear in thy Discourse that Friends
think it not well for me to be with thee. So after this pretty sort of
Insinuating manner Wet-friend creeps into any sort of Company, and is as free
of his Bottles and Collations as the Topmost of them all, Canting after his
Yea-and-Nay manner, till the repeated Glasses of Wine so inflame his Light,
that it may be seen to blaze at his Face and Eyes: Thus it is observable, that
Wet-brother never balks nor ceases to force about the Glass, with a wilt not
thee drink, Captain P.? or the like, until, as was said, his outward Tabernacle
seems to be all on fire. Then is Friend become the Buffoon of the Company,
holding forth in the abundance of his own Sense, till he has talked and drunk
himself into the Opinion of all in the Room; then a Song is admitted to be
seasonable, and Friends outward Man approves the Wit of it; then out comes the
unsanctified Humh! It were pity such an ingenious Man should be so much given
to Waggery; but to deal plainly with thee, I never was against any thing that
was smart and witty, though Friends themselves were Exposed in it. Hick-cough
prevented Friend from enlarging upon that Point.

This may suffice to give thee an Intimation of the Morals of Friends, when
that which is called the outward Man prevails; for that obstinate Case many
times will carry the Light within into places of such obscurity, that there may
be little or no Signs of the inward Refulgencies, as damps; and ill Vapors are
observed to stifle the Shinings of a tallow Tapour, which puts a Period to the
Fourth Chapter.

CHAP. V.
A further Illustration of Friendly Correspondence by way of Letters.

A Letter from a Friend that had buried his Wife, about a second Election.
Friend,
THou know that about the Eleventh Day of the Fifth Month my late Wife
Margaret departed out of the State of Mortality, having done the part of Friend
for Thirteen Years. She had in that time no less than Fourteen Children, which
were named without Dipping, Crossing or Sprinkling; the first came in Two
Months after we came together, being the First Fruits, and Pledge of our
friendly Acquaintance; as for the rest she often told me, that some of them
resembled thee, especially Isaac and Thomas, and I hope thee wilt be kind to me
for their sakes. Since her outward Tabernacle was laid amongst the dust of
Friends in the purchased place of Burial, I have had great hankerings and
lustings after strange Women, and have sometimes suspected that somewhat of the
Root of Wickedness has remained in me. But (as thee art a Friend) I will be
plain with thee, for I am apt to think thy Wife's Sister Elizabeth may be in
Condition to cure these wild Inclinations. All the while I was at the
Holding-forth in Lombard Street, she carried away my affections so far from
what was said, that not a Word of that precious Friend could sink into my
Memory; yea, I must acknowledge to thee that my Desires went a wandering, and
Margaret was as much out of my Thoughts as if I had never known her. Indeed
Margaret has told me, that thee wast a very good Natured Man, and did very
well understand the very Symptoms of friendly Inclinations; therefore, it may
be, thou know the better how to advise thy Friend in like Condition; so
that, if thou think it convenient, I may take her home to me, to lie in my
Bosom. Verily, Friend, this seems to be very agreeable to me, and I am apt to
think thy Sister-in-Law Elizabeth may have some well-wishings to me; for, to be
plain with thee, she permitted me (all the time of the Meeting) to use a
Familiarity with her. It is said, That the Heathen Philosopher, called
Aristotle, recommended it as the fittest time for Males to Marry at Thirty
Years of Age, and the Females at Fifteen; and I am of the mind it may be very
suitable (if Friends may take a Heathens advice) for (though my Name was never
entered on the Church-Book, as they call it) yet, by computation I am about
Four and thirty Years of Age, and (as I have been told) she may be about
Sixteen; which suites so exactly with the advice of that Philosopher (who they
say was a great Midwife.) And I remember Margaret read much in a Book, said to
be h^^ that it might not be unsuitable if we did Join together for the
Propagation of another Race of Friends: If this will not be hearkened unto, I am
afraid I may some time or other requite thy kindness to my Margaret upon thy
Abigail; so that if it may be proper for thee to advise Elizabeth concerning
this matter, I would not have it be long before thee send me an Answer; for if
I be not the sooner Accommodated, I shall go near to be in the State of the
Wicked. Thus I have thought fit to set before thee the whole of my Condition,
and to crave thy Assistance in this matter, especially I having by Industry
obtained somewhat of the outward things of the World, and being sensible that
Elizabeth will bring with her somewhat that may add to the fullness of the
Creature, and to the Desires of

Thine in the Light, J. N.

An Answer of Friend unto the foregoing Letter.
Friend John,
THine of the Eleventh Day of this Fifth Month (by the World called July) came
safe to my Hand, and as touching and concerning what thou writest about
Elizabeth, it is very likely I may be free to act for thee according to thy
desires. Thee writest of the need thy outward Man stands of a Meet-helper; it
is very probable, that having been accustomed to use of a Yoke Fellow, thee
may have some Yearnings after Creature-Refreshment. If thee did thy self
reveal the matter to Elizabeth, and show her how the Case stands, it is very
likely thee may find her Inclinable, it being now about the Age of Desires
with her; and I doubt not but she may prove a Help-meet for thee upon both
accounts, being possessed not only of Youth enough to set an Elder agog, but
having besides a considerable Stock of what the World calls Fortune, besides
what she expects from Pensylvania. I shall give her such a Character of thee,
as shall not leave her insensible of thy Inclination and Ability, as to the
Affair in Question; and herein thou shall not fail of the best performances of

Thy Friend as to the Light, D. F.
From the South Side of Moorefields this 19. day of the aforesaid fifth Month.
A Dialogue between John and Elizabeth.
Elizabeth. NAY, John, but thee may not think to take such freedom with me,
unless thee and I had been better Acquainted; for (to deal plainly with thee)
thy Carriage is no less boisterous than that of the loose, carnal Ones amongst
the Wicked: Did thou ever see any one so tumbled and tossed, unless it were
one of the Light-housewifes in their sinful Houses? and do thee think to
serve me after that manner?


John. Yea, but Elizabeth, hark thee unto me, I say, were it one of the
worldly Youths that should handle thee after this manner, thee might have
some cause to complain; I say, if one of the carnal Ones should press so upon
thee; but for me who am (as thee know) a Brother of the first Head, and have
diverse times held forth at Meetings of Friends: I say, this looks as if thee
were not acquainted with that Freedom which we of the Light may use within, and
amongst one the other. Alack, if I should have come and made such a brisk
Attempt upon thee in presence of the loose Ones of the World, then thee
might have had some Reason to Complain; but how is it possible that thee
can have any Fellow-feeling of my Condition, or I of thine, unless we come
close to the Business, to know how things are.


Eliz. There may be something in what thee say for ought I know, but I have
not been much accustomed to things of this Nature, and I did expect thou
should have come in a more Courtly manner.


John. What, then it is possible thee expectest I should come to thee after the
Formal and Idolatrous Manner that the Fantastical Fellows of the Times come to
them they call their Ladies and their Misses, which is much after the same
manner that the Pagans do to their vile Abominations; that is to say, Cringing
and Scraping, and Bowing and Uncovering my Head, saying a Thousand such
abominable Lies and Untruths, as, Madam, I am your most humble Servant; Madam,
I am glad of the Honor to kiss your Fair Hands, with abundance more of such
frothy, ceremonial, useless, nonsensical, canting Balderdash, which signifies
no more than a Tale of a Tub; when even themselves* and a^^ the wiser sort of
Men cannot but know, that to squeeze the Question in a few honest well-meant
words to the purpose, and a good, round, warm Application to the Business in
hand, has been ever found to be more available, and successful (as I said)
even amongst themselves. For after all their Congees and Trips, their Legs and
their Lips, and the Complement they bring, which can Spell no Thing; they must
at last come close to the Matter, or all the Fat's in the Fire, and their
noisey blustering Complements vanish in Dust and Smoke. But what signifies all
this Bustle and Clutter amongst Friends?


Eliz. Nay, I never was against that honest natural Freedom that allows every
Creature to make use of their own Gifts and Talents with all the Freedom thee
can imagine; but how I, or mine, came to be Entailed to thee, I do not yet
see, for I am apt to think there may be two words to a Bargain; and that thee
ought not to lay any Claim to me, without showing any warrantable Pretense
for it; and before we go any farther, I am willing to be satisfied as to this
matter.


John. Yea, and that thou quickly may, for I would have thee to understand,
that I am Sound from Top to Toe, and every way as well qualified as another
Man. But if this be not sufficient, I am Free that thee should have any
further satisfaction that thee shall desire.


Eliz. Nay, John, if thee art of the mind that this be such an undeniable
demonstration of thy right to use me as thee please, I shall be free to
declare to thee, that I would have thee to consider this looks in thee like
Extravagant Motion, which (when thou shall come to consult the Light) will
appear otherwise than now thou do imagine; and what will the Wicked say when
they shall understand after what manner thou have been making out thy Title?


John. First I would not have thee trouble thy mind at what the Discourses of
such may be, because it cannot in any ways affect us, because we are not of
them; and besides, all that they can say will imply no more than this, That
they deny that Freedom to us, which themselves take when they think fit. For if
only the Carnal Ones should take the Liberty to Increase and Multiply, what
must become of our Yea-and-Nay Tribe? Must the Family of the Light be Extinct
for want of Issue? This indeed were the ready way that Paganism should again
cover the Face of the Earth. But, Elizabeth, since I find that thou art come to
the Age of Maturity, it may be needful for thee to receive thy measure of
Creature-Comfort, rather from the Hands of a Friend, than an Alien, and from
one of the Light rather than from the Men of the World.


Eliz. As for what thee were speaking touching Maturity, I can say little to
it, because as thee know we are denied the use of Books, which are (by
Friends) thought to be the Effects only of humane Learning, and by consequence
very hurtful to the Light; though (to be free with thee) I am of Opinion they
may (in some Cases) be very useful; for it happened that once a Book, called
the Academy of Complements, came to my Hands, and really, John, thee can
hardly think after what manner it wrought with me, for the Readings filled me
with such warm and sweet Motions, and such inward Inclinations, as I think very
suitable to my Years.


John. Yea, Elizabeth, and I would have thee consider, how very sweet the
Com^^^ts of Matrimony must be, if those little Motions, that stir up an
Inclination to Love, be so transporting.


Eliz. Yea, John, I will be plain with thee, for I saw thy Letter to Daniel
concerning me, and he did in friendly manner open the matter on thy behalf; but
I must needs say, neither one nor other drew forth my Inclinations toward
thee, as the Enlargement thou have made on the Account, which has abundantly
convinced me that it may be convenient for thee to hold forth in a State of
Marriage; for I have a good Opinion of thee, in respect of natural Endowments,
and am free to tell thee, That it is not the Thing called Fortune shall
separate us, for thou know I have enough of that to bid Friends welcome
withal, and since thou seem to be a Man of good Parts and of good Condition,
I am willing to comply with thy Desires.


John. Elizabeth, thou have quite Captivated my outward Man, and have quite
melted down the Light within me.


Eliz. Farewell, John, I shall be in pain until I see thee again.


John. Farewell, Elizabeth; and whilst the Sons and Daughters of the Wicked are
tied up by the Pagan Priests, for better, for worse, for term of Life, thou and
I will be our own Priests according to the Primitive Invention of conjugal
Cohabitation till death us do part.


Eliz. Fare thee well.


John. Farewell.


CHAP. VI.
Containing diverse Letters from Friends upon several Occasions.

A Letter from a Friend to an Attorney in London, to Arrest one that owed him
Moneys.
Friend,
I Herewithal send unto thee the Copy of an Account, as it was stated between
J. W. of London, and my self, on the Seventh Month of the last Year, as thee
may see by the Writing; it is a part of my outward Portion which I cannot
well want: And since the Jews (our Predecessors) are allowed to Implead and
recover Debts due to them, I know not why Friends may not be free to secure
their part of the Worldly Mammon. Therefore I would have thee to employ a
carnal Officer called a Sergeant to seize upon his outward Tabernacle, and lay
him in Custody until such time that the Moneys be paid down, or some one or
other (known to be considerable in the Goods of this World) put his Fist of
Wickedness to a further Security, so that I may not be defrauded of my outward
Subsistence. However, I would have thee use all convenient moderation toward
the Creature, and for thy trouble herein thou shall be satisfied by,

Thine in the Light, W. R.
Utopia, this 17th. of the 5th. Month, 81.
Another Letter from Friend A. to the Parson of N.
Wicked Priest,
THou Hireling, thou Priest of Baal; nay, thou Member of the Beast that sit
in thy Steeple-house, and there thou pretendest to be acted by the Infallible
Spirit, which thou receivedst when thy Predecessors of the Order of the Mag-py
laid their wicked, bloody, and unclean Hands upon thy filthy Noddle; when alas,
there is no Light, no not so much as the least glimmering of Light in thee; for
thou art compassed and covered with thick darkness, yea with Egyptian darkness,
which leads thy People into that State which Spiritually is called Sodom and
Egypt. Though thou take upon thee to be their Pastor, thou rather appearest
to be an Impostor; for thou strippest, and starvest, and sellest thy Flock for
filthy Lucre: If thou be not a Jew, how dare thee demand and sue for the
Tenths that were given under the Law to the Tribe of Levi? Art thee a Priest of
that Tribe? And is thy Separation to thy Office such as theirs was? How dare
thou hold Friends in filthy Prison-houses, and starve their Families, under a
pretense that the Tenth of their Labor is thy due, unless (I say) thou were of
the Seed of Abraham, and the Tribe of Levi? Think thou that Six or Seven
Years studying the Language of the Beast, at one of the two Infamous
Universities, and having thy Crown scratched in an Ember-week, gives thee a
Title to the Care of the Souls in the Parish of N.? I say unto thee Nay, nay,
nay, for all the while thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of
Iniquity; therefore I declare unto thee in the Power of the Light, and in
Trembling, and great Assurance that a horrible Tempest will overtake thee, even
such as will blow up the Foundations of thy False Church, and discover the
rotten bottom thereof: For the Cries of Friends are mightily against thee, and
will not fail to pull a horrible Vengeance upon thy Head. Therefore I advise
thee to set at Liberty the Bodies of William, and Tobet, and Humphrey, whom
thou have most wickedly, and like a Member of the False Prophet, kept in Bonds
for filthy Hire; so that they may be at Liberty to act in their Callings for
the Support of their Families: For thee may be well assured that (if thou
keep them there till Doomsday) Friends will not bow their Knee to thee, nor to
thy Baal, whom thou after a most Idolatrous manner set up. Nay, I say unto
thee, thou will find Friends rather willing to bear their Testimony unto the
Death, than to submit to thy Lewd and Idolatrous Impositions. This was upon my
mind to Declare unto thee, to join my Testimony as a further Witness against
thy carnal, persecuting Spirit; and hereunto I have set my Hand,

J. W.
The 17th. day of the 2d. Month, by the World called April, and in the Year of
Friends Captivity.
A Letter from a Friend in Noddy-Land.
Friend Thomas,
I Have often had thoughts of giving thee an Account of our Arrival in this
Place, of its Situation, Temper, and what we underwent (as well in our Passage
hither, as since our Arrival;) and when this comes to thy Hand, thou may see
that I have taken the present Opportunity to dispatch unto thee by the
Windmill Frigot, Patrick Maggot Master, being the same that brought us hither.
And it seems not amiss if I begin to relate unto thee what happened to us in
our Passage, which (as thou know) we began the 34th. Day of the Month of
Fancies. When we came on Board at Gravesend, there was very little material
happened unto us, until we passed the Downs, saving that diverse Friends came to
take their Leaves of us, not without promises, that (when we had planted the
Light in those far Parts, and Converted the Wolves and Natives of the Country
to the Naylorian Faith) they would come and seek out a Habitation amongst us;
and in the mean time would not fail to send over to us as many as they could of
the Families of the Fickle-heads, Paper-sculls, Humourists and Stiff-necks,
besides some of the Order of Thomas Muggleton, to Settle and Improve us in
Bull-and-Mouth Faith. Having given us these assurances, they recommended us to
the Protection of the Waves, leaving some vollies of Sighs to fill the Sails,
and a great many Farewels and goggling Glances to accompany us in the Voyage.
We took in diverse Passengers as we passed down the Channel, some of which I
shall name unto thee, because they may be of great use unto us in this place;
there was (let me see) Humh -- Thomas Giddybrains, Arthur Holderforth, Geofery
Crackwit, Marmaduke Featherpate, and Humphrey Shakenoddle; besides some
She-Friends that freely offered themselves with much cheerfulness to accompany
the Brethren into any Region whatsoever, for the sake of Propagating the
Bull-and-Mouth Strain: Amongst them was Elizabeth Stickfast, Margery Tiplecan,
with some others, who may be of great Refreshing when need shall require. But I
shall now speak no more of that matter, but pursue my Design in acquainting
thee with what we observed in our Voyage. The first memorable Place we came to
was that which they call the Bay of Biscay, belonging to the Coast of Spain,
and our Windmill was here put very hard to it, for the Winds were loud and
contrary, the Waters rough and mountainous; so that it was well that we of the
Ships Crew were of such Light Principles and make, that we had no apprehensions
of Sinking, or else we might have been in danger of having our Lights quenched
in the Bay, by the Impetuosity of the Waters, as some Friends have had theirs
Extinguished on that Shore, by the Violence of an Hurricane, they call the
Inquisition. We continued two Nights and almost three Days in this boisterous
Place, before we got off; and then the Sea calmed, and the Winds became gentle
all of a sudden, which seemed as if we had left all our troubles behind on the
Shores of Europe, and that we had now past the Storms of Adversity, and were
going to enjoy Peace, Light and Tranquillity amongst the better natured
Inhabitants of the Forests of Noddy-Land; for though at our first Landing we
might find them somewhat rough and barbarous, yet we had no reason to despair,
but the constant Temper of Friends, and the Resemblance and Proportion they
maintained in their Understandings, with those of that Newfound Country, would
soon beget a mutual Amity amongst us, and reconcile them to so agreeable
Conversation.

We continued our Course through a vast unbounded Ocean, abounding with diverse
Sorts of strange Fishes, some whereof had Wings and flew above the Waters;
these we thought might resemble Friends, for that which occa^ioned these Fishes
to fly, was to avoid the devouring Jaws of certain great Fishes that hunted
after them upon the face of the Waters; and then they would of a sudden spring
up, and conveigh themselves in the Air to a far distant place, and by that
means were preserved. We also saw diverse of the great Fishes called Porpoises,
who with great and indefatigable Eagerness were still in pursuit of their Prey;
and these seemed unto us to represent our Adversaries the Informers, Apparitors
and Proctors, who often suck in whole Shoals of Friends; stowing them in the
nasty Maws of their Prison-houses; unless (like the flying Fishes) Friends get
on Wing to avoid their greedy Chase.

One Night, in our Passage, Susanna dreamed, That the Whore of Babylon had put
her self in the Disguise of a Friend, and was going over Incognito, to mix her
Tares and Chaff amongst the precious Seed that Friends were about to Plant in
this to be reformed Climate; and that she had on Board many Bushels of such
detestable Weeds, whereby she intended to choke the good Corn. We were very
much troubled at this Vision of Susanna's, and could not think it to be any
think short of a Revelation; wherefore we were as diligent as possible to find
out if any such person was amongst us, and began to enquire amongst our selves,
where every ones place of Birth and Abode had been? At last it seems there was
one who had been bred in Italy, but upon further Examination of the Matter you
could no more have imagined her to be the Whore of Babylon than the Came of
Tartary; for it was not possible you could discern any difference betwixt her
and the rest of the Sisters, nor was there any sign that she had ever used
Patching or Painting, nor could we find so much as one Bull or Necklace amongst
all her Clothes; besides, her Looks were so Innocent, her Demeanor so Humble,
and her general Conversation so sweet and obliging, having such a particular
kindness for Friends, that we concluded Susanna's Dream must needs mean
somewhat else, that we could not conceive at that time, and therefore we even
troubled our Heads no more about it.

A Day or two after we met with a small Storm, which was very black and
troublesome for sometime, but it continued not long, not above the space of four
or five Hours. The Captain told us we were then about the Isle of Poines; and
that there were a sort of Evil Spirits that haunted those Parts, and always
showed some distaste or other when Friends passed by, perhaps fearing least at
some time or other Friends may take occasion to Plant the Light amongst them;
which doubtless would be the ruin of their State.

At length we arrived, after all difficulties, and came safe on the Shore of a
Land, in all Respects, so like our selves, as if it had been cut out on
purpose; for nothing but an universal Confusion appeared, nothing was Regular,
nothing in Order: There were no Exchanges for Pride and Vanity, no gilt
Coaches, nor painted Women, no Steeple Houses nor Hireling-Priests, no wicked
Universities for the Corrupting of Youth with humane Learning, no Inns of
Court, to set one Neighbor against the other. And some are of Opinion, it will
be safer for the Public to have no Laws at all amongst us; for whilst we come
not to a determination of what shall be Law, every body hopes that his Opinion
or Inclination may be gratified, but when once the thing is concluded upon, one
side or other will certainly be disgusted: Therefore the more Prudent conclude
this way of suspending any positive determination as to that matter, to be of
more universal satisfaction, than it were possible to be were it once resolved
upon. So that to me it seems much better not to be troubled with tedious
Volumes of humane Laws; which have always been such a burden as neither
Friends, nor our Brethren of the Dissension have been able to bear: And since
there is no Transgression where there is no Law, it would look as if we made
Laws on purpose to make Transgressor; but every Friend may be a Law unto
himself; and then of consequence there will be no room for vexatious Suits,
carnal Officers, wicked Prosecutions, nor cruel Prison-houses. And as for
Steeple Houses, we intend to Build none, and that will be an Infallible way to
keep out unclean Churchmen, for they will find little Comfort to Inhabit where
they have no resting Place. And we are out of hopes of bringing over the
Natives to us in some short time, by inviting them to a A kind of heathen Word.
Promiscuous Cohabitation with us; so that the Issue (at first) will be
Enlightened on one side, and in the next Generation, there need be no doubt but
they may be Transparent all through. Our greatest fear is, least at some time
or other the Whales might Conspire against us, and bring Doctors-Commons (over
Sea) into this our illuminated Plantation; but as long as London Bridge
stands in the old place, it will be a hard matter for them to do it, and we
hope our Friends (yet behind) will take care to secure that Post: For if that
Nest of Plagues should once come to be Transplanted into this our Region, it
would soon render it Uninhabitable, not only to us of Bull-and-Mouth Order; but
even the Old Inhabitants, Bears, Wolves and Tigers, would find a troublesome
Neighborhood. For the Security of our Territories, I may (without Vanity)
freely tell thee, that we think our selves Headstrong enough to Guard them
without the help of carnal Swords and Guns; and for Powder we have an utter
aversion, because it is said to be the Invention of a Friar, and smells rank of
Superstition. Thus I have as briefly as I could summed up unto thee what I have
to say, and was upon my mind to write unto thee, concerning what I spoke of in
the beginning of the Letter. I would advise thee not to let it come into the
Hands of the Wicked. And so I rest

Thine as touching the Light, B. K.
From the Yea-and-Nay Plantation in the Province of Noddyland, this 7th. Day of
the 9th. Month, and in the 1st. Year of Its Inhabitation.
CHAP. VII.
Some Questions and Answers by way of Discourse, between a Yea-and-Nay Friend,
and a Man of the World.

Man. O Friend John, how is it? How goes Trade at the Windmill Tavern? What,
thee still sellest Wine and Sin at 12 d. the Quart I warrant?


Friend. Hark thee, Cornet, it is like I have sold thee many a Bottle of Wine
(and I have some reason to remember it) but for the Sin thee speak of, I
never contracted with thee for any Commodity of that Nature, but it is to be
feared thee may have dealt with the evil One for that. I buy my Wines of
Friend F -- who, I am apt to believe, thee think to be an honest Man, and
would not sell me a drop of Sin in a Butt of Wine, if he were aware of it.


Man. But, John, thee know Wine is a good Creature, or else, why do thee
deal in it? And good Creatures do not put bad Things into Peoples Heads; but I
have sometimes drunk of Wine at thy House that has put a Thousand ill Things
into my Noddle, and am therefore apt to think there might be something of the
Old Man mixed with it; for I could seldom come out of thy Doors, but I must
presently get into some Sinning-house or other, and what can they say to that?


Friend. I say it is probable there might be somewhat too much of the Young Man
in that; for I can tell thee by Experience, that when I was about thy Years, it
would have a much like Operation with me, so that sometimes in an Evening I
have had extravagant Thoughts that way; but since I am come to write Old Man, I
find a great abatement of that ruffling Vigor, which if it were in the Wine,
would still continue; and therefore I am apt to think it is more in the Nature
of the Man, than in the Wine.


Man. John, I commend thee, thou art not like one of those Skew-mouth'd,
Sowrefac'd, Ill-look'd Fellows, that shall stand groaning, and turning up their
Eyes when they see a fair Lady (though the Devil be not like them in a Corner;)
but thou (like a generous Man) ownest thy Inclinations, and this Frankness of
thine is a Thousand times better than all their Mimicking Cant.


Friend. Yea, though I am free to say so much to thee, it might be much to my
prejudice, if Friends should come to hear of it: For though (as thee were
saying) many of' em are old Dog at it in a Corner, they shall be the first to
throw a Stone at a frail Brother.


Man. Well, John, I think after thee and I have so often been drunk together,
there is no need thou should doubt my Secrecy: But 'prethee how does Jenny
do, that is a pretty Rogue?


Friend. Nay, thee wilt hardly imagine how Scurvily that Baggage has served
me, almost enough to make me renounce Female Correspondence.


Man. A good modest word for it I vow, but 'prethee, Friend John, how was it?


Friend. Why, after thee wentest to the Camp I took her into my House to Board,
and used her with all the kindness thee can imagine, but one of my Merchants
Men happening to come to the House one Afternoon when I was from home; he got
her out of the Bar, and he got her up Stairs, and got her to Eat and Drink with
him at a high rate, at length he got her quite from me; and the Gypsy (they
say) is gone to Fulham to take the Air; thee may well think the rest: So that
I am left without a Female to Credit my Bar, and to look after the Business of
my House.


Man. Ay, and without a Play-fellow: 'Troth I pity thee, poor Friend John. How
do thee manage thy self under these hard Circumstances? and how does thy
outward Man bear it under such a sad Disappointment?


Friend. Why I have been thinking to borrow my Cooper's Wife, Margaret (and
thee know she is a pretty Woman) to stand in the Bar at times; but her
Husband is such a Jealous pated Fellow, that if thee or I should at any time
have any business to call her up Stairs, the Fellow would presently run mad,
and spoil all my Wine; and yet I must be forced to take in a Female to carry on
the Trade of my House, or else I were even as good pull down the Bush; for the
Town is come to that pass, that thee, and such as thee art, will not drink at a
Tavern unless there be something of a handsome Woman in the Case.


Man. Nay faith, Friend John, it is too true, I am clearly for a little Love in
the Case, the Wine goes down the better for it; but some of these Bar-women
(though they look as demure as a She-friend at a Silent Meeting) yet are
detestably Common, and shall make as much work for a Surgeon, as half the ^ilts
that ply in Fleetstreet; and what is to be done in that Case, Friend John?


Friend. Why (plainly) I say, such things may happen in wicked Houses, where
due care is not taken, and there the Gamester must stand all hazards; but thee
have seldom ever found such neglect at my House, where none are admitted to
that Freedom but a special Friend, or so; and if any thing be amiss, the Female
durst as well be Excommunicate as put such a trick upon a Customer that uses
my House: That would go near to raise so much of the Old Man in me, as might
break forth to the damage of her outward Tabernacle; besides, being for ever
discharged of the Trust of the House. But 'prethee, Cornet, come and see thy
Friend some time, thee may be assured of good Wine, and a Soldiers Bottle.


Man. And procure a kind She-friend to boot, Friend John; it is that I always
insist upon: I say, can thou not procure a good She-friend of thy own
Green-apron Tribe? I fancy such a Dish may do very well for change sometimes.


Friend. Thee talkest after a reprobate sort of way, as if I were to turn
Broker or Procurer, and have my House Branded with the Infamous Name of a
Common-house; nay, nay, I would not have thee press any thing upon me that
looks that way: But it is like I may persuade or prevail with a sober Friend to
be kind to thee, or so; but to turn Procurer, I abominate the loathed name of
such a one.


Man. 'Troth, admirably will distinguished (had thou not been a Yea-and-Nay
Brother) I should have said learnedly distinguished, and enlarged upon the
Point: No, no, I Will have no procuring, only prevail with a Friend, as thee were
saying. Faith, Friend John, I am very well Edi^ied, and (twenty to one) may
call upon thee, touching the Premises.


Friend. Fare thee well, I would have thee be mindful.


Man. Never fear it, Friend John --


[Exit Laughing. Certain Verses made into Meter to signify Friends Attainment
in Poetry.
WHen Heads of Friends at first were bent
Like Wind-mills to turn round,
That Motion soon begat Ferment,
And straight a Light we Found;
A Light so dull, obscure and faint,
No other could it see;
But Holders-forth did still maintain't,
And hey Boys, up got we.
Upon a Tub, or Stool advanced
In midst of Learned Throng;
Till down their Cheeks fat Sweat has danced;
And postern ferm'd among:
And still the Light, the Light they squeak'd,
'Pray mind ^he Light within,
Till all the Crowd with Heat have reak'd,
And yet no Light was seen.
But yet if carnal Learned Men
Have taught their Scholars Right,
No Heat can be without some Fire,
And where there is Fire there is Light:
That there was Fire and Light, Yea both
Full plainly it appears,
By Foam of Yea-and-Nay-Man's Mouth,
And Glowing of his Ears.
Thus having proved Friends have the Light,
Next Thing I shall evince,
Is, what the Brethren do see by it,
Beyond the Power of Sense.
For such Discoveries they have made
By force of this same Optic,
That, that which others make a Trade,
Would make a Friend quite Crop-sick.
And first this Light does plainly show
What Steeple Houses are;
That they are Shops, to set to view,
And vend proud Baal's Ware:
That it is Friends Interest to fly
From Walls so much profaned,
And make a Temple of a Sty,
A Stable, or a Barn.
That for a Friend to put off Hat
Is great Abomination,
That Ribbons are of Pagan date,
And Lace a carnal Fashion;
And that Minced Pies are sinful Meat
To Idols vain devoted,
And Plum-broth, a sad Crime to Eat,
As Learned Friends have Noted.
They have found out the use of Rings,
A heathenish Invention;
That Necklaces are Ominous Things,
Not fit for Friends to Mention:
That Learning is a Cheat they have found,
'Cause it detecteth Error;
Therefore it is fit to run't a ground,
For it is to Friends a Terror.
That She-friend (when at Bull-and-Mouth)
Appear in Green-Say Apron,
And look demure and meek, forsooth,
Without a Fringe or Tape on:
Though when at Home in Richest Silks,
And Hood set loose, she would Tempt ye,
Flanting like one of the Town Jilts,
And can as soon Content ye.
That Friends Increase and Multiply,
By way of Propagation;
The better to stock and supply
The next Windmill Plantation:
And to maintain the Canting Race,
From fear of an Expunction,
Friend may Hold-forth, and may Embrace
One of the Carnal Function.
These great Advantages and more,
Which here I have forgotten,
Friends have arrived to, on the Score
Of that same Light you wot on*
These by the World are deemed to be
Such Ear-marks of Distinction,
That Friend is known as easily,
As poor Knight knows his Pension.
As other Puddings (though full of Plumbs)
Of a Quaking-pudding come short all,
Even so does Friend, where ever he comes
Transcend each other Mortal:
His prick'd-up-Ears (like Almonds blanched)
Stuck thick as they can clutter,
And words as Sweet as any Manchet,
With Sugar, Sack and Butter.
And as the May Pole in the Strand
(Though stripped of her Array)
Surpasses those which in Country stand
With all their Garlands Gay;
For he is a taller, braver Plant,
And has stood out many a Shower;
So Friend (though Flutterments he want)
Makes Fop his Top sails lower.
Nor is it unto Friends alone
The Advantage does arise,
For half the People in the Town
Can see through our Disguise;
And all by help of that same Light
I told thee of long since,
That a Friend has now no more benefit by it,
Than has a Son of Ignorance.
For plainly they the Cheat discern
Through all our feigned Dresses,
And pass their Flouts, with Scoff and Scorn,
At our Midnight Carresses.
That Friends are marked and pointed at
By Porters, Dray-men, Bakers,
Tinkers and Cobblers, and what not;
There Is one of the Wet-Quakers.
But why't should be a Sight so rare
To see a Friend has Paddled,
I fansy it is more common far
Than to find Egg that is Addled:
Yet Egg is Egg, although it smell
And be a little Noisome,
So Friend is Friend, and will be still,
Though he be somewhat Toisom.
Besides, it is but Friends Outward Man
That has been laid a Soaking,
And when but little Fire has been,
There has been mighty Smoking.
So frequently by carnal Ones
Friends have (like Bulls) been Baited,
When all the while the Inner Man
Is uncontaminated.
Thus I have proved Friends have the Light,
And their Advantage by it,
And think I Am so far in the Right,
That thou can not deny it.
If that the Meter do not Chyme
In Consort, for to please thee,
Know, Friends are not much used to Rhyme,
And there is an end John Easy.
There is no doubt but by this time thee may be satisfied, that much may be
said to the advantage of Friends in Rhyme, as well as to the Commendation of
other People; and since the Heathen Poets have writ great Volumes in Praise of
some Men that they have thought deserving, it may be a Task not unworthy the
Attempt of some brave Pen, to oblige the World by some heroic Endeavors,
singing aloud the Prowess and high Achievements of Friends.

CHAP. VIII.
A further Illustration of Yea-and-Nay Morals, by way of Vision.

THE subsequent Story has been so strongly Imprinted on my Thoughts, whether
purely by the force of Imagination, or some other Circumstances, that it has
obtained sometimes the Credit of a reality -- However (in this place) it is
like to pass for a Vision.

It was in the charming Season of the Year (when Nature was clothed in all her
Fragrances, and the tender Blossoms of the cultivated Fields lent their
Aromaticks to the wanton Air, which tossed the Spicknard into the neighboring
Roads, which gave a powerful Invitation to be on Horseback) that a dear Friend
of mine came to my Bedside, acquainting me, That he had urgent Business that
Term to London, and would be glad of my Company: For hang it, Jack, (said he)
why shall we still confine our selves to the Solitudes of a Melancholy
Retirement from the Conversation of Mankind? I have a little Inclination to
divert my self with observing the Modes and Tricks of the Town, and to spend
some Guineas to see the Scenes of that great Theater, the City. The Invitation
was as agreeable as could be, and I immediately complied; but we were forced to
take Coach to accompany a Lady that was related to my Friend. When we came to
go into the Coach, there happened to be in the Company a pretty ancient
Gentleman, who was of a singular pleasant Temper, and a very good Scholar;
besides, a brisk jocond sort of a Yea-and-Nay Man, who seemed to be about
Thirty Years of Age, of an Air and Garb less starched than usual amongst People
of his Profession. We spent the first day after the manner of Strangers, in a
kind of reserved Observance of one another Humors and Inclinations, only the
old Gentleman Entertained us with diverse Relations of what he had observed in
his Travels, which were very Pleasant, and received great advantage by his
manner of delivering them. The second day we became more Sociable, and took a
greater freedom to Discourse by turn, of several Matters Pleasant and Divertive
upon the Road; amongst the rest the Yea-and-Nay Man told us one that seemed
somewhat reflective upon his own Profession; which gave us occasion to think
him not of the number of those streight-lac'd ones, who presume none to be
honest but those of the Denomination; but that he entertained (at least) a
possibility that they might fall under the same Topic with other Men, and that
they might make use of a knack in their way of dealing not inferior to some
that have been looked on as Sharpers, by the rest of the World. The Story was
this:

One day a certain Friend of ours went to Smithfield Market to dispose of a
Horse he had, which had the misfortune to be blind, but so advantageously, that
he must be a good Jockey that could discern it. Many looked upon the Horse and
bid Money for him, but came not up to the Price Friend intended to make of him:
At length a Citizen liked him (it may be the rather because he was in a Friends
keeping) and came so near the Price, that Friend thought it no part of Prudence
not to put him off; notwithstanding the Citizen (having tried the Paces,
enquired into the Age, and liked the Height and Color of the Horse) at length
demanded of Friend, What faults the Horse had? Nay, (says Friend) I know of no
Faults that he has (meaning he had but that one) so the Citizen paid him down
the Money, and having received the Horse into his Custody, said, Truly I see no
Fault in him; to which Friend replied, Neither does he see any in thee: Which
the Citizen (not minding) took in good part; and Friend imagined a blind Horse
to be suitable for one that was without Light. This Story satisfied the Company
much the more coming from the mouth of one of the Fraternity, and put my Friend
in mind of one he had heard of another kind, but of the same sort of People,
which he related after this manner.

It happened once on a time that a certain Judge sat upon the Bench at a
Country Assize, who took the Freedom (in the Afternoon) to joak and droll upon
Men's Names; and there happened to be one Indicted for a Murder whose Name was
Willman, but one of a very odd sort of Aspect, whether his Guilt might
contribute to it, or no, it matters not. The Judge (having heard the Indictment
read) speaks after this manner to the Prisoner at the Bar; Sirrah, you are here
Indicted for a Murder, and your Name is Willman, put away W and put to Sp and
it is Spill-man, put away Sp and put to K, and it is Kill-man; thou have an
Ill-name and an Ill-look, and wilt certainly be hanged. One that sat there as
a Justice of the Peace (who was a Brother of the Yea-and-Nay People)
apprehending this rhiming sort of Justice to be a singular new method, and that
which would pass for current in all Cases, entered it down in his Pocket Book
for a good Precedent, and resolved to steer by it. It happened that in a short
time after a certain Fellow was Convicted before him for stealing of some
Bacon, and after the Witness had upon Oath declared their knowledge: Oh, Oh,
(quoth the Yea-and-Nay Justice) you are a dangerous Fellow indeed, your name is
Willman. Sir (replied the Fellow) your Worship is mistaken, my name is Fowler:
Sirrah, Sirrah (quoth the Justice) that is all one, how dare you interrupt
Justice? I say thy name is Willman, (and I am sure I have a good Precedent for
it); put away W -- But here the Justice was at a loss and could go no further;
so that taking out his Pocket Book, Look you, Sirrah, (quoth the Justice) here
is your destiny, and I am sure it is good Law; and then reads on, put away W
and put to Sp, and it is Spill-man; put away Sp and put to K, and it is
Kill-man; thou have an Ill-name, and a very Ill-look, and wilt certainly be
hanged. Clerk, make him his Mittimus, and send him to Gaol to answer the next
Assize, and then let the Judge tell him whether it be Law or no. This last
Sentence was delivered with great Vehemence, because the Prisoner had
Interrupted him in his Execution of Justice.

The Yea-and-Nay Passenger Laughed as heartily as any of the rest, at the
Ignorance of the Quaking Justice, and no debate at all arose about the truth,
or probability of the Story; for all agreed that things very Ridiculous and
Absurd might be Imposed upon the Ignorant, which was all the use the Company
made of it.

In the Evening the Coach brought us to Coventry, where (after we had very well
Supped together) our Friend Traveller was very importunate to take my Kinsman,
and my self abroad to see the Town; which we willingly consented to, being
weary of two days sitting in a Box. After we had walked for some time, and
observed what he had a mind to, Friend was free to ask us if we would not drink
a Glass of Wine before we returned to our Quarters, adding, He was acquainted
at a Tavern, where he could Command the best in that Town. We willingly
accepted the Motion, and went to the M -- where the Claret and Rhenish were
very good, but that which pleased us most of all was another Friend of our
Fellow Travelers, whom he had sent for to make up a mess; drinking went round
very briskly, and the Discourse was agreeable to it; for Bacchus as soon warms
a Yea-and-Nay Man, as any other sort of Flesh and Blood. The Old Man had taken
such freedom amongst Friends, that the Young one began to be Rampant; there was
a Motion made by Friends to go to a House of Convenience, but we prevailed with
them to put off that, because of the Season of the Night which was pretty late;
and doubting we might be Indisposed for the Mornings Travel, we had a hard tug
to overpower the Importunity of Friends upon that account; they giving us all
imaginable assurances that nothing could be objected, either against the Youth
and Beauty of the Ladies, (for so in their Wine they called them) nor the
Accommodation of the House, which they affirmed to be very gentile, and such as
could not be bettered upon the Road: Besides, Friend offered to be at all the
Expenses of the Treat, if we would accept of it. It cost the other half a dozen
Bottles before the heat of this Inclination could be Extinguished; at length it
was resolved that drinking a Bumper to each Females Health should suffice at
that time. So (discharging the Reckoning) we endeavored to find the way Home
to our Lodging, about Twelve at Night. The Old Gentleman, and the Lady I spoke
of, were taking their repose some hours before. All the way home to our Lodging
Friend gave us all the Assurances of a most passionate respect, and determined,
when we came to London to give a demonstration of that Kindness he had
conceived for us, to which we returned all the acknowledgements the Season
would permit, and we thought proper on that occasion, but could by no means
prevail to go to our Lodging until every Man had called for his Bottle in our
Quarters; so uneasy did Friend appear to be, that he must leave our Company
that Night. We were fain to promise him to spend as much of our time with him
as our Occasions would permit, when we came to London; and we resolved to let
no Opportunity slip that might give us the truest Prospect of Friend's Morals;
for that we began now to be convinced, somewhat of Flesh and Blood might
Inhabit under that seemingly abstemious and mortified Outside, and that much of
the Goat lay lurking under the Sheeps Skin; so that now there wanted nothing
but a fit Opportunity for our new Friend to give a thorough Prospect and
Detection of his Morals; and our seeming compliance with his Inclinations, gave
him occasion to imagine that our desires were the same, and that we favored
those loose Passions with no less Indulgence than himself; and that Bait which
(perhaps) was intended to betray us into a discovery of our Resentments, gave
him the greatest provocation to expose his own, or else it might be purely the
violence of his Appetite that might hurry him upon those unwary Attempts, and
that in the presence of Strangers; at least he must be supposed to much to
credit his own Opinion of our Complexions; not regarding that no determination
ought to be made of any Man's Inside by the appearance of his exterior Mien and
Figure, whereof himself was a sufficient Instance. It is not to be forgot, that
going to see the Cathedral of the Diocese, which was in that City; Friend (who
was a great Despiser of Ceremonies) kept on his Hat in detestation of the Idol
Tombs and Monuments, and made many Sage and Declamatory Remarks upon those
stinking Abominations (as he thought fit to call them) and entertained them
with an Harangue on that Occasion, which I think not proper in this place to
omit.

Friends (said he) I would have ye to consider, that our Paganish Forefathers
did little think of the ill Consequences they should bring upon their
Posterity, by Erecting such Places of Worship; they were of one Mind when they
did it, and dreamed not of the Animosity and Contention that should arise
amongst their unwary Successors, by reason of the Dissentions and Differences
in Opinion that should afterward be fomented and carried on by the Priests
attending upon these Places. How many sorts of Opinions have been broached and
vended from yonder prattling Box, which ye call a Pulpit, but it might very
properly be called a Pull-pit, because, by the Doctrines taught in many of
them, People are pulled, halled and dragged into the Pit; not only the horrid
black Pit in the other World, but into dark and dismal Pits and Holes even in
this. Is it not from the Cushion-smiters of that place that Friends are
Fulminated, Excommunicated, Condemned and Delivered over to the Devil of the
other World to be kicked and buffetted; and to his Representatives the Prison
Keepers of this habitable World, to be bumbasted, jailed, stripped, flayed,
curried, worried and what not? How many several Sorts of Sects or Insects have
been brooded and swarmed through ^he Influence of the Tenets published and
maintained in those Places? Hardly has there ^een any Opinion, Doctrine or
Persuasion whatsoever, though never so black and detestable, but has had its
Pulpiteers to broach and justify it. In some Ages they have thought fit to
teach up one way, at other times another, as it pleased the Priestcraft of the
upper most Party. Sometimes the Box must be filled with a Hood and Tippet,
sometimes with a Geneva Cloak, and Cropp'd Ears, at other times a black Satin
Cap with a laced Lawn one turned up round it, a pair of Spanish Boots and
Spurs, and a short Velvet Jerkin, have usurped the Place, as if Divinity were
taking Horse, or the People to be Spurred up to Devotion; sometimes a Lay
Brother of John of Leyden's Order, has mounted the Place in his Russet
Formalities, a large, High-crown'd, Flap-ear'd Hat, a Sword at his Breech, when
Armies have been in fashion, as if the Truth were to be propagated by dint of
Steel, or Mathematick Garb; sometimes it has been the Fashion to Squeak and
Whine, at other times to hector it in a haughty and thundering Tone; then (at
times) top Snuffle and Snauch through the Crany of the Nose, as if the Doctrine
had a Spice of the French Mode. Never more Antic Postures, Mimick Tones, and
Fantastic Gestures presented themselves on an Unbaptized Stage at Bartholomew
Fair: And all this ado to dress and set off their reprobated and absurd
Nonsense, and recommend their Abominable Cant to the admiring Vulgar. The Bells
in the Steeple never rung more Changes than have rattled from the Twa^ling-box
in the Steeple-house. And all this great variety (forsooth) must be believed,
and assented to for truth, as if that sublime, simple, and naked Excellence,
wanted the Embellishment of so many Masquing Garbs, Forms, and Dresses. But
when shall'ye ever meet with a Friend of the Light that holds forth in any of
these Weathercock Pulpits, and Trump and Sham upon the People such Gew-gaws
for Doctrine? or Edify the People by thumping the Feathers about their Ears,
or playing with the Tassel of the Cushion? Nay! nay! I tell ye there is more
Edification in a silent Meeting, than in such a sort of Formal way of Action.

Then for the painted Glass in the Windows Can it be supposed that the People
there represented ever went in such loose kind of colored Garments, some blue,
some red, tawany, yellow, flowered, or green, after such manner, as if their
idle Tailors had put Stuff enough in one of their Vestments, to set up an
ordinary Mercer; and as if they were set there to intimate a Lawfulness for
people to flant it in Extravagance of Apparel? Nor must the Dead be without
their Vanities, as if they could not sleep quiet in their Graves, unless they
were loaded with vast Tombs, Statues, and Hatchments, enough to load a mighty
Ship; and the Expense of which were sufficient to buy a large Plantation, for
Friends to retire unto from ^he rest of the World, and plant the Light amongst
their increasing Colonies.

I thought he would never have done with his Enthusiastic Reflections; but it
fell out, that just in the Nick one of our Men came and gave us an account that
Supper stayed for us at our Inn; to which we then returned, not a little
satisfied that we were relieved from his unwelcome Remarks; having not only
declaimed against the Decencies used by the Living, but passed his invidious
Remarks on the Monuments sacred to the Memories of the Dead. However, it was
some satisfaction to us, to hear his Zeal vented in that sort against the
Antic and unexcusable Fopperies of that kind of Pulpeteers, for which we could
not but acknowledge he was not without some plausible cause to show his
Resentments: Those people having (by their affected Tones and Postures) too
notoriously exposed their Profession to Exception of the more prudent sort of
Men. We forgot not at Supper to give the Company an account of Friends
Expostulations; (but in such manner as was not distastful to him) which was
very acceptable to them, and the Old Gentleman was much satisfied with the
Railery that passed on that occasion, of which his part seemed to us the most
sweet and diverting. We passed the rest of the Evening in a Game or two at
Tables with the Old Gentleman, at which he was very excellent; and this gave
Friend a fresh occasion to exercise his Talent against that vain and idle sort
of Exercise* but he was so civil, or so prudent (at least) as not to give us
any disturbance, but held forth amongst the Ladies, who were very witty, and
encouraged him to speak his utmost upon that Subject; which (they assured us
afterward) was as pleasant to them as a Farce. This gave Friend some
inclination to think that he had crept a little into the Conversation of the
Ladies; and by their seeming assent to what Friend had alleged, he began to
conclude with himself that they were bringing over to his Party, and that
encouraged him to discourse to them of several other matters; some whereof
savoured of very great and particular kindness, which Friend had conceived,
especially for the Lady who was of our Company; she seemed not to apprehend any
dislike at his Insinuations, which prompted him the more to pursue and improve
that Interest which he supposed he had gained; so that it may be supposed he
went to bed not without having some hopes kindled of attaining somewhat that
was never intended for him. After our Game was ended, the Lady informed her
Cousin of all that had passed between Friend and her, and with what seeming
Compliance she had raised in him a belief of arriving to what he might design.
We could not but conclude this would afford us other matter to work upon; and
that by this means Friend might be prevailed with to give us a further prospect
of his Morals when he came to London; having resolved with our selves to use
our utmost endeavors to understand after what manner he Conversed in the City,
and whether all his designs were executed in the disguise and figure of a
Yea-and-Nay-man. This succeeded to our wish; for after having passed three days
more upon the Road, (wherein nothing material passed, but the increasing a
mutual Correspondence, and some Civilities and Treatments which Friend
presented to the Lady (for he took all occasions to fasten any thing that
looked as a kindness particularly on her) though he seemed very diffusive of
his respects to all the Company) we arrived at our Inn in Bishopsgate-street,
and gave each other notice of our several Lodgings.

CHAP. IX.
A Continuation of the Vision: Diverse Passages and Occurrences in relation to
Friend in London.

THE second Day after our Arrival in the City, Friend came to our Lodgings,
which we had taken in Fleet-street^ and passed upon us the Complement of the
first Visit; enquiring of us (but especial^^ of the Lady) how we found our
selves after our Journey, and expressing great Congratulation for our Health
and safe Arrived; he permitted us to prevail with him to accept of a Dinner
with us; and gave us a solemn Invitation to requite that kindness, by Dining
with him the next day. After Dinner he complied to go to the Tavern with us,
where we warmed him with some Bottles of Wine, which with much freedom he
accepted of, recounting to us diverse pleasant passages relating to himself; at
length (taking a full Glass of Wine in his hand) says he to the Gentleman who
was related to the Lady: Friend Robert, It would be great peace to my Mind if I
might be related unto thee according to the Flesh; that is to say, if I might
Marry thy Kinswoman; I do assure thee, that difference as to our Opinions,
should never occasion a difference in Affection; and therefore if thee
please, thee may acquaint her that I have drank a Glass of Wine, minding
her Welfare. At that word setting the Bumper to his Nose, he gave it so hearty
a Toss, that he made every drop of the Wine invisible; and cast back his Head
so far to clear it, that his Hat dropped off before the Glass was taken from his
Lips. Whoever has heard the Story of Let him Live, need be at no loss to
comprehend the Mystery of the Hat falling off: It being a way of Complement
peculiar to Friends, when they mind the Welfare, or, as the World has it,
drink the Health of Men in Authority. We merrily asked of Friend, whether that
dropping off of his Hat was not designedly permitted by him, to let us see that
he did not much insist upon the Ceremony of the Hat, if it were agreeable to
the Company? Friend ingeniously acknowledged, that it was done designedly, on
purpose to testify his respect to Friend Robert's Kinswoman; and that he could
willingly, not only put off his Hat, but perform any other Ceremonies to
witness his kindness to her. This extraordinary way of showing his respect to
the Lady, obliged us to make our Acknowledgments of his kindness in the most
sweetening terms that could be; he told us, that before we left the Town, he
doubted not but to convince us, That there were some amongst the People of his
Profession, that had as great an Esteem for that which is called Civility, as
any sort of People whatsoever. We acknowledged, he had given us all the reason
in the world to believe it; and that whoever had the happiness to be acquainted
with him, could not miss of an undeniable demonstration of it. We pledged the
Health he had begun to the young Lady, and were about to begin his; but he
would, by no means, suffer it at that time; but alleged, the satisfaction he
received by our Excellent Company (as he was pleased to term it) contributed
more to his Health, than all the Complements that could be made use of: We
returned, That we thought he could not well condemn, or speak contemptfully of
that whereof he was so great a Master. And (having given him our repeated
assurance of taking a Dinner with him the next day) we Coach'd it home to our
several Lodgings; giving the Lady an account, with what Obliging Ceremony her
Yea-and-Nay Servant had drank her Health; and how full of sweetness and respect
every thing was that he spoke concerning her: We likewise told her, that she
was, in all probability, to expect some brisk Attacque the next day, for that
we foresaw Friend would not fail to Charge her with all the Artillery of a
great Entertainment; departing so far in his way of Converse, from that sullen,
stubborn humor, that shows it self amongst Men of his Profession; that in
softness and complaisance of temper, he seemed to exceed the most refined
Courtier, and Gallant of the Town.

We again resolved not to omit any thing that might further our discoveries of
the Man's Morals, and doubted not but every day would contribute more to our
purpose; and we doubted not but the next day we might go a considerable length
in our design. We determined to play all one Game, (that is) of giving our
selves up to his disposal for that day, the better to observe whereto his
Inclinations would prompt him; only the young Lady had a design to banter him
with a trick, which she would by no means discover to us, till she came to put
it in execution. But that I may be the more exact in my Relation, I think it
proper in this place to let you know in what Figure Friend presented himself to
his Mistress or She-Friend the first day, (that is to say) as it appeared unto
us; You must then understand, That Friend came in a Coach to the door, and
having made enquiry, and understood that we were within, he entered the House,
my Friend and self conducting of him into a Parlour; He had on a sort of very
fine Serge, of an indifferent, sad Color, lined through with a rich Venetian
Tabbee, as near the color as possible; his Cravat was made up of the true
stamp, with a little puff before; his Shirt showed very little at the Hands,
but enough to discover it to be very good Holland; he had on his Head a modest,
well-made, light, ^laxen Peruke; and upon that a white Beaver, as ^ine as the
Skill of the Artist could make it; he had on a Cloak of extraordinary rich
Chamlet, very well lined; Gloves of Bucks-skin, well scented; and the rest
answerable; his Person was somewhat above the middle stature, straight, and a
little plump; his Complexion was fresh, and his Countenance smiling, with an
Aspect that spoke Venus to have been his Ascendant. This was the form that
Friends outward Man showed it self in unto us the First day, which argued him
to be a lover of his walking Tabernacle; at his going away from the House he
was very liberal to the young Ladies Maid, and forgot not the Cook.

It remains now that I give you an Account of our Visionary Entertainment at
Friend's Lodging, which (no doubt) by this time you are agog to hear; why then
it was after this manner. His Lodgings were at a considerable Tradesman's house
in N -- street, who (though he was of the same Profession with Friend, yet) had
a very great Opinion of Friend's persuasion) and disliked not so much of
Friend's Disposition and Conversation, as Friend thought fit to discover to
him. At this place Friend received us with demonstration of a very great
respect, and had obtained the Gentleman's Lady of the House, and a Friend's
Wife (about Fanchurch street) who was a pretty Woman, to bear our She- Friend
Company. We were Conducted into a Parlour very well Wainscotted, and a good
Marble Chimney-piece; after some little time the Women came in and Complemented
the strange Lady, with great Civility. You could discern no difference in the
Habit of the Yea-and-Nay-Woman from the rest, only that she wore no Lace, nor
Top-knot; she had on Manteau and Petticoats of as rich Flowered Silks as could
be worn; a white Gawfe Hood, set on somewhat loose upon her own flaxen Hair,
and good Face, which needed no hidings, nor set-offs; a black Hood tied
somewhat loose upon that; a very white Hand, and a cheerful Air; which were
very advantageous Indications, and of no small force to gain upon the
Affections of those that Conversed with their Owner. I made no particular
Observation of any other person in the Company, the rest being of that sort of
people amongst whom I spent my daily Conversation, and for that cause nothing
of Novelty appeared worthy remarking amongst them: Besides, it was our
particular business to detect what we could of Friends way, and Inclinations,
as it is the purport of this Book to set before Friends (and others too) a
Glass, wherein they may discern their own Complexions. But this digression must
not hinder me from going on with my account of our Entertainment at Friend's
Lodgings: which now I reassume; A Barrel of Oysters, and some Bottles of Old
Hock were set upon the Table, which soon set the Men on work, who began their
Forcible Entries, Plundering the Fish out of their Rockie Enclosures, and
Epicurizing on the Spoils: The Ladies were not forgot, but were presented by
the Men with the greenest, and the fattest they could find; Friend taking care
to furnish his new Mistress with the choicest he could cull from amongst them.
Scarce had we made our Conquests over the Colchesterians, but we were taken
into a stately Dining Room very well gilded, and wanted nothing of Furniture
that might speak it Noble. The Side-Tables groaned under their Load of massy
Plate, and rich Glasses; The Cisterns were heaped with Bottles of the choicest
Wine; and every thing that presented, spoke the Oppulence of the House, and the
generous Temper of the Master of the Feast. The Table was covered with Dishes
of the principal Rarities that Season of the Year produced; I am very loath to
name them, lest it should raise in some an Appetite, or desire to be at a
Yea-and-Nay Feast; but this I assure you, my Lord Mayor's Cook never sent
Dishes to his Table more Exquisitely Ragousted, garnished, or set off. You may
be sure there wanted not a Quaking-Pudding, dressed in all his Formalities of
blanched Almonds, and steeped in all the rich Sweets of the Indies: And as
every Dish was dressed to the best advantage, so the number no less discovered
the profuse Bounty of the Master, for there were three times more Dishes than
Guests; So that I could not for bear thinking of the City of Mindas, where the
Gates were said to be bigger than the Town. In the mean time Friend was over
Head and Ears in business, Carving to the Women, of every Dish, and loading his
supposed Friend with so many Plates, as if she had been to eat for all the rest
of the people at the Table: Nor was she more plied with Plates, than with the
sweet Invitations of, Prithee eat if thee can; I would fain have thee to help
thy self where thee best likest; Prithee be as free as if thee were at home;
for any thing that is here is freely thine; with such abundance more of such
sweetning Sauce, that the poor Lady's stomach was cloyed with the sight of such
heaps of Delicates. It cost us at least two hours at Table before we were freed
from the Attacks of fresh Dishes, and a Banquet, which concluded the Dinner.
Very little passed at Table, only general Discourses; but I must not omit that
before all was taken away, Friend, whispered me, that it would be improper to
drink any Healths at that Table, for he would not for any Consideration the
Master of the House should ever understand that he had complied with any thing
of that kind. This thoroughly convinced me that Friend seemed to be one thing to
one sort of people, and another to others; and that there must be something of
the Hypocrite lurk under that reservation. Yet notwithstanding that Healthing
was prohibited, there was a great deal of Wine consumed at Dinner; for the
Glasses (and those not of the smallest size) were always kept in motion with,
Thee have not tasted of such or such a sort of Wine yet; why do thee not call
for that sort thee likest best? I would have thee drink as freely as if thee
were at home. And still when these Greetings came about, you were sure to have
a Bumper put into your hand; that by that time we came to rise from the Table,
some of us had got red-coated Faces, and looked as if we had been at a meeting
of Gossips at a hot Sooping. To carry off the Fumes of which, Friend takes us
into his Lodging-room, and their treats us with a Bottle of Vsquebaugh to help
the digestive faculty. He there showed us diverse pretty Rarities which he had
in a little Cabinet, and offered to present our She-Friend with a Gold
Snuffbox, which she would by no means accept of, alleging the Entertainment
she had received there had been such as she had no reason to take snuff at,
which Friend admitted for an Excuse; however Friend was seized with something
of a Qualm, which made him turn up the Whites of his Eyes, and make a stronger
Impression upon She-friends Hand, which he grasped with a more than ordinary
vehemence, and was about to whisper somewhat to her by the side of the Bed; but
had no more power to speak, than if he had been at a silent Meeting.

-- Virtue forsooth,
And Modesty so stopped his Mouth.
At length a little recollecting himself, he began to apprehend, that this sort
of Trance might have betrayed something more than was fitting at that time;
whereupon he endeavored to excuse himself, That some sudden Vapor had
surprised his Spirits, and that he was subject sometimes to Hypocondriack Fits:
This passed well enough with some that knew nothing of the cause; but the truth
is, he wished all but one out of the room. The young Lady feigned a great
sorrow for him, but hoped the indisposition would not be of continuance, but
that he would be in condition to receive her Thanks for that days generous
Entertainment; Friend was under some difficulty to make returns suitable to the
Complements put upon him; but (whispering the Lady) he told her, That he must
owe the Cure of the distemper he lay under to her Goodness, as it had been
caused by her Beauty. The Lady knew not how to acquit her self of this, without
a Blush; but returned, She was not Conscious of any disease which she had, that
might spread its Malignity, and be the occasion of a distemper on any one, but
for the Cause he had assigned: She desired not to be numbered amongst those
that were called the Killing Beauties; and that she fansied those were
rhetorical Flourishes that he had gathered out of a Book called the Academy of
Complements, where it was usual to bring in the Men bleeding, fainting, or
dying, under the Wounds their Cruel Mistresses had given them; as if our
tender, simple Sex (said she) carried Darts in our Eyes, or some secret Venom
about us that killed and destroyed people at a distance. For my share, I cannot
apprehend the meaning of such Imputations; and (unless you inform me) shall be
at a loss to understand the intent of them.

This Railery put Friend out of heart to pursue his design that way; but
(fetching a deep sigh) said to her, I may take some convenient time to satisfy
thee as to that matter; and so the Discourse and Entertainment ended at that
time, my Friends Kinswoman having been disappointed of the designed Trick she
had merrily intended to put upon him. We took our leaves, but Friend would by
no means part with us until he had obtained a promise of my Kinsman and self to
meet him at Eight that night at an appointed Tavern; so having fixed upon the
Number, we parted very well satisfied that our next Meeting would give us some
clearer Detection of Friend's Temper and Designs.

The hour being come, we repaired to the Tavern, where we found the Number at
the Bar, and were Conducted into the Room where Friend was just come before us;
having in his Company two persons that seemed to be Gentlemen, one of them
about Twenty years of Age, the other seemed somewhat less; they were both in
Garbs very gentiel, and handsome; and it happened we were not much out in our
Calculation concerning them, for one of them was of one of the Inns of Court,
the other Lodged about Pall Mall, and much inclined to the practice of Music,
in which he had acquired a considerable Excellence. Friend made somewhat of an
Excuse for having taken Strangers into his Company, having before made us an
Assignation; but withal told us, they were Gentlemen of his acquaintance, whom
he met just in the Street as he was coming into the Tavern. We gave him the
assurance, That any that had the Honor to be of his Acquaintance could not
fail of being very welcome to us, and that we ought to acknowledge it as an
Additional favor, that he did us the kindness to admit us into the
acquaintance of his Friends. We then took half a dozen Glasses round, and
Friend could not forbear putting the Younger of the two Gentlemen upon a Song,
particularly one above the rest, which Friend said he much admired, for one of
the wittiest Pieces of Poetry which he had ever heard. The young Gentleman, in
compliance with Friend's desire, sung the ensuing Song, which I think may be
found in A. Brome's Poems.

SONG.
TVsh! never tell me I Am too young
For loving, or too green,
She stays at least sev'n Years too long
That Is wedded at Fourteen;
Age, and Discretion fit
Grave Matrons, whose Desires and Youths are past,
Love needs not, nor has Wit:
They in whose Youthful Breasts dwells naught but Frost,
Can only mourn the Days, and Joys they have lost.
Lambs bring forth Lambs, and Doves bring Doves,
As soon as they are begotten;
Then why should Ladies linger Loves,
As if not ripe, till Rotten:
It Is envious Age persuades
This tedious Heresy for Men to Woo,
Stale Nymphs, and Vest al Maids,
Whilst they in Modesty must answer, No;
Late Love, like late Repentance, seldom's true.
Gray hairs are fitter for the Grave,
Than for the Bridal Bed;
What pleasure can a Lover have
In a Withered Maidenhead?
Dry Bones, and rotten Limbs,
Turn Hymen's Temple to a Hospital,
Age all our Beauty dimns:
Though Lands may not till One and twenty fall,
The Law to Love prescribes no time at all.
Nature's Exalted in our time,
And what our Grandams then
A^ four and twenty scarce could climb,
We can arrive at Ten.
Youth of it self does bring us
Provocatives within, and we do scorn
Love-Powders, and Eringoes;
Cupid himself's a Child, and 'twill be sworn;
Lovers, like Poets, are not made, but born.
The Song ended, Friend asked our Opinions of it; we could not but acknowledge
the Words to be very witty, and that the Gentleman had expressed very much Art
in Singing it; but withal, we could not but conclude within our selves, that
Friend was certainly in his Amorous Moods and Tenses; and that the time was
come that he could no longer suppress his Inclinations; but it was pleasant to
observe in what sort of Forth they discovered themselves, for 'twas not one
Song, nor ten, that satisfied the Importunity of Friend's desires, though the
young Gentleman easily complied with whatsoever he asked in that kind, and not
one of the Songs but was well Liquor'd, or else some of them were gross enough
to have risen upon the stomach of a Bawd. But the fatter they were, the better
they slipped down; till at length Friend was for putting round, not only a Glass,
but a Kiss in memory of his Coy Friend (as he called her) so that Love was now
become so blind, it could hardly distinguish Sexes. By this it appeared to us,
that Friend had much of the Neopolitan in his Veins: And that as it is said of
Diogenes, that another Philosopher saw his Pride look through the Rags of his
Garment; So might it be said of Friend's Levity, that it showed it self through
the formal Cover, and disguise of his grave and self-denying Habit.

Nor may it be improper in this place to recollect a little how in Clusters the
Vanity of weak and unmortified Tempers show themselves; for Friend was not
content to expose the folly of his Inclinations on the one hand, but he must be
discovering the pride of his Mind on the other hand, being not able to contain
the Ostentation of that splendid Treat, which but that day he had entertained
us withal; but must divulge to the two young Gentlemen the Extravagance of his
Banquet, until they seemed to be Teazed with his unwelcome Repetitions. So much
does an ostentatious Affectation, and an uncurbed Passion divest a Man of that
Esteem, which a reserved and tenacious Temper still maintains.

Now was Friend wholly for making a Night on it, and giving the Body-natural a
little relaxation; we were for complying with the humor, and the two young
Gentlemen discovered no Inclination to refuse joining in the design. More Wine
was called for, a piece of Sturgeon, and some Anchovies, which delicately
helped on the Ferment: So about one of the Clock in the Morning a Coach took us
up at the door, and (we being all at Friend's disposal) rumbled through the
Watches, until we alighted not far from K -- bridge, where we were received
into a very fine House, the Rooms modishly furnished, and shining with many
Lights, every thing appeared very gay, and Friend told us the Gentlewoman (for
now he was able to speak that Language) was a remote Kinswoman of his, That she
was a brisk Woman, and had several pretty Neices, that would be very good
Company for us. The Bottle of Orange-water was produced, and the Servants were
as busy as if it had been Noonday; two Spits of Fowl were set to the Fire,
and (after sometime) there dropped into the Room five young Damsels, which
passed for the Cousins; they were all very formally saluted, and took their
places with us round the Table, diverse Songs kept us awake until Supper, or
rather Breakfast, was brought in (for these sort of Animals can cram and devour
at all hours) and amongst the rest a Pastoral Dialogue was excellently Sung in
parts by the young Gentleman before mentioned, and one of the new She-Cousins;
who acquitted her self admirably well in the performance of it; which moved
Friend's outward Man to take acquaintance with her Cheek and Breasts, which
after served him instead of a Guittar to play his part on. The Fowl was brought
in, ^aten, and well washed in Wine: Madona, the supposed Aunt, sitting in a
great Chair, and for a Conclusion to the Table-work, began a Health to the best
Woman in Christendom, which went round, and Friend took it very Devoutly; so
that Ceremony being over, we were Conducted to as many several Lodging-rooms,
the Damsels (being of courteous Function) bringing Caps and Neck-cloaths into
the Chamber, and asking whether we would not have a Dram of Rosa-solis, or
Orange-water, or any thing else to compose us to sleep; my Friend and self
desired to be in one Bed, pretending an Infirmity, which is often the ^ffect of
Lodging in such places: which (with some little seeming difficulty) was
^dmitted; how the other Gentlemen disposed of themselves, I know not; but
^^ppose Friend forgot not to take his Fiddle ^o Bed with him.

It must be imagined it was near Day ^hen we went to Bed, and therefore could
^ot be expected we should get out a Hunt^^g at five or six in the Morning; but
^^ough the Bed had so much of our time ^till ten or eleven, and I must
acknow^^dge my Head to have been soundly heat^^, yet could not I obtain one
hours sleep; such unusual and ^rouding Thoughts usurp^ upon me. Sometimes I
considered in what ^igure Friend would appear to himself when he began to
recollect in the Morning; and then I apprehended that we might present much
after the same form, having complied (for ought he might know) in all the parts
of the Extravagance. Again, what account could he imagine we should give of him
to the young Lady; unless he might suppose her to be of the humor that (some
say) the Scots Women are of? Not to have any value for a Man, unless he has
set up the credit of his Abilities, by having had two or three beforehand.

These (I say) and many more were the Considerations which took up my thoughts,
but I perceived Friend had no such Cogitations to disturb him; having (it is
probable) concluded within himself, that all Mankind were alike; and though
they wore different Habits, and were of different Opinions in other matters,
yet all unanimously agreed to prosecute their Bestial Inclinations, and give
themselves up to their Sensual Appetites. And I am the more apt to believe this
Opinion might much prevail with him, for a reason that you will find in the
next Chapter, when we come to speak of his Associates: Besides, that as soon as
we were got up, he came very briskly into our Room, and enquired of us, how we
had liked our Lodging, and our Company; we answered him, that both were very
agreeable, because both were very pleasant; at which he embraced us, and buss'd
our Cheeks; by which we perceived the Damsels had not given him notice that we
had had none of their Company; probably they kept that Secret to themselves,
lest the others should come to the knowledge of it, and they might be derided,
and exposed for having been so slighted by their supposed Gallants. A great
deal of Chocolet was consumed as soon as we were dressed, and we used our
endeavors to get Friend home into the City with us; but he could by no means
part with his Aunt and Cousins be-Dinner; we were not permitted to understand
of any thing that was to pay, but were told it would look ill if we questioned
it: No doubt Friend sufficiently gratified his Aunt for the Entertainment; and
we gave somewhat to the Servants, took our Leaves, having with much contesting
obtained that Point; (only our Change-business would not permit us to stay) so
we got to the Water side, and came by Boat to the Temple Stairs, leaving the
Yea and-Nay Cully with his Friends, to the further Management of the Aunt and
Nieces.

CHAP. X.
A Continuation of some more Visionary Observations relating to Friend.

IT will not be amiss now to acquaint you, that yesterday (which was the day)
of Friend's Treating his supposed She-friend, he appeared in a fine, light,
Broad-cloth Suit, lined with Satin of the same color; and the brims of his
Beaver were somewhat larger than the day before; this was the Garb he came to
the House of Pleasure in; but the Morning (before we parted) he came into our
Room in a Peach^ colored Satin Gown, Flowered with Gold and Silver, having
Cap and Slippers suitable; in this Dress very Amiable, and whether it might be
his own, kept at that House for his wearing when he came to take the Air, or
whether Aunt kept such Perquisites for the accommodating persons of his
Quality, I cannot determine: This I am satisfied in, that Friend considered
himself as much in that Garb, as a Peacock does when he erects his Plumes.

We saw Friend no more until two or three days after, accidentally meeting him
upon the Exchange, we found him upon the East-country Walk, with diverse grave
Merchants, some whereof were distinguishable by their little Neck-cloths.
Friend was now become a Yea-and-Nay Man again, and (giving us the formal Bow,
the fleering Smile, with the Hand a little extended out of the Cloak, to give
us the Friendly gripe) we were saluted with a How is it with thee Robert? how
is it with thee Thomas? I would willingly drink a Dish of Coffee with ^e at the
A. Coffee-house; to which we replied, He might find us there in a quarter of an
hour. We observed two or three Friends came in with him, and pressed him very
earnestly to dispose of two or three Thousand pound for them in his Country
Goods; he seemed not much inclined to it, until seemingly conquered by
over-perswasion, we heard him express himself to them after this manner: If I
am not mistaken in my own Heart (with Eyes lifted up) I can freely say that I
am willing to do my utmost for promotion of Friend's Interest, but ye very well
know what pains I take to manage my own little business; my Returns have been
but small this Year; and we are under such discouragements, that unless Friends
be Assisting to one another, the Wicked will carry away all Trade sheer from
us: Now I say, if ye desire me to lay out such a Sum for ye to the best
advantage, it is fit we come to a determination of a certain Factorage by way
of Poundage, or otherwise; and that ye remit me such Sums as I see occasion
from time to time to draw upon ye; but we will leave the further discourse of
this matter until to morrow after Change, for I am willing now to speak a
little to those two Young men, that came up the Country with me. So (after
Reciprocal Noddings) he dropped them, and whispered us, That that place would not
be convenient for us to discourse in; therefore if we had not Dined, it would
not be amiss to go to the D -- Ordnary, and there we might have the opportunity
of enjoying our selves, without being supervised. We approved of the advice,
resolving (if possible) to ^ound Friend to the bottom (having already gone so
far) to observe a strict Compliance with his Temper, as we had hitherto done.
We had a Goose, and a dish of Minced Pyes for Dinner, which it may be Friend
might have Demurred to in other Company; but (amongst us) it was concluded all
things should be in Common. Friend told us that he had been prevailed with to
tarry at Aunt's all the following Night, and that his two Friends had continued
with him: That these Frolicks were somewhat chargeable, but that he seldom used
them, unless (at times) for his Health's sake; but however the thing was not
much to be valued by him, being in a way of Trade, that (if he had Vanity
enough) he might very well keep his Coach and Dogs. We acknowledged that he had
laid an Obligation upon us, which from another hand would have looked like an
affront, in taking upon himself the whole charge at the Country House, and that
we thought it not proper to dispute it there; but were resolved, unless he
would permit us to re-imburse him, and to be upon equal terms for the future;
we would even offer that Violence to our selves, as never more to come into his
Company. He would by no means admit a^y thing of a retribution, but consented
to an equality for the future; and upon those Terms a Truce was made.

Then he enquired of the young Lady, and hoped we had not so far betrayed that
Confidence which he had reposed in us, as to speak any thing to his
disadvantage there; for that he hoped he was not mistaken in our humors; for
that we had always appeared to him to be under the same circumstances of Flesh
and Blood with others.

I diverted this discourse by drinking a Glass to the Aunts and Nieces Healths
at the Country House, which very well confirmed Friend in his Opinion of us. A
great deal more Chat passed about our Diversion at yond place, of which Friend
expressed himself very Feelingly, and (being pressed) confessed he thought he
might have been a little too vigorous, but that in such cases he never tied
himself up to abstinence, but always applied himself to a dose of Infallible
Pills, which never failed him; and offered each of us a Box, against such time
as we might have occasion. We returned him our Thanks, and assured him we would
send for them when that presented.

After this (having passed the Bumpers about, and Friend returned our
Compliment by taking so many Glasses to ours) he frankl^y told us, That he was
very glad we had met him that day, for we had thereby put an opportunity into
his hands of inviting us into the merriest, and best Company that the Town
afforded; where were such variety of humors, and all joined in such a Harmony,
as could not be matched again: And therefore desired us to meet him not far
from Salisbury-Court, at an appointed place, betwixt the hours of Eight and
Nine, Number 43. This fell out according to our wish, and we needed not be
asked twice for our Compliance in that case. So that we had nothing to do but
to promise not to fail at the Time and Place. So we drank about to the Healths
of the Excellent Company we were to meet that Night; and having given our hands
to be punctual, we went home to put our selves in order for that purpose;
taking each of us a Glass of Water to suppress the fumes of the Wine from
disturbing our Heads. We acquainted the young Lady with the design, who made us
promise to Print Friend's History in a Book; which is answered by this Vision;
in the Evening we repaired to the Assignation. We made so much haste to the
place appointed, that we prevented the Company; and finding no Number left at
the Bar, we retired to a Coffee-house for half an hour, and then found Friend
and a great many of his Company arrived by that time, many more dropped in, in a
short time after. It seemed to me to be the greatest Medley of people that I
had ever seen; for there were French, Scots, Irish, Dutch, and English, and as
many Sects as Amsterdam affords: Some seemed to be Gentlemen, some Soldiers*
some Merchants-men, others Mechanics; some came to Expose themselves, others
to make their Advantages, and Observations thereupon: Yet all agreed to make it
a Merry-meeting, as they called it; there were diverse that by their Habits
discovered themselves to be of the Wet sort of Friends, who had put on a brisk
gayety of humor, and appeared to be no more like the same sort of people they
used to look like at Bull-and-Mouth, than an Apple is like an Oyster. There was
amongst the rest a Sullen-complexion'd Blade of a Glover, who (it seems) had
been a Holder-forth at Conventicles; and this Spark was a great Stickler
against Church Discipline; but I could not perceive that either Friend, or any
of the Yea-and-Nay* People gave him any encouragement to promote his discourse;
but he was quickly taken off by a smart Gentleman in a red Coat, who so
all-to-be-baffled him, that he was condemned to silence during the rest of the
time. In fine, this seemed to make out the Harmony which Friend was speaking
of, that so many people of such ^ivers Figures, and distant Habitations, should
agree to come together, as (it seems they often did at that place) on purpose
to Fuddle, and blow up one another with repeated Bumpers: Some were for talking
of public News, others gave no Attention to it; some for Twoodling on their
Recorders, others for a Snap of a Song; but still the Glasses maintained a
nimble motion; until (by general consent) a Consort of Voices was agreed upon
to be very seasonable; which some of the Company performed very well; amongst
many others, Singing that which follows, with four Parts.

Would you know how we meet over our Jolly brisk Bowls,
As we mingle our Liquors, we mingle our Souls.
The sweet meets the sharp, and the kind-soft, the strong,
And nothing but Friendship grows all the Night long:
We Drink, Laugh, and Celebrate every desire,
Love only remains the unquenchable Fire.
The Songs gave the whole Company great satisfaction, after which some of the
Company played two or three Consorts on their Haught-boys and Recorders: This
Diversion I could not but esteem very laudable and gentile, and should not have
thought my time misspent in frequent Entertainments of that kind. But now the
^iery Element began to make many of their Brains whirl; some then began to
discourse of their Hectoring Pranks and Debauches, others of Tricks they had
played in the Custom-house; some complained they could not make up their
Master's Cash, others of Suretyships they had been ensnared in; some again
boasting how often they had passed the Discipline for the French Disease,
others dreaded the need they were in of entering into the same Course. The noise
was so great, that there began to be an Universal ^lamour from all parts of the
Room, which resounded with nothing but Oaths, Blasphemies, Cheats, and
Debaucheries, enough to have deafned Newgate it self. And yet most of those
people (when abroad) passed for quite another sort of Animals then what they
then appeared to be; Such a Mockage is there in the Excess of Wine! This indeed
gave a full discovery of the lewd Revels that Friend was a frequenter of: Now
the Room was become the perfect Emblem of a divided State, for the whole
Company were divided into little Cabals, three or four in a place, and as many
Glasses as there were People, and the Bumpers were constantly driven about till
the World began to Circulate: But this I will say for Friends, They never
boggled at their Wine, nor scrupled the Ceremony of their Hats; but most of
their Debates were calm, touching Female Assignations, or so. Amidst all this
clamor, one of the Company makes up to Friend, demanding satisfaction of him,
for carrying him to a certain House, where he had received some damage in his
Perquisites, and that the Cure had cost him ten Guineas, besides danger of
Relapses: this he insisted upon with great noise and Menaces: Friend meekly
replied (smiling in his Face) Thee might have stayed at home, if thee had
not been free to have gone with me; and if thee would make use of any thing
that was to thy prejudice, what is that to me? If thee find thy self grieved
in my company, thee may keep out of it. But this was so far from allaying
the Gentleman's Passion, that he was the more enraged, and swore bitterly, if
Friend did not promise him, before the Company, to give him satisfaction the
next Morning, that he would immediately run him through. My Kinsman, and Self,
interceded on behalf of Friend, but were like to be set upon by four or five
for our pains; one of them (who appeared to be the younger of the two that were
with him at Aunt's) giving Friend a whole Volly of filthy Names, and swearing
by no mean Devotions, he demanded satisfaction of him, for giving him the
Italian hug, as they were one night in bed together: These matters were so
plainly made out by many of the Company; that there was no good to be done by
interposing, only we urged the time of the Night, and danger of the Watches,
(which I am apt to think, some of that Company dreaded, as much as a Jilt does
a Beadle, or a Hempstock.) This somewhat allayed the Tumult; and a further
Debate of those matters was put off until the next Meeting, which Friend
promised them should be the next day. Then an amicable Glass or two passed
about; and (a Reckoning being called) my Kinsman and Self threw down our
Quota's, which was about Five shillings a-piece, and excusing our selves, that
we were Strangers, and had far to our Lodgings; we took leave of the Company,
leaving Friend to pay for most of them, as no doubt he did.

When we came home, we gave the Lady an account in what Company we had left
Friend, and how he had been Insulted over by diverse of them, which made her
hold her Sides for Laughter: At length, said she, Cousin, what shall I do for a
Friend? for now I plainly see my spruce Yea-and-Nay-Man has deserted me, and
is taken up with Jilts and Boys; and in short time I fear he may fall in Love
with a Fille, as poor Friend Green at Colchester did.

But for my share, I could not but have compassionate thoughts for him, and was
with great tenderness affected to see a young Man with such a seeming,
plausible outside, and one that was Courted with all the advantages of
Fortune, so miserably led Captive by his insatiate and unruly Appetites: I was
no less astonished (amongst that mixed Company) to see Professors of almost all
kinds Wallowing and Kennelling in the swinish Debaucheries of a wanton and
degenerate Age. What Is that Religion that does not reclaim Men from such
Inhumane Bestialities? But amidst my Moralities, I was whispered in the Ear,
That no Man yet ever set fire to a Field of Corn, because there were some Tares
in it: And that doubtless there were some Hypocrites, and that amongst the best
sort of Professors, or else the World would be better stocked with Honesty and
Charity, than upon the strictest enquiry it appears to be.

That these were a sort of Agents, and Factors that would still be kept on foot
by the Prince of the Lower World, as long as he has any thing to do in this.
And therefore (since such were abroad) they ought with the more caution and
diligence to be resisted.

These and suchlike Considerations not only took me off from my wonted
Conversation before I went to bed, but from my sleep after, until toward the
Morning, and then my very Dreams were composed of such reflections: Oh! the
horrid disadvantages of an unhappy Conversation; it not only entraps a Man in
the inextricable Snares of Debauchery and Poverty, but exposes and detects the
miserable Captive to the reproach and contempt of the rest of Men.

Wretched state of Ductile Youth! always inclinable, and always open to the
Attacques of every violent Temptation; forgetful of their Guard, and
inconsiderate of their Company. Happy they that Converse in a lovely Solitude,
with Groves and Streams free from the disadvantages of humane Conversation,
which beguiles and entices the unwary upon those unavoidable Precipices. And
yet were it not for Disguises, who would be decoyed? Were all the Promoters of
immorality and baseness amongst Men stigmatized in their Foreheads, as Friend
Naylor once was for his Blasphemies, it were to be hoped they would have few or
no Followers: But whilst Wolves shall put on the Habit of Sheep, Vultures that
of the Dove, and the Hyprocrite haunt ye in all the Habits of Gown, Cloak, or
Jerkin; so long there is little hopes that Men will be armed with Caution
enough to avoid the snare. Such like thoughts as these (as I said) kept me
company sleeping or waking until the next time I saw Friend; and that was
accidentally thus:

There is no doubt but the consciousness of his guilt, and being so notoriously
detected, as at the late Tavern-muster, prevailed with him to keep at a
distance from our Lodging, where we never saw him afterward; but going one day
by a house, where I saw a great many green Aprons, gray Coats, and large-Ear'd
Brethren pass in before me, I had the curiosity to enter into a Room where
there were a great Throng Assembled; in midst of whom was Friend Exalted on a
Form; sometimes dilating his Palms, sometimes thumping his Breast, and
Vociferating till he made the Auditory groan again: I was a little surprised to
find him Holding-forth after that manner, not thinking his Age had called him
to that Classis; but it seems he was acknowledged a Gifted Brother from his
Youth: A little after he espied me, he put a period to his discourse, and
(having sat down awhile) came to me, and desired me to call at his Lodgings;
which I did in a day or two after, with intention to tell him my thoughts of
his lewd and abominable Hypocrisy: But he was gone into the Country, where, in
a short time, he drew down several Thousands of pounds out of Friend's hands on
pretense of a Factory for them; a little while after (having made himself too
public, and got what he desired into his hands) he slipped over into Ireland,
and so gave Friends the slip with a considerable Stock, wherewith he purchased
an Estate there, and threw off the disguise of a Quaker.

We have been since told, that he had a Wife and diverse Children in the
Country, when he pretended that Address to the young Lady; and that since he
has been settled in Ireland, he has carried it very abusively to his Wife
(who is looked upon as a sober Woman) keeping Strumpets in his House, besides
what he frequents abroad; where he continues to keep company with the
Neighboring Youth, and infect them with his contagious Debaucheries.

The End of the Vision.

Friends, I Would not have you take it in Derision, For Yea-and-Nay this is a
downright Vision.

CHAP. XI.
Certain Rhymes made into Meter, whereby to set forth the Love of Friend
William to his Friend Abigail.

BUT hear me, Friend, before ever we speak a word of Verse; prithee tell me
soberly, and to the Text; Did not Friend John Complement neighbor Ninny the
Kirk-man after a delicate sort? See what these huffing Jacks are, when Friend
lets loose but a little of the Old Man upon 'em: And then (for fear his
Cowardice should be betrayed) it was a drunken Sergeant that did the Murder. O
Wit! wit! a rare excuse to blind and conceal the Heroic Prowess of Friend
John! that the World might not know Kirk-man was kicked by a Q -- But no matter
for that, it is no difficult thing for the Light that is in Friend to vanquish
the obscurity of such Juggling pretenses, and vindicate the just Power and
Superiority which the Old Man ought to have over such Whipper-snappers.

Now for the Verses, Friends.

1.
O Love! whose mighty Power
Is stronger far than Claret;
Send down of Wit a shower,
That I may speak like Parrot.
2.
Transfund my crazy Noddle,
That Is cracked enough in Conscience;
That so my Brains may Coddle,
In Raptures of high Nonsense.
3.
Let Abigail's fair Skin,
As bright as scowred Pewter;
Shine like the Light within,
On her Admiring Suitor.
4.
Yea, let her red Complexion,
As fair as any Brick-bat;
So work on my Affection,
That I may nothing stick at.
5.
And make me frisk and vapor,
In Verse of high Inspiring;
And that my Wit may Caper,
To Abigail's Admiring.
6.
Her Eyes are like two Oranges,
With Cloves stuck round about-a;
Her Mouth is like a Porrenger,
When that the Broth is out-a.
7.
Her Nose like a Pack-Saddle strides,
From one Cheek to the other;
No Damsel in the World besides,
Was ever so like her Mother.
8.
Her Butt -- ^ks, and her Shoulders,
Strive for the upper-hand so;
It Is hard for the Beholders,
To say which highest stands, ho.
9.
When she to silent Meeting comes,
With Apron green before her;
She simpers so like Mussle-Plum,
'Twould make a Jew Adore her.
10.
When she does groan 'midst Crowd of Friends,
Full often 't has caused me wonder;
Whether from Top, or nether End,
Has burst the Peal of Thunder.
11.
Thee may the Balmy moisture see,
About her Lips to settle;
Just like to drops of Furmitee,
Upon the brim of the Kettle.
12.
It makes my Blood in Veins to dance,
And puts me in Condition;
Much like to Friend, when in a Trance,
When I behold the Vision.
13.
O Abigail! thy Love transcends
The rest of the Creation;
As much as we, who are called Friends,
Excel the rest of the Nation.
14.
Great are the Triumphs, Poets sings,
That mighty Love has made;
Subduing all, both Queens and Kings,
The Distaff, and the Spade.
15.
Some have to Bedlam gone for Love,
And there Love-Songs are bawling;
Some over Walls, and House-tops move,
Like Puss at Catterwawling.
16.
Men too for strange Flesh have been mad,
And shifted Sex, like Hares;
And in the Transporting heat were glad,
Misses to make of Mares.
17.
At which the Men of Colchester,
Were very much Offended;
And for that Cause, on Gibbet there,
Was Brother Grene Suspended.
18.
So that the very Rage and Power,
Of this most Ravenous Passion;
Poor William's Entrails will devour,
Without Commiseration.
19.
Therefore to thee, Friend Abigail*
This Meter is directed;
That the Love which is on thee Entailed,
May never be rejected.
20.
And I with Poets, yea the best,
Will sing thy Praises certain;
And in hopes of thy Good Will, I rest,
Thine in the Light, W. Martin.
CHAP. XII.
Certain Enthusiasms by way of Direction concerning the Choice of a Woman; and
the Manner of Friends Celebrating the thing called Matrimony.

AND now having given thee a touch of Friend's Seize in Rhyme; whereby
thee may plainly discern, that ^f Friends would comply so far as to in^truct
the World in their Numbers, they do not a little exceed the Performances of
others.

For even as a Harry Groat
Grown gray, is worth four single Pence;
So Friend deserves a Cap and Coat,
For his Exceeding Rhyme, and Sense.
I am now free to go on with thee, and set before thee some Directions for
Youth to govern themselves by; as touching their Choosing, and manner of
Courting a Female Creature; and after what manner Friends have thought fit to
tie the Matrimonial Noose. As to the first thing, thee may have it curiously
drawn to thy hand according to the Directions of a Friend well Skilled in the
business, or affair of Intercourse betwixt that which they call the Masculine
Gender, and the Feminine; and that shall be plainly set before thee in Writing,
and is that which follows:

The DIRECTIONS.
First, when thee find thy Inclinations draw forth thy Love toward the
Female kind; I say thou ought to consider, whether thy Appetite and thy
Ability be proportionable one to the other; for if thee desire to have every
day a Dish of Poach'^ Eggs at thy Table, and thee have neither (...) to lay
thee any, nor Money to buy (...); why then Yea-and-Nay, Friend thou art like to
go without. Even so, if thee have desires after a Woman, and she will not come
to thee, neither art thou able to go to her; why then, plainly Friend, thou art
to go without her; according as it is Celebrated in Rhyme.

If Fortune favor, I may have her,
Now I am about her;
But if Fortune fail, I may kiss her Tail,
And so may go without her.
Secondly, in the second place, thee art to consider whether the Female that
thou desire be of a suitable temper, and disposition of mind with thy self;
That is to say, whether her Inclinations and Affections be as strong and
fervent toward thee, as thine are toward her; Or thou would better be dragged
at the Tail of a Horse,
Than e'^r be tied up for better for worse.


In the third place it may be needful for thee to consider her outward Estate,
what she may be really worth as to the Goods of this World, if she come to be
weighed in the Balance of Examination; for many times they weigh very heavy in
the Scale of Report, that are found light and ^^pty in the Scale of
Examination: It was therefore the Opinion of a certain Friend, That Women's
Portion-money used to be drawn over a Gridiron, and so Nineteen parts of twenty
dropped through, and never came into the Husband's Purse.

Then get thee some Silver with her thou do wed,
Or else let her lie alone in the (...);
For if' twixt the Sheets together ye come,
Then there comes a breed, its a Horse to a Plum;
And where there are Children, there must be Pap,
Therefore in the first place see thou secure that.
Fourthly, It were not amiss for thee t^^ ^onsider her Manner of Education, or
P^^^eding: For if she be one of us, much will b^ saved both in respect of Time
and Expense; in respect of what thee must needs be at, if she be brought up
after the Fashion and Custom of the World; for then thee must be at the trouble
and charge of that which they call Entertainments, Presents, Treats, and
Serenades; so that sometimes it may cost thee Ten or Twenty pound at a
Spring-Garden, Thirty or Forty pound for a Gold Watch, a Locket of Diamonds, or
so; besides the constant Attendance of a Coach and Servants. Whereas, if thou
seek the Love of one of thy own Persuasion, ^t is far otherwise, all that
vain and extravagant Expense is saved, and thou art secured from the danger of
keeping Footmen and Pages; no Balls, nor Masquerades; no Visits, nor Parkings:
which often occasions Husbands to have a pain in their Heads, besides the Noise
it makes in the Town, when a Woman is supposed to be Lightly inclined. Though,
to deal freely with thee, it is possible one of our own breed (if she be any
thing handsome) may at some time or other serve thee a slippery trick; For even
She-friends love lusty Yeomen,
As well as any other Women.


In the Fifth place, thee art to consider, That thee art not to come and seek
the Love of any one of our She-friends with a Sword hung up at thy Breech, for
that looks as if thou were inclined to use violence in the case; whereas our
Females know how to yield without being set upon by Carnal Swords.

Neither art thee to expect that our Widows should be distinguished by their
first and second Mourning, or their Veils; which looks like a Bill over a door,
written, Here is a House to be Let, or so: But Friends have a way of
whispering the matter about at a Meeting; or when they come together, either at
a Coffee-house, or their own Homes; and they know to a Scruple what weight she
is of: And much charge is hereby saved, for there needs not the Expense of
putting her out of Mourning; for the same Cloths that served to Mourn for the
Dead, will serve to Bed with the Living. And as to the matter which their
Priests usually ask of the Parties when they come to be joined, Whether they
know any Impediment, etc. Thee art to understand, that Friends satisfy
themselves as to that point before it comes to that; for the Ligh^^ shows us
that these things ought not to be hid^ but that Friends ought to take
sufficient observation of the premises beforehand, or otherwis^ it may happen
that one Man, or one Woman^ may be Married to another; which Friend^ have
observed was never the Intention of Nature, nor the true intent and meaning of
being Yoked together.

So that, to prevent mistakes, it is good
That Friend by Friend be understood:
Or else poor Female (as 't may happen)
Instead of Man, may Wed a Capon.
But these things strictly are forbidden,
So to the next thing we'll proceed on.
Sixth- Lie, That is to say, in the Sixth place^ If thee espousest a Friend of
ours, there is Money saved by the bargain; and let me tell thee that is a main
point: For if thee weddest afte^r the Carnal way, thou must buy thy Wife of the
Priest, and that may stand thee in about Twenty shillings; which is at least
Nineteen shilling Eleven pence half-peny-farthing more than many times they
happen to be worth: And is (...) not a sad thing that a Man shall lay out his
Money in a Commodity, which many times (...) would give twice as much to be rid
of, and t^ clear his hands again? It is bad enough, Friend^ to meet with such a
bad bargain for never farthing: but to pay Money for such Ware, by no means
according to the Light. And the wicked have observed it in some of their Meter.

He that Marries a Wife that is fair,
Of future happiness need not despair,
He may go to Elysium without any prayer,
The Sins of his Wife shall save him:
But he that Marries an ugly Wh --
Runs every day on the Devil's score,
H'as a Hell upon Earth, and another in store,
And Satan will surely have him.
Friends Form of Marriage.
Seventhly, All the foregoing Directions being observed, and Things in
readiness to put an end to the business of Courtship, and enter upon the affair
of Marriage; then art thee (in the presence of a Crowd of Friends, at a
Holding-forth) to take thy Female by the Hand, and lead her into the midst of
them; saying to this effect, (for Forms are odious things to Friends) Friends,
I would have ye take notice that I take this Woman home to live with me, at
Bed and at Board, and to do the Business I have for her; and I design to
provide things needful for her. So when the Company part, they go home
together; and at Night the clean Sheets are laid, and Friends go together to
propagate according to the Light.

I would have thee mark; here is not one word of For better for worse in the
whole matter, for Friends have not thought it reasonable to bind themselves
upon such unequal terms: Here Is no Dancing, no Fiddling, no Noise of Boys and
Wenches to whet Friend's Appetite beforehand; but things are done with Silence
and Moderation, according to the Gravity ^^d Custom of Friends.

So Male-friend does with Female couple,
Without a deal of Noise and Trouble,
Mingling their gear without pollution;
By Ancient, true Institution,
Which Friends conceive by Light within,
May be a means to prevent Sin:
Marr'age is Salt (some have been thinking)
Which keeps Friend's Outward Man from stinking.
In the Eighth place; If thee have Issue of thy Labors; that is to say, either
Son or Daughter, see that thou permit them not to be dipped, or sprinkled after
the Carnal Fashion, but call it after what Name best likes thee; for Friends
have Ordained themselves Priests in their own Houses; and know, That Children
propagated after the manner of the Light, can never be in a State of Darkness.
When they grow up, be sure thou keep 'um from running to Steeple Houses, lest
the noise of the Bells should make them deaf.

And if their Ears be stopped with Noise,
How shall they hear the Teacher's voice?
When he at Bull-and-Mouth does Roar,
Of things never understood before;
Nay so profound, Friends (if you mind it)
The Light within can never find it.
Ninth- Lie, I advise thee, in all thy dealings see that thou prefer a wicked
one that has Money, before a Friend that has none; for it is Money (Friends)
that is the life of business; Therefore get Money honestly (if possible)
however get Money. For verily when once the Money is out of Friends baggs* thou
can then discern very little Light within him; but it is the Friend that has
most Money shines the brightest.

These Directions I thought fit
To leave behind to teach Friends Wit;
He that does mind the last set down,
^S bel^v'd by all the Friends in Town.
CHAP. XIII.
Certain other Epistles and Greetings, giving a further discovery of the Knack
Yea-and-Nay-People are arrived to, as to the thing called Complement.

A Letter from a Friend, to another Friend in Prison.
Friend Marmaduke,
SInce the Evil ones have confined thy outward Tabernacle in the house of
Captivity, I have had great Sorrowings for thee; not so much upon account of
thy Sufferings, which are like the scouring of a Lanthorn; Yea, I say,
Sufferings scour, and rub off the grease and foulness that sticks to the
Horns, so that the Light shines through much the clearer, and may be seen from
one end of the Street to the other. Carnal ones have great resemblance one with
the other in their Actions: For even as the great round Lanthorn which hung at
Friend B's Tavern-door, was caned, battered, and broken to pieces, by one of
them called Bullies; and all because the Light therein was a little obscured by
reason of the darkening, caused by a foulness contracted (as I said) on the
case or outside; so that Bully chanced to step into the Canal: Even so they
deal with us of the Yea-and-Nay-People; If they discern not the Light (of which
sometimes our selves cannot see so much as a glimmering) why then I say they
lay violence upon the outward case, and fall foul upon that wherein the Light
is enclosed. And this is what was upon my mind to say unto thee, as touching
that matter.

But that which has caused in me the greatest bewailings, is for the loss
Friends sustain as to the carrying on of the work at the Meetings. Since thee
have been laid in Bonds, scarcely any one has been moved to speak, or
hold-forth for the Edification of Friends; but all our comings together have
been (as it were) silent Meetings: only Friend Elimas gave some Exhortations
and Establishments touching securing the Interest of Friend's outward Estate;
which has been of great use.

I have likewise further grief of Mind concerning thy Wife Elizabeth, who I
understand is fallen with Child since the time of thy Captivity, and it is
verily thought by some, that it is by one of the wicked ones; which occasions
great grief of heart amongst Friends; for they reason thus amongst themselves:
If she had been true and faithful to the Light, she would never have had to do
with one of them that are in a State of Darkness. And as an Adding of weight
unto thy bonds, I shall forbear what was upon my thoughts to say with relation
thereunto: only this may not be amiss to advise thee of; That it may be needful
for some Friends (of the more reputable sort) to give out, that it was begot in
the house of Bondage; and that Elizabeth be advertised, That upon condition she
join in testifying the same matter, thee wilt be willing to pass by the failing
with silence, especially, provided she keep out of the snare for the future.
This, I say, I thought meet to set before thee, and thee may use thy mind
concerning it; or else if thee think fit, a Bill of Divorce may be given
her; so that it may appear, That Friends are not free to encourage their Wives
in such Abominations.

If thee have any business, with relation to thy outward affairs, wherein I may
show kindness unto thee; It Is like I may be Free to act in it, if thee give
me notice. So with Friendly Greetings and Salutations unto thy Self, and those
in bonds with thee, I remain

Thine according to the Inward Glimmerings, Aminadab.
The 49th. Day of the 16th. Month, in the Year called Plato's.
An Epistle from a Yea-and-Nay Youth, who was a Prentice with a Comb-maker,
written to his Father in the Country.
HENRY,
I Write this Epistle unto thee that thee may understand of the Health of my
Natural body, as I did of thine, and thy Wives, in one from thee, bearing date
the 11th. Day of the last Month. I would have thee to understand that Friend
Humphrey (with whom thee have placed me to serve an Appreticeship of seven
Years) is one of those the World calls Wet Quakers; and came home about three
nights since after the second Watch, not only wet within, with the
bloody-colour'd Juice of the Creature, which is brought over to us from a
Country called France, (which, they say, has a downright Enmity against the
People of our Persuasion; and it may be the Liquor which comes from thence may
partake of the Nature of the Inhabitants;) for (as I was saying to thee) he w^^
likewise wet without, his raiment being very much polluted with the defilement
of the Canal; by which it is evident, that the French Creature had been showing
its Enmity, and after a most malicious manner cast him headlong into the
Canal; and that at such a time of night (that if the City-watch had not taken
him out from thence) it is very likely he might have perished in the Water, as
it is said some Creatures of the same nature did heretofore. His Light was so
far extinguished therewithal, that I could not discern the least appearance
thereof. The Watch that I told thee of brought him into the house, and laid him
upon my bed, in the shop (for the Woman called his Wife would not suffer the
Men to bring him into the Room where she was; but said unto them after this
manner; Carry the Swine, and lay him where it is fitting for him to be: So that
I was forced to get into bed, when the weight of his burden on the top of the
Cloths was very troublesome to me, besides the snoring and grunting noise which
kept me waking the rest of the Night. Just in the Morning, as I began to move
to get out of bed, a flood of reddish Liquor gushed out of his Mouth, which
stained not only the Sheets, but my Shirt also, and washed me all over; which I
was forced to wear wet about me the greatest part of the following day.

Now I am doubtful that Humphrey may frequently be brought home in like
condition, which would be very troublesome to me these cold Winter-nights; for
he has frequent contendings with that unlucky French Creature, and
notwithstanding he is often cast down by ^t; Yet will not the courage of his
Old man suffer him to keep out of the way, or give over the Contest.

There is likewise another thing which very much sticks with me, and that is
this; Our Neighbor's Prentices, and sometimes Stran^^rs, as they go along the
Streets, are apt to cast abuses at me, and reflections with respect to our
Trade: What (says one) thee art cutting up thy Father's head to make a Comb of,
or thee art cutting up thy Master's horns; the Citizens Wives will have
somewhat to say to thee for Sawing up their Husbands Brow-Antlers, and the
like: It were endless to reckon up the Scoffs I endure upon that account. So
that it has been much upon my Spirit to know thy Opinion concerning this
thing, and whether thee may not think it convenient to provide some other
Habitation and Calling for me, where I may be free from such continual Flouts.
But if thee take no care as to this matter, it is like I may be free to get
off into some one of our Friend's Plantations, where (it may be) I may meet
with none of these troubles. Thus signifying my Love to thee and thy Wife, and
minding Friendly Salutations to thy Family; having great desire to hear from
thee, I remain

Thine according to the Flesh. Henry the Younger.
The 5th. Day of the Month, called Maggot* in the Year of Horn-Fair.
Some Meter upon Occasion of the Wet Quaker.
FRiends! he is not Drunk, they who say so are Sots;
Does not his Laundress scowre, and wash the Spots
Of his foul Vestments? Tell me why he may
Not wash himself, that is far more foul than they?
For, to be Drunk, with Friends were great forgetting;
^ut it is like Friend may have ^ain a-wetting.
The Carnal Swine in Mire are always Wallowing,
But Friends (like Sheep) drop in the Ditch by following;
And they through Bry'rs will follow one another,
So one Friend falls in the Pit by following the other.
A Letter from a Friend to the Keeper of a Prisonhouse.
Friend,
FOR though I may not call thee by that name properly, and as thou art an Alien
to the Light; yet I have thought meet to give thee that Title, as I have no
enmity to thy Person. Thou know thou have in thy Keeping the outward Man of
diverse Friends, who are put into the Custody of thy Cage of Captivity; but
withal, it were not amiss for thee to consider, that though Friends are put
into a Cage; yet they are no Birds, for they have no Wings, neither do they
whistle nor sing as the feathered sowl do; but they are placed with thee for
diverse Considerations moving the Men of Authority so to do; and thee wilt find
it much to thy advantage to use Moderation toward them, during the time of
their Captivity; for verily that will sound much to thy Commendation: Do thou
not see with what tenderness the Creatures that are kept in Cages about the
Town are used? they have their Prisons cleansed every day, and are supplied
with fresh water and food for the support of their Tabernacles; sometimes they
have green boughs, and leaves put about them for their refreshment, which makes
them rejoice in the kindness of their Keepers; Yea, verily they do greatly
rejoice, and testify their thankfulness by their merry chirping and hopping
from one perch to another.

Now (as I was a saying) though Friends cannot chirp and sing thy Commendation,
yet they have ways of expressing their gratitude, in such a manner as (I am apt
to think) may be more acceptable to thee; For if there come into thy House a
Hamper of Wine, a piece of Venison, or a piece of Plate, verily I may say these
are very acceptable things, and yet such as Friends can part withal upon good
terms. But if thee be sour and rugged to them, thou will find it far
otherwise; those acceptable returns will be strangers to thy house, and it will
be a hard matter for thee to get thy Fees for their restraint; they will rather
die in bonds, than that thou shall be one farthing gainer by them.

I have set this matter before thee, that herein thou might consult thy own
benefit; for it has come unto my Ears, that thee have been very hard and cruel
to Friends in thy keeping; and that thou have not only denied them the
refreshment of She-friends company, but have laid violent hands upon some of
them; and have sore bruised their outward Vessels, to their no small
discomfort. I do therefore appeal to thee, whether such usage would be welcome
to thee, were thou in their state and condition? or whether thee would not
take it unkindly to have thy outward Tabernacle battered and mortified after
such unkind, yea barbarous manner. Therefore let me advise thee, if thou will
not allow them the kindness which birds receive, that thou will (at least)
afford them that which is not denied to beasts; that is, That they may have
Meat, Drink, and fresh Straw. So rests

Thine in the Shinings within, T. L.
The first Day of Noddy-Month.
Another Epistle, by way of Enthusiasm, written to Penelope, the Daughter of
Geffery.
Friend Penelope,
IT being now about the time which the World calls Midsummer-moon, which time
will always be famous amongst Friends, upon the account of the extraordinary
Enthusiasms, great Revelations, and strange Appearances which have penetrated
the Crancums of their Microcosms about that season: And it being about the time
that the Men called Doctors Exercise more than Common Severity toward our
brethren which are under their discipline in the Long-house on the South Side
of Moorfields; where they Scarrisie, Cupp, Plaster, and Syringe the Brain-pans
of Friends till they hardly know whereabouts the Seat of their Sensitive
faculty is, or what is become of that humor which used to reflect the Idea's
of the Imagination upon the (...); and discover unto Friends Castles in the
Air, Monsters in the Sky, and Constellations on the Earth: I say this is the
time when our poor Friends (who are in the Custody, and under the Cure of those
Cruel wretches) are masserated and mangled, that they have not the benefit of
seeing and discovering those things, which we who are yet out of their wicked
hands have freedom to do.

And therefore, O Penelope! I will declare unto thee, what happened unto me
about the Seventh Day of the Sixth Month, which last passed over us. It came to
pass that I was at a silent Meeting, where were many Friends who were in great
pain of mind; Yea, and their thoughts strugled mightily within them, as if they
had been ready for the birth: But, behold! not one of us had strength to bring
forth our thoughts, or (as I may speak) to Midwife them into words; so that in
this state we waited there for several hours, sometimes folding our Arms,
groaning, and goggling at one the other, until at length we parted, and every
one returned unto his own place.

And it came to pass that sitting down in one side of my Garden, and viewing
the little Worms that were laying up their Stores for their Winter-provision,
suddenly there was a mighty noise within my head, much like the rumbling of a
violent storm at a little distance, and a great weight seemed to rest upon my
head, which grew heavier and heavier, and the noise increased more and more;
And I called unto Margaret my Wife, and said unto her, Woman, come thee hither
unto me; and she hastened, and came unto me: but when she drew near unto me, she
cried out, saying, Who art thou? and I answered, and said unto her, I am Robert
thy husband; how comes it that thou do not know me? And she said unto me,
Tarry a little, and I will fetch the mirror out of our Chamber; for I am apt
to think thee may hardly know thy self: So she brought with her the Mirror
which was hanged against the Wall of the Chamber; and I cast mine Eyes toward
it* and behold! there issued out on the top of my head two branches in the
appearance of mighty beams; and they waxed higher and higher: And I said unto
her, Woman, what have thou done, that my head is thus encumbred? And she
answered, and said unto me, Robert, what meanest thee by saying so unto me?
Did thou ever understand that the wife was the occasion of a Wind-mill's
springing up out of her Husband's head? And I said unto her, How! a Windmill?
and she answered, and said, Yea a Windmill: And again I cast mine Eyes toward
the Mirror, and behold the form of a Windmill showed it self on the top of my
head; and that which had seemed like two beams, appeared now to be the Fans of
the Mill, and the Mill went round with great noise; and it seemed unto me as if
a great quantity of Meal (which was grinding in the Mill) issued forth at my
Nose, and fell upon the ground: And again I called unto Margaret, and said unto
her, Woman, get thee a Vessel that may receive the Meal which falls to the
ground, and preserve it for the use of the Family: But she answered unto me,
and said, Thee art in some Trance or Vision, for there appears unto me
nothing like the Flour of Wheat issuing from thy Nostrils; but there is
somewhat of a slimy matter, as if thee had caught Cold in thy head; And I
said unto her, What then is become of the Windmill? and she said unto me,
Neither does any such thing appear unto me, but it seems wholly to be taken
away.

During all this time I saw many strange and wonderful things. There appeared
unto me as it were fourteen Parrots, and as many Parraquetto's, and they sat
round in Company together, and they altered their appearance, and had upon them
the resemblance of Friends when Ass-sembled together at Bull-and-Mouth. They
were silent for a long time; at length they began to hold forth all at once,
which had almost deafned me; so that I could no more understand a word they
said, than if one of our Brethren had been Edifying; and notwithstanding they
appeared in the Figure of Friends, yet they retained the Voices of Parrots.

In a very short space after they assumed another Figure, putting on the
resemblance of a Flock of Geese, whereof some were white, and some gray, and
the noise of the Gaggle which they made far exceeded the Clatter of the
Parrots: At length they made toward a great water, which appeared unto me as
if it had been the Ocean; and getting upon the water, they swom away in a whole
Colony, until I could no longer keep them in view.

I have understood concerning thee, that thee art a wise Woman, and
understandest the Interpretation of Dreams and Visions; and likewise thee being
one of us who are called Friends, I was the more free to set the whole matter
before thee, and to desire (if thee think fit) the Interpretation thereof;
for I have great thoughts of heart concerning this matter. Neither may I forget
to acquaint thee, that, though the appearance of the Windmill cease, yet the
rumbling continues with me, and I am apt to think will never get out of my head
as long as I live. Margaret my Wife sends Greetings unto thee. Fare thee well,

Thy Will-a-wisp Friend, R. Maggotpate.
From the Windmill Place, in the Calends of Midsummer-moon.
Another Witticism, whereby it may appear that Friends do not want Talents.
IT happened that some Persons of Quality had appointed a Dancing-Ball, and a
certain Friend Dining with them that day, it was agreed upon amongst the Women,
that Friend should be had to the Ball that night; whereupon (Friend being
somewhat inclinable to the wet kind) he was prevailed withal to continue with
them all the Afternoon, and wanted not his share of refreshment of the Creature
called Wine, so that he began to be flexible as to the point of Complaisance*
^^and when the Coach was ready, Friend was prevailed upon to go with them and
see the Ball, where he was told many pretty Ladies would be present; and being
come to the place, Friend was seated very much to his advantage, to observe the
Company and the Dances: At length a certain Lady (having on a Mask) came and
took Friend by the hand, (and had privately hinted a Tune to the Music;)
Friend demanded what she meant by calling him forth, declaring, that he never
understood what a Dance was; but the Lady would by no means excuse him, and
Friend was held fast by the hand, and managed by the Lady, sometimes following
her leading up, sometimes falling back, till the Room was filled with Laughter.

Likewise another.
Two Friends meeting in the Street, after staring one the other in the face,
and passing some half a dozen groans, which seemed to presage some evil
tidings; quoth one of them, Do thee hear that Friend Susanna is fallen -- and
there made a pause, to fetch up another groan; Alas! said the other, Is she
fallen down Stairs? or is she fallen from a Horse, or from her Feet? Nay
verily, quoth the other, she is fallen with Child; Ha! ha! replied he, Was it
by one of us, or by one of the wicked? To the which (the other replying, By one
of us) said he, Yea! there may be some comfort in that, that the Light may
spread the farther: And thee know Lambs will be playing.

And another also.
A Gentleman that had some acquaintance amongst the people called Friends,
happened one day to invite a Friend (who was a Countryman) and his Wife to
dine with him; and after Dinner told them he would now give them a sight of the
Rarities, that they might be able to give an account to their Friends, when
they came home, of what they had seen; they discovered no dissatisfaction at
what he said, but soon accepted the courteous offer; and accordingly the
Gentleman took them to see the Tomb^ in Westminster-Abby, which had very near
raised the Old man in them; for Friend was ever and anon in great fumigation
against the Iaols (as he called them,) and had much ado to forbear declaring
against them in the very place; for it cost him many a groan to suppress his
resentments; sometimes hauking, then spitting and blasting up the Eggs of his
Eyes to the Cieling as if he doubted it were falling upon them; the Gentleman
could not forbear smiling within himself, to observe how uneasy Friend was,
and the many touches he gave his Cloak and the wretched faces that were made,
and all to be gone out of the habitation of those vain Creatures, with their
Pagan garbs and gildings: The Gentleman after took them to the Tavern; where it
was very pleasant to observe what pains Friend took to wipe the sweat off from
his Face, occasioned by the warmth of his Zeal; he could hardly admit of a
Glass of Wine until he had born his Testimony against them, for almost half an
hour. The Gentleman (seeing this work so kindly) determined to put one trick
more upon Friend, and to give him further occasion to enlarge upon the Point,
and accordingly took Friend and his Wife to a Playhouse; when Friend was come
at the door (seeing many Coaches, and a great crowd of Footmen) Prithee (said
he to the Gentleman) whose House is this? The Gentleman whispered him, A
foreign Ambassadors, which made Friend desirous to go farther; so the Gentleman
privately clapped the Ticket-money into the Box-keeper's hand, and led them into
the Eighteen-peny Gallery: It happened to be O Edippus that was Acted, and the
House was very full. Friend spent a considerable time in staring at the People
and the Scenes, but especially the Actors, who were dressed after a most
Idolatrous manner; and Friend had just entertained the form of an Idol-Chapel
in his Imagination, when he asked the Gentleman what place that was? To which
he replied, (whispering) the Chapel: But then! no sooner was that word out, but
Friend fell into a most violent Agitation, pulling the brims of his
broad-brimn'd Hat, rubbing his Ears and his Forehead with his Pocket-napkin,
'till they began to glow again; drawing his Wife back by the Sl^eve, ^ho leaned
a little forward to increase her wonderment: Sometimes he would be tweaking the
Gentleman by the Coat to have him gone; saying, 'Prithee let us get out of this
filthy place* to which the Gentleman replied (whispering,) They have not done
yet: Friend stood gaping and trembling as if he had been in a Trance; At last
his Wife espied the blazing Stars in the Scene, and immediately shrieked out,
laying both her Arms about her Husband's Neck, and hanging her weight upon him:
Alas, quoth she, look up, Robert! look up! the Day of Judgment is come, and we
shall be slain here amongst the wicked! The People round thought the Woman had
been in a Fit, and it is supposed that either She or Friend Robert dropped some
Aromatic, for the Company were fain to stop their Noses, or smell to the
Snush-box: Then they made way, and Friend and his Wife had an opportunity of
conveying themselves out of the frightful place. The Gentleman went with them
to the door, and having put them into a Coach, he left them to ruminate upon
the Astonishing sights they had seen; and returned, and sat out the rest of
the Play.

CHAP. XIV.
Treating of Friends familiarity with the Creature.

TO what purpose is all the thing called Breeding or Education in the World
bestowed upon Man or Woman, if by a sullen or stately reservedness the rest of
Mankind are deprived of the benefit thereof? I say, what avails it if a
Merchant, or a Gentleman, (as they are called) shall give his Son the Education
of the University, or his Daughter that of the best Boarding-Schools about
Town; if after all that charge, and (it may be) an excellent Improvement under
it) these extraordinary qualified persons shall confine themselves to their
Clossets, or by some other means tie themselves up from the Conversation of
others? Who can admire, or be in love with those Endowments, which they never
have an opportunity to know? Therefore it is an open and familiar way of Access
and Communication that gives persons the advantages of knowing and being known
to one another, and a condescending and mixing with Company, that discovers as
w^^ the Endowments, as the Nature and Temper of People. And though the rest of
the World have unjustly stained Friends for being of a morose, sullen, and
reserved way and temper, yet those that have had opportunities of Converse with
them, and of looking through the disguise of the Yea-and-Nay Profession, have
found Friends have not been shy of laying themselves open, even in ways of
uncommon and extraordinary Familiarities: Or else how should the Butcher ever
have thought to have found Friend W. in bed with his Wife, at a time when the
Butcher was at a Market two miles from his House? It is not much amiss to
relate the passage, though the Neighbors are well enough acquainted with it.

Friend William very well knowing and understanding the times and seasons when
the Butcher's business obliged him to be from home, had frequently had
Inclinations to be a little inward (as one may say) with the Woman called his
Wife, and accordingly was not wanting to make diverse visits and applications
upon that occasion^: In some of which he happened to lay himself so open, that
the Butcher had sufficient Intimation, that there was some familiarity (as they
call it) between Friend and his Wife* and that this Correspondence was managed
chiefly at the times when he was at Market. Whereupon the Butcher took occasion
to drop home from Market (one day) sooner by some hours than was usual; and
behold! Friend was just coming off the bed from taking a little repose even at
the time as the Butcher came into the Yard; and thereupon Friend said hastily
unto Rebecca (who was the Butcher's ^ife) Arise thee quickly, for behold thy
Husband is in the Yard; and come and let us sit down and commune together in a
way of familiarity, that when he comes in, he may not find wherewithal to
blame us; so Rebecca came and sat her down upon a Stool in the midst of the
Room, and Friend William sat upon a Bench at some distance; their discourse
was about matters relating to the Yea and-Nay Persuasion, upon which point
Friend was Holding-forth with great heat of Argumentation: The Butcher tarried
some time in the passage, and heard the discourse was altogether about matters
relating to the Light within; at length coming into the Room, and finding them
at such a modest distance, he hardly knew how to put himself into a Passion;
but saluted Friend in courteous manner (saying) William, how do do? To which
Friend replied (simperingly) How is it with thee? After some time the Butcher
enquired what occasion had brought him that way at that time? To which Friend
answered, I have at some times had Conversation with thy Wife, and finding her
to be Inclined to the Light, I reckon it not amiss to have discourse with her
in a way of familiar Communication; But if thee find fault with this matter,
behold thy Wife is before thee, and let her speak unto thee. But the Butcher
(finding he had m^ssed the main business he came home about) dissembled the
matter, and Friend (...) me to no damage, by reason of his familiarity.

But it happened that some time after, upon another Market Day, the Butcher
took an occasion to go to Friend's house, about the time that William and
Rebecca used to be familiar; and finding William's Wife within, enquired
concerning her Husband William; She could give him no account of the matter,
but that he seldom was at home on that day, but constantly walked forth (as he
said) to Hold-forth at a silent Meeting. The Butcher, being a little nettled at
this constant sort of Holding-forth, gave the Woman (...) understand that there
was great familiarity between her Husband William, and his Wife Rebecca, and
said he had found them together, and was come to acquaint her with it, and to
offer (if she thought fit) to requite their Correspondence in a way of
familiarity with her; The Woman made no scruple of complying, so that a
familiarity was contracted betwixt her and the Butcher; and the Butcher so well
approved of his new acquaintance, that he sent for Twelve-peny-worth of Cider
to rejoice in the Correspondence he had obtained.

But behold! as they were enjoying themselves, and the Creature, Friend William
comes into the Room, being returned from Holding-forth, and said unto his
Wife, O, Woman! what do thou? And she answered and said unto him, I am
entering into a way of familiarity with our Neighbor the Butcher, even as thou
(...) entered into a familiarity with his Wife Rebecca. Whereupon William sat
him down, and groaning (...) in his mind, said thus, I have pulled this Evil
(...) my self; and it is just with our Neighbor the (...) to requite my
visitings of his Wife, by ha^^ Conversation with mine. And the Wi^e of Wil^^^
Conceived, and brought forth a Son, and called (...) Name Kill^Calf in memory
of the Butcher.

^hen pray mark this, and do not slight it,
Friendship with Friendship is requited:
Though Friend William lost his Holdings forth*
The Butcher had his Peny's-worth.
FINIS.

