FORTUNE IN HER WITS, OR, The Hour (...) all Men.

W^^^TEN In Spanish (...) the most Ingenious Don Francisco (...) Quivedo
Villegas, Author of (...) Visions of Hell.

Translated into English BY CAPT. JOHN STEVENS.

LONDON, Printed for R. Sare at Gray's-Inn-Gate, F. Saunders in the
New-Exchange, and Tho. Bennet in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1697.

TO Mark Arundell Esquire
SIR,
THere are three Faults, which I have observed in many Dedications, and which I
have resolved carefully to avoid. The first is, the Choice of an Unworthy
Person to Dedicate to. The second, the servile Flattery bestowed on him. And
the last, the Tediousness of the Epistle. The two last seem to be necessary
Consequences to the first; for when an Author has made choice of a Vile Patron,
he is obliged to turn Parasite in his own defense, and to defile much Paper, as
well as nauseate the Reader with a multitude of Fawning Sentences, stolen out
of ancient Panegyricks spoken to Wicked Heathens, who yet were better Men than
those pretended Christians to whom the same Praises are now applied.

I believe Envy it self cannot find place to censure the Choice I have made,
and only Envy is capable of attempting it, which if it should, there is yet
this Satisfaction, that we know this Vice, tho aiming to devour and tear
others, only gnaws and wounds it self. Good Men, who are the true Judges of
Merit, know yours to be far above all I can offer; and yet I make no doubt but
you will look upon this as worthy your Acceptance; for Generosity regards not
the Gift, but the intention of the Giver. David not only accepted of the Water
brought him by the Three Worthies from the Cistern in Bethlehem, but also
offered it to our Lord, because those Men had brought it with the hazard of
their Lives. It was not the Water that was of such value, but the Zeal of those
Men to serve him that made it precious. Accept, Sir, in like manner hereof, and
regard not the value of the Offering, but the Will of him that offers.

Where Merit is, there can be no Flattery, and therefore should a better Pen
than mine undertake to make your Character public, it might find Subject
enough to employ it self without falling into that Vice. It is peculiar to the
Unworthy, only they delight in it, and yet it is that which most exposes them
to scorn. To commend Wicked Persons, by attributing to them Virtues they are
wholly void of, is no other than to extol the Whiteness of an Ethiopian; for
the Vices of the former are no less visible than the Blackness of the latter,
and to commend them, for what is not in them is rather a reproach than a
commendation. But those who like you are truly Virtuous, are also free from the
vanity of taking delight in public Praises, because no eminent Virtue can be
long concealed, its own luster will attract the Eyes of all Men, and therefore
it needs no foreign helps to make it publicly known. Virtue carries its Reward
and its Honor with it. It is better to say nothing, than to fall short in a
worthy Character. Yours, Sir, is above all Flattery, and since it can receive
no accession by a just Praise, ought to receive no diminution through the fault
of my Pen.

Sir, I am obliged to draw to a conclusion, lest I should be condemned for
incurring the same Fault I blame in others, which is Tediousness. It will be
needless to give you an account of my Author; he is well known to the World,
and, I doubt not, but to you in particular. As for the Translation, it is
exposed to every Man's Censure, yet if you approve of it, I shall not question
but it may please; and if it please such as are Competent Judges, it is no
matter for the rest. I think, Sir, I have avoided those three Faults I
mentioned at first, by choosing you to Dedicate to, by forbearing your just
Commendations, lest Malice should call them Flattery, and by reducing all I had
to say to this small compass. All that remains is once more to beg a favorable
Reception and kind Acceptance for this small Offering, which comes not alone,
being well attended by the good Wishes for your Prosperity and Happiness, of,

SIR, Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, JOHN STEVENS.

THE PREFACE.
DON Francisco de Quevedo Villegas, the Author of this small Work, has been a
Person so famous in this Age, among all those who understand the Spanish
Tongue, that it is much to be admired that England should still be so great a
stranger to his Talent. Nothing of his has hitherto appeared in English but his
Visions, and how general an acceptance they have met with every Man is
sensible. Being Encouraged thereby, I take the Liberty to present the Public
with another small Piece of the same Author, nothing inferior in it self to any
of the Visions, unless it has sustained loss in the Translation, which must be
left to the Judgment of Judicious, and Vnbiassed Readers.

I cannot but lay hold of this Opportunity of undeceiving those who look upon
my Author as only a Facetious sort of inconsiderable Satyrist. As to his Birth
he was a Man of good Quality, and Born to a good Estate being as he is Styled
in the Title of his Works, Knight of the Order of Santjago, or St. James, and
Lord of the Town called Villa de la Torre de Juan Abad, which is somewhat more
than a Lord of a Manor with us in regard that in Spain such Lords have the
power of Life and Death wihin their Lordships, and are therefore called Senores
de Horca y Cuchillo, that is, Lords with power of Hanging and Beheading. His
Parts are too great a Subject for my intended brevity, only this must not be
passed in silence, that he was the Spanish Ovid, for Wit flowed naturally from
him without Study, and it was as easy to him to write Verse as Prose Besides
he was well Versed in the Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and Italian Languages, and had
imbibed the Marrow of the best Authors in them. But his Works will be a lasting
Monument of his great Abilities. All of these, that is extant, is contained in
Three large Volumes in Quarto, two whereof, contain his Works in Prose, and the
third his Poems. These are all the Poems of his that have hitherto been
committed to the Press, but a Friend of his, who was familiarly acquainted with
him, affirms in the Preface to that Book, that they are not the twentieth part
of what he writ. We have also another Proof that more might have been expected,
which is, that this Volume is divided into Six Muses, the other Three being
designed to compose another. Thus much may suffice as to the Author and his
Works in general.

Now as to this in particular, I will not give any Character of it, lest it
should seem designed to prepossess the Reader, and I hope it will appear
beautiful enough of it self without the help of any borrowed Ornaments. It was
writ above Fifty years ago, as may appear by several Passages in it, as
particularly where speaking of the French he mentions Cardinal Richlieu as
Prime Minister; Treating of the Dutch, he urges their encroachments in the East
and West Indies; and in his Discourse concerning England, he hints at the
Rebellion then about breaking out.

As I have said nothing in Commendation of the Original, so neither will I say
any thing in Vindication of the Translation. If good, it needs none, and if
otherwise, it deserves none. Only the Reader may observe, I have followed the
Spanish as close as the difference of the two Languages could bear, which I did
to preserve as near as possible the Authors Sense entire, without intruding any
Notions of my own.

My Design is not to make up this small Volume with a long Preface, for this
has already extended farther than I had proposed to my self. I will therefore
conclude, advertising the Reader, that according to the Acceptance. I shall
sind this meets withal, I will proceed to give the Public a farther Taste of
the Works of Don Francisco de Quevedo.

FORTUNE IN HER WITS, AND THE Hour of all Men.
JOVE in a Splenetick Rage rent his very Throat, and pierced the Earth with his
Bawling; for to say it only pierced the Heaven, where he resided, had not been
an Expression emphatical enough. He summoned all the Gods in great haste to
assemble before him in Council. The first that appeared was Mars, that
Celestial Don Quixot, armed Cap-a pee, with his Spear advanced, and making
Passes in the Air. Next to him came the Platter-faced Deity Bacchus, with a
Periwig made of Vine-Branches, his Eyes overflowing, his Mouth like a
Wine Press belching out Liquor at second-hand, his Speech Stammering, his Steps
Reeling, an his Brain entoxicated with the Juice of the Grape. On the other
side appeared Hobling Saturn, that Bugbear, Child-eating Deity, gorging himself
with his own Sons. With him came Dripping Neptune, the Watery God, that bears
an old Woman's Jaw Bone instead of a Scepter; for that is the English of a
Trident; about him hung the Sea-weeds like Rags, clung together with the Spawn
of Fish, smelling strong as of a Friday Dinner, and with the Water that ran
from him laying the Dust of the Charcoal raised by his Follower Pluto, a God of
Devils, with his Head and Face powdered with Soot, perfumed with Brimstone and
Gunpowder, and Clothed in such profound Darkness, that he was scarce
discernable, tho close followed by the Glaring Sun, with his Brazen Face and
Tinsel Beard: That Fox-coloured rambling Planet, that winds up the Threads of
all Lives, affects being close Trimmed, doats on the Guitars and the Lute, and
yet is employed in tacking of Days one upon the back of another, and heaping of
Years and Ages, having conspired with Cares and Apoplexies for the Peopling, of
Churchyards. Venus, as she came, filled the Heavens with the vast
Circumference of her Fardingale, hiding the Five Zones under her Petticoats,
her Face but half licked, and the Tower that was to cover her bald Skull
hanging all awry for haste. After her came the Moon with her Face cut into
Quarters, the Night-walking Lady that only serves to save Candle and Lanthorn.
The God Pan rushed in with a great noise, being followed by two vast Herds of
Sylvans, Faunes, and other Hairy and Cloven-footed Gods of the Woods. All
Heaven swarmed with Manes, Lemures, Lares, and other little Deities, who all
took their Chairs, the Goddesses In Spain the Women do not sit on Chairs, but
on Cushions upon the Ground.
squatting down like Tailors upon their Legs, the whole Assembly attentively
fixing their Eyes upon Jove. Man's rattling his Armor like the Harmony of a
Tinkers Kettle, started up, and looking stern as a Bully after a Beating,
thundered out these Words: Open thy Mouth with a Vengeance, thou mighty Hector
of this upper Region, open thy Mouth, I say, and prate, for you seem to be in a
Dream. Jove thus accosted in so rough a Dialect, whilst, tho it was Summer, he
held the sparkling Thunderbolt, (when it had been much properer to have cooled
himself with a Fan) raising his Voice, that it might sound the greater,
answered: Keep your Prating Tongue betwixt your Teeth, and let us call Mercury.
In the twinkling of an Eye Mercury dropped before him, holding his little Wand
like a Juggler; his Heel fledged, and his little Hat in the shape of a Mushroom
on his Head. Then Jove said, Thou Ubiquitary God, shoot thy self into the
World, and in a trice drag Fortune hither by the Ears. In an instant the
Spright of Olympus, clapping Wings instead of Spurs, to his Heels, vanished
with such swiftness, that the sight could not distinguish between his departure
and return. He returned like Lazarillo leading Blind Fortune, who with a Staff
in one Hand felt out her Way, and in the other held a String, which was a
Bridle to a little Dog. She stood a tiptoe upon a Globe, in the midst of a
Wheel wound with Threads, Breads, Ribbans, Cords, and Ropes, all which, as it
moved, knit themselves together, and unknit again. Behind, as her Maid, came
Opportunity, a Broad-faced, Flat-nosed, Bald-pated Wench, only on the top of
her Forehead was one single Lock scarce big enough to make one good Whisker.
This Lock was as slippery as an Eell, and played in the Air, being moved at the
breath of every Word. By her Hands it appeared that Opportunity lived upon hard
labor, and doing all the Drudgery of Fortune. All the Gods appeared disgusted
at the sight of Fortune, and some of them made signs as if she had turned their
Stomachs, when she in a squeeking Tone, and speaking at a venture, said; My
Eyes being in their Swaddling Clouts, and my Sight in the dark, I cannot
discover who you are that make up this Assembly; but be you who you will, my
discourse is directed to you all, and particularly to thee, O Jove, who
spittest thy Thunderbolts after the drippings of the Clouds; tell me what
Whimsey came into thy Head to send for me, whereas for so many Ages past thou
have never so much as thought on me: Perhaps thou and the rest of thy Mob of
Godlings have forgot how great the extent of my power is, and that I have
tossed about both thee and them no less than I do poor Mortals. Jove swelling,
and looking stern, replied; Thou Sot, thy Extravagancies, thy Follies, and thy
Wickedness, are so great, that Mortals believe, since we do not curb thee,
there are no Deities, that Heaven lies waste, and that I am a poor
insignificant God: They complain, that thou give to Villainies those Rewards
which are due to Merit; that Virtue is unregarded, and Vice encouraged; that
thou placest those in the Judgment-Seats, who ought to be preferred to the
Gallows; that thou bestow'st Dignities on those whose Ears should be Nailed to
the Pillory; and that thou oppressest and impoverishest those thou ought to
raise and enrich. Fortune looking pale with anger, and chafing, said; I am no
Fool, I know what I do, and all my actions are guided by Prudence: You who call
me rash Sot, remember you Kackled like a Goose to Leda, that you played the
false Coiner with Danae, that you Bellowed and acted the Bull for Europa, and
have been guilty of a thousand other Roguish mad Pranks, and that all those who
attend you have been only Crows and Magpies; None of which Fopperies can be
laid to my charge. If Persons of Merit are laid aside, and Virtuous Men pass
unrewarded, the fault is not altogether mine; many despise what I offer them,
and their Modesty is laid at my door as a Crime; Others rather than stretch out
their hands, let slip what I tender them; Others snatch it from me without my
consent; More Men are enriched by forcing it from me, than by my free gift.
There are more that steal what I refuse, than that keep what I give them; Many
receive of me that they know not how to preserve, they lose it and pretend I
take it from them; Many accuse me for misplacing Gifts on others, which would
be much worse employed on themselves; There is no Man happy without being
envied by many, and no Man is miserable without being contemned by all; This
Maid has always served me, without her I have never done any thing; her Name is
Opportunity, hear her, and learn of a Drudging Wench how to judge of things.
Then Opportunity letting her Tongue run for fear of letting her self slip said;
I am that sort of good natured Female that offer my self to all Men, many find
but few enjoy me: I am a Female Sampsoness, for all my strength lies in my
Hair, he that can hold fast by my Lock need not fear to be thrown by my
Mistress: It is I that manage, I that distribute her, and when Men know not how
to pursue their own interests, and make their advantages, they lay all the
blame upon me: Folly and ignorance have furnished Men with these Hellish
Sentences, Who would have believed? I did not think. I did not reflect on it. I
did not know. It is well enough yet. What matter's it. It is neither here nor
there. To morrow will do. There Is time enough. There is no wanting an
Opportunity. I slipped my time. I know my own business. I am no Fool. Let not
that trouble you. I am bound to see it. That Is a Jest. Never believe it. I Will
do my own business. I shall not want. God will provide. All days are not alike.
If one thing fails, another hits. It Is well enough. What is that to him? It is
my Opinion. It cannot be. Do not tell me. I can see into it. Time will show it.
Let the World run. It is I that am to answer for it. I am no such Man. Very
lively. Let them talk as they please. Over Shoes over Boots. I understand
Trap. Time will show, they say, and But, and Perhaps, and the Conlcusion of all
positive Blockheads, Come what will. These Follies make Men Conceited,
Sloathful and Careless; These are the Gaps that I slip out at; These are the
Rubs that overset my Mistress's Wheel; and these the Gusts that split her Sail.
Then if the Fools let me slip by them, what fault is it in me to be gone? If
they lay the Rubs in the way of my Mistresses Wheel, why do they complain of
its jolting. If they know it is a Wheel whereof every part is sometimes up and
sometimes down, and that each part descends in order to rise, and rises in
order to fall again, why do they entangle themselves in it? The Sun has stood
still, the Wheel of Fortune never did. Whosoever has thought to fix it, only
gave it a check that it might whirl again with the greater fury. Its motion
like that of Time puts a period to all Worldly Felicities and Calamities, to
all the Lives in the World, and by degrees to the World it self. This, O Jove,
is matter of fact, let who will oppose it.

Fortune encouraged at these Words, and turning on all hands like a
Weathercock, said; Opportunity has discovered how unjustly I am accused;
however, I am resolved my self to convince thee, thou Supreme Thunderer, and
all thy Company, carrousing in Nectar and Ambrosia, notwithstanding that I
always had, now have, and shall ever continue to have as much power over you,
as over the meanest Rabble in the World. I hope to see your Divinities starving
with Hunger and Cold for want of Victims, and that not so much as a black
Pudding shall be sacrificed to you, but you shall only serve to fill up
Ballads, and be brought in for Rhyme sake in Love Songs for the Diversion of
the Mob, and Encouragement of Hawkers.

A Curse light on all thy Designs (quoth the Sun) for so impudently blaspheming
against our Power. Were it permitted me, as I am the Sun, I would swelter thee
with Heat, scorch thee with my Rays, and make thee run mad with the Headache. Go
dry up the Dirt ( said Fortune) ripen Cucumbers, furnish Plagues for the good
of Physicians, and assist those that louse themselves at thy light; for know I
have seen you keep Cows, and run after a Wench, who, tho you was the Sun, left
you in the dark. Remember your Son was burnt to death like a Heretic,
therefore be silent hereafter, and let those speak to whom it belongs. Then
Jove with all his gravity uttered these Words; Fortune; both you, and that
impudent Wench thy Servant, are much in the right, in many things you have
said; however, for the general satisfaction of all People, it is irrevocably
decreed, that on the same day and hour throughout the whole World every Man be
put into those Circumstances he justly deserves. This must be, therefore
appoint the day and the hour. Fortune replied, To what purpose is it to delay
what must be, let it be to day, let us know what time of the day it is. The
Sun, who is the Standard of Clockmakers, answered; This is the 20th of June, as
to the time of the day, it is Three and three quarters and six minutes after
Noon. Mind then (quoth Fortune) and as soon as it strikes Four, you shall see
how affairs go upon Earth. Then falling to work, she began to greaze the
Axletree of her Wheel, to settle the Spokes, remove the Nails, and entangle
several Cords, slackning some, and straining others, till the Sun cried out,
and said; It is just Four, neither over nor under, for this very instant I have
brought the shade of the Gnomons of all Clocks upon the fourth Postmeridian
Line. No sooner had he uttered these Words than Fortune, as if she had been
playing on a Cymbal, began to unwind her Wheel, which whirling about like a
Hurrican, hudled all the World into an unparallelled confusion. Fortune gave a
mighty Squeek, saying, Fly Wheel, and the Devil drive thee.

The Physician.
That very moment, a Physician riding along on his Mule, a Snails Gallop, in
pursuit of Diseases, was surprised by the wonderful influence of that Hour
which was to give all Men their due, and on a sudden he found himself in the
posture of a Hangman, with his Legs across the Shoulders of his Patient,
crying, Credo instead of Recipe, as if he had been going to turn him off the
Ladder.

The Alguazil.
At a small distance followed in the same Street a Criminal that was Whipped, the
Crier before proclaiming his Misdemeanors, the Hangman behind lashing him, he
riding upon an Ass, and naked from the Waste upward like a Galley Slave. This
was his posture at the Striking of the Clock, which was no sooner over, but the
Horse the Alguazil is an Officer in Spain that apprehends Criminals, and
attends the Execution of Justice. Criminals in Spain are carried to the
Gallows, and Whipped upon an Ass.
Alguazil rid on threw him, and the Ass the Criminal; The Horse took up the
Criminal, and having changed Stations, he began to be lashed who before
attended the Execution, and he to attend who before was lashed. The The Scribe,
in Spanish Escrivano, is a sort of Clerk almost inseparable from the Alguazil.
Scribe alighted to set all again to rights, and taking out his Pen it grew out
into a Galley Oar, and instead of Writing, he began to Row.

The Apothecary.
The Scavengers Carts passing through another Street at the first moment of the
Hour, stopped before an Apothecary's Shop, and on a sudden all the Dirt began
to fly out of the Cart into the Shop, whence the Pots and Glasses leaped out
into the Carts with wonderful noise and confusion. But the Dirt and the Pots
meeting, as the one went in and the other out, it was observed, that the Dirt
very squeamishly cried out, Keep off. Mean while the Dust men were not idle,
but with their Brooms and Shovels swept together and threw up into the Carts
heaps of Painted Whores, Pocky Beaus, and Powdered Fops.

The Cheat.
A certain notorious Knave had built a sumptuous House, not much inferior to a
Palace, with a stately Porch, and over it a Noble Coat of Arms cut in Stone,
and an Inscription as if he had been of some considerable Family. The Owner was
an errant Thief, who under the shadow of his Employ had stole the whole Cost of
the Fabric. He was then in the House, and at the Door was a Bill signifying
three Apartments were there to be let. The Hour came, O good God, who can
express such a Prodigy? Every Stone, every Brick in the whole Structure, fell
asunder, the Tiles flew some to the top of one House, and some to another, the
Rafters, Doors and Windows hurried into several Houses, to the terror of the
Owners who looked upon this Restitution as the effects of an Earthquake, and
thought it was the end of the World. The Iron Bars and Grates walked about the
streets seeking whom they belonged to. The Arms that stood over the Doors
posted away to a Country Gentleman's seat, whence this Cursed Villain pretended
himself to be descended, The Rogue himself stripped of his Fabric, was left
alone at the corner of a Street, with only the Bill upon him which had been at
the Door, but that so changed, that whereas before the purport of it was, This
House is to be Let unfurnished, inquire within of the Landlord: Now it was,
This Thief is to be Let unfurnished, whosoever will hire him may come in
without knocking, since the House does not hinder it.

Opposite to this Man lived a Pawnbroker, Pawn-Broker.
who seeing his Neighbor's House vanish, thought to secure himself, saying,
the Houses remove from their Landlords, this is a base invention. But though he
used the utmost diligence to secure himself, the hour was come, and on a sudden
an Escritore, a Silver Table and, a rich Hanging which he kept in Captivity
being Pawned to him, flew from the Walls with such violence, that a piece of
the hanging in its way to the Window wound it self about him, and carried him
through the Air above an hundred paces, where he dropped on the top of a House,
not without some bruises. From thence to his unspeakable Grief, he saw all he
had hurried away to the right owners. After all the rest came out the Letters
of Nobility, In Spain Gentlemen take out their Letters of Nobility, which
whosoever can show, is free from Arrests.
upon which he had lent a Sum of Money to the Gentleman they belonged to for two
Months, on condition to receive five and Twenty per Cent. Interest for that
short time. These Letters to his astonishment, as they passed by him, said,
Thou Barbarous Tyrant over Pawns, if our Master for our sake cannot be arrested
for Debt, what reason can you show, to keep us in Prison? This said, they
leaped into a Cooks shop, where the Gentleman that owned them sat with a
hungry Belly envying every bit he saw another put into his Mouth.

The Talker.
An Eternal Talker, who lavished as many words, as would have furnished half a
score intolerable Bablers, and whose Tongue seemed to be the perpetual motion
so long sought after, was busy confounding his whole Neighborhood with the
overflowing of his clack; when, on a sudden, the hour being come, his Tongue
was tied up, and he struggling to run on, only stutter'd and stammer'd the same
syllables over without end; and finding his mouth stopped, his very Eyes and
Ears seemed to forget their own Office, and burst out into talk.

The Judges
Five Judges were sitting on the Bench upon a Trial; one of them merely out of
ill nature was projecting how he might cast both parties. Another being a mere
Ignoramus, and understanding nothing of the matter, was resolved to give his
opinion, as all Blockheads do, at a venture. The Third a doting old Fellow who
had slept most part of the Trial, giving Judgment like? Pilate's Wife, by
Dreams, was considering with which of his Fellows he should close in opinion at
random. The Fourth who was a Learned and Upright Judge, sat like a Cipher next
to the last, who being corrupted with Bribes, strained the sense of the Law,
and drew over to his Party the other three; but at the very instant of giving
Judgment the hour commenced, and instead of saying, The Court is of opinion,
that such a one is Cast and Condemned, he said, The Court does award, that we
be Damned, and accordingly we are Damned. Be the sentence fulfilled said an
unknown Voice. In a moment their Gowns were converted into Snakeskins, and they
falling together by the Ears, soon stripped one another Faces, every one
carrying away his Neighbors Beard, to show that their Judgment lay in their
Fingers, and not in their Heads.

A Match-maker.
A Match maker was busy intoxicating an Honest Man's Brain, who being weary of
a quiet Life and a good Estate, was thinking of Marrying; he proposed to him a
consummated Jilt, and set her off in this manner. Sir, I will not commend her
Birth, because, God be praised, you have quality enough to bestow on her; as
for Riches, you are plentifully provided; Beauty in a Wife is a thing of
dangerous consequence; as for matter of Judgment it is you that are to govern
her, and you do not take her for a Councellor; ill humors she is not troubled
with, her Years are but few, (yet he meant she had but few to Live) she has all
the other good qualities you could wish. The poor Man in a passion cried out,
Thou accursed Devil, what other good qualities can she have, since you own she
is neither well Born, Rich, Beautiful nor Discreet; and all you can say for her
is, that she is not ill-natured. Scarce had he done when the Hour began, and
the Cursed Match-maker, who acts the Tailor at Weddings, Stealing, Lying,
Cheating, Patching and Piecing, found himself Married to the Monster, he would
have vamp'd upon the other Man; and the new Couple falling upon one another,
went off Kicking and Scratching, and Crying by turns, Who are you? What
Fortune did you bring, you are not worthy to wipe my Shoes.

A Poet.
A Poet having seated himself among an Assembly of Wits, was rea^ing to them a
Pedantick obscure Poem of his own composing, so stuffed with Latinisms, so
cramped with Syncopa's, so entangled with Parentheses, and so perplexed with
Similies and Allusions, that none of the Company could find either head or tail
to it. Upon the turn of the Hour he had gone halfway through his Jargon, or
Confusion of Languages, and all the hearers pressing upon him, to pick out, if
possible, some meaning from that Chaos of hard Words, one of them who held a
Candle in his hand to inform himself the better by over-looking the Paper, put
it so close that the unfortunate Poem took Fire. The Poet stamped and tore his
hair seeing all his labor condemned to the Flames; but he that had fired it
pacified him, saying, These Verses are like old tarnished Silver Lace, they
must be first burnt, and then perhaps you may separate the pure Metal from the
Dross.

The Whore.
A Topping Whore sailing out of her Lodging with a mighty Fardingal, so large
she could scarce crowd through her narrow Entry, and filled both sides of the
Street with the vast compass of her Coats, was overtaken by the first minute of
the all-ruling Hour, and on a sudden being set upon her Head, appeared like a
Bell inverted. Here was discovered a vast Fardel of Rags that composed a
Rumprowl, with a Piece of Tapestry Hanging rolled up to set out her Hips, which
in the turn loosening, and falling over her Belly, there appeared at the bottom
of it an Holofernes's his Head. The whole Street was alarmed with the Shouts of
the Rabble that beheld her. She Skreiked, but her Voice being drowned in the
labyrinth of her Petticoats fallen about her Head, the noise sounded as if it
came out from a deep Cavern. She had certainly been stifled in the Crouch, but
that at the same time a Beau strutting along the Street with false Calves, and
three false Teeth; and two Dotards with their gray Hair, and Beard colored
black; and 3 old Bald pated Fellows that wore Periwigs; They were all surprised
by the Influence of that Hour. The Beau feeling his Calves slink away, thought
to cry for help, believing his Legs would be stolen; but at the first motion of
his Tongue, out drops his Teeth. The Dotards Beards and Hair became as gray as
a Badger, so that they scarce knew one another; and the Bald Fellows Periwigs
flew away with their Hats, leaving them nothing differing from bare Skuls, but
that they wore Whiskers.

The Nobleman.
A certain Nobleman had a Favorite Domestic who devoured his Substance, this
Domestic was cheated by his Servant, the Servant by his Man, the Man by his
Friend, the Friend by his Wench, and the Wench was deluded by the Devil. Now
the Hour being come, the Devil who seemed to be at such a distance from the
Lord, seizes upon the Whore, the Whore on her Spark, the Spark on the Man, the
Man on the Servant, the Servant on his Master, and the Master on his Lord, and
the Devil possessing him, after running the Gantlet through the Whore, the
Bully, the Man, the Servant and Domestic, in a Hellish Rage he falls upon his
Domestic, the Domestic on his Servant, the Servant on his Man, the Man on his
Friend, the Friend on his Whore, and she laid about upon them all; and thus
exagitated by Furies, they tore one another to pieces, all their Frauds and
Villainies were laid open, and the Devil who had managed the whole Contrivance
without discovery, swept them away all in a Cluster.

The Rich Wife.
A Rich Married Woman sat at her Dressing Table, plaistering up her Wrinkled
freckly Skin, sleeking her Weatherbeaten Forehead, drawing Eyebrows with a
Pencil, coloring her decayed Cheeks with Spanish Wool, and dying her pale
Lips of a lively Cherry color. By her, as an Assistant, kneeled a Decrepid old
Governant like a Skeleton, Dressed up, holding a Tour of an extraordinary
magnitude. Next to her stood a young Chambermaid, yet a Novice at the Trade of
Daubing, and in her Hands a pair of Iron Bolster'd Bodies, contrived to
rectify two mighty Excrescencies that discomposed the figure of the Body. In
this posture sat the Lady confounding and shaming her very Looking-glass, when
the Hour commenced, and she led by the powerful influence thereof, began to lay
about her, applying the White-wash to her Hair, the Black Lead to her Teeth,
the Red to her Eyebrows and Forehead, clapping the Tower on her Jaws, and
lacing on the Bolstered Bodies the wrong way. Thus in a moment she was
converted into a Skarecrow, with a curled Beard, and four Hunches more ghastly
and frightful than an Hobgoblin. The Governant thinking she was distracted,
started up, and fled with might and main; the Chambermaid sounded away as if
she had seen the Devil, and the Lady enraged in that horrible posture scoured
after the Governant. The noise brought the Husband, who seeing his Wife,
thought she was possessed by some Malignant Spirit, and ran with speed to call
a Priest to apply Exorcisms to her.

Abuses in Goals.
A Sovereign Prince resolved to be present himself at a Goal Delivery, being
informed that his Officers made the Prison their Market, where they bought and
sold Crimes and Criminals at all sorts of Rates and Prizes, exchanging Robbers
for Gold, and Murderers for ready Money. He ordered the Prisoners to be brought
before him, and found they had been apprehended for the Crimes they had
committed, but were detained through the Avarice of their Keepers, who computed
what some had and might have stolen, and what others had or might have of their
own: so that their Cause was depending as long as their Stock lasted, and the
day it expired was the day they were punished; it being plain they were
apprehended for the ill they had done, and executed for what they had not.
Among the rest were two condemned to be Hanged the next day. One of these
having compounded with his Adversary, was kept as a Prisoner at large. The
other they designed to Hang for Robbing, after having been three years a
Prisoner, during which time they had devoured all he stole, and all he, his
Father, and Wife, by whom he had two Children, were worth. Thus far had this
Prince proceeded when the Hour commenced, and he turning pale with anger, said;
This Man you disigned to discharge because he has compounded with his
Adversary, shall be hanged to morrow; for the contrary would be exposing of
Lives to Sale, and the Price of buying off an Appeal would prove the purchase
of a Husband's Blood from the Wife, of the Father's from a Son, and of a Son's
from the Father; so that Pardons for Murder being to be bought, a Rate would be
set upon every Man's Life, and thus all Examples of Justice would cease, it
being an easy matter to persuade the Appellant, that a Thousand or Five
hundred Crowns will do him more good, than the Hanging of his Enemy. There are
two Parties concerned in all public Offenses, viz. Justice and the Person
Offended, and it is no less necessary that the former should punish, than that
the latter should forgive. This Thief, whom after three years imprisonment you
intended to Hang, shall be sent to the Galleys; for as it had been justice to
Hang him three years ago, so now it would be a Barbarous Wrong, because in him
you would hang his Father, Wife, and Children, who are innocent, and whose
Substance by these delays you have devoured. I remember a Story of a Man, who
enraged that the Mice gnawed his Papers, Crusts of Bread, Parings of Cheese,
and old Shoes, took in Cats to destroy the Mice; but perceiving the Cats not
only eat the Mice, but stole his Meat out of the Pot, and tore it off the Spit,
that one day they spoiled a Fowl, and another a whole Joint of Meat, he killed
the Cats, and said, The Mice for my Money. Do you apply she Moral to this
Fable, since you like Devouring Cats, instead of cleansing the State from
Vermin, do catch and eat the Thieves, who are little Mice, that Pick a Pocket,
Cut a Purse, Snatch a Hat, or Steal a Cloak, and at the same time you waste the
Country, consume Estates, and destroy whole Families. Infamous Wretches, I will
rather endure Mice than maintain Cats. This said, he ordered all the Prisoners
to be discharged, and the Officers to be apprehended. There was a wonderful
Noise and Confusion, those lamented who before were inexorable; and the
Prisoners loaded those with Fetters and Chains, who before had Fettered them.

Old Women hiding their Age.
Several Women appeared in a Street, some of them a-foot, and tho many were well
stricken in years, they tript it along like young Girls, proud of their little
Feet and white Petticoats. Others were packed up in a Coach, dissembling their
Age with their Coy Looks, and playing with their white Hands. Others Dressed
like Bartholomew Babies, and afraid the Air should discompose them, were set up
in Glass Cupboards or Sedans, carried by greasy Fellows, the farthest prospect
of the Lady's Eyes being the neighboring Haunches of the foremost, and the
next Perfume to their Noses proceeding from his sweaty Feet, which being free
from the encumbrance of Socks sent it up the fresher. All of them were as gay
as young Girls, striving to be taken for such, concealing their Age as they
would their Shame, and Ogleing with those Eyes that were ready to sink into
their Heads. Upon the very entrance of the Hour they were met by Maximus,
Origanus, Argolius, and a pack of other ancient Astrologers, with their
Ephemerides in their Hands, who presently attacked them, to fix upon every one
the date of her Life to the very year, day, hour, minute, and second of their
Nativity. These Conjurers set up a Cry, Own your Age, ye Wretches, since it is
your Doom, you are Forty two years old, 2 months, days, 2 hours, 9 minutes, and
20 seconds, says one of the Astrologers to one of the Ladies. Good God! who can
express the terrible Shreiks she raised; all that could be understood was, you
Lie, it is false, I am not Fifteen; Lord, what a Rogue this is to say such a
thing! Another cried, I am not Eighteen; a Third, I am but Thirteen; I am a
mere Child, an Infant, cries another. Origanus was writing her Age upon the Back
of one, as if it had been a Bill upon a Door, and it was to this effect; This
Woman was delivered into the World in the Year 1629. She perceiving by this
means, it would appear she was 67 Years of Age, all in a rage cried out, Thou
Old doting Emblem of Death, I am but just come into the World, my Teeth are
not all cut* Thou decayed piece of Antiquity, replied Origanus, Teeth will
never spring under old Stumps, look upon your Date: I Will own no Date, quoth
she, and thus falling together by the Ears, the controversy ended in a
wonderful confusion.

After a sumptuous Dinner a mighty Potentate sat sat lulling his Pride with
the false Flatteries that fell from the mouths of his Servants. Sycophants.
A grumbling noise resounded from his crammed gutts, which could not agree in
the Cooksshop of his Belly, with the strange medly of varieties he had
devoured. He foamed at the Mouth, the Wine boiling over, and his whole Face was
inflamed and bloated with the exhalation of his Stomach. At each word he
uttered, though never so stupid, the standers by like Men in a Frenzy poured out
Superlative Encomiums: An admirable sentence cries one, nothing could be expressed
finer says another, most incomparable words says a Third; and lastly, a
Parasite who labored to out-flatter all the rest, straining a lie to the
utmost pitch exclaimes, Learning it self stands amazed to hear you, and even
admiration is outdone. The great Man strutting, and fetching up two or three
Gulps, the forerunners of a Vomit drivelled out these words, I am much
concerned for the loss of my two Ships. Immediately the Parasites renewed their
Flatteries, and Romancing without measure, one of them replied, That that loss
redounded to his Honor, that it fell out as could have been wished, and
nothing could have happened more opportunely, since it administered an
opportunity of falling out with his Neighbors, from whom he might take Two
Hundred in lieu of these two, which might easily be compassed. To prove this,
the, false Flatterer produced many examples. Another said, That loss was the
greatest testimony of his Grandeur, for only he was a great Prince who had much
to lose, that losing was a better demonstration of Power, than gaining and
acquiring, which were the Practice of Pirates and Robbers. That damage
sustained, he added, would be the enriching of him; and then began to fill his
Ears with sentences out of Tacitus, Salust, Polibius, Thucidides, and other
Authors; represencing the vast losses of the Greeks and Romans, and a Thousand
other extravagancies* The mighty Glutton who only studdied how to excuse his
sloth, took these falsehoods as full satisfaction for his loss. The Devil
himself could not have contrived a better way to infatuate him. At this time
the crudity of his Stomach for want of digestion cast up a Belch, which made
the room to Echo No sooner had the Cursed Parasites heard it, than kneeling
down to make him believe he had sneezed, they unanimously said, God bless you.
That very minute began the Hour, and the great Man raving as if exagicated by
furies cried out, Villains, since you would impose upon me so far as to make a
Belch pass for a Sneeze, tho my Mouth and my Nose are so close together, what
can I expect you would do in those things I neither see nor smell. Then shaking
his Hands about his Ears as if he were driving away their Lies, he ran at them
and kicked them out of the Palace, saying. Had these Fellows come upon me when
I had a Cold, they had utterly undone me; one sense that was left me proved
their ruin, their is no greater happiness than Smelling.

The Cheats.
The Misers warned by costly experience separated themselves from the Cheats,
and these rather than lose their Trade attacked one another, disguising their
Words and counterfeiting Plain Dealing. Says one Cheat to another, Sir, having
paid dear for dealing with Sharpers who have been my ruin, I come to you who
are no stranger to my Honesty, to desire you will lend me 3000 Royals There are
such quantities of Coper-Mony in Spain, that great Sums are often paid in it,
and great Consideration is allowed for Payments in Gold or Silver.
in Brass, upon a Bill which is accepted and payable in Silver within two
Months; the party the Bill is drawn upon is so responsible, the Money is as
good as if you had it in your Pocket, and you will have no further trouble than
telling of it. But the Man upon whom he gave the Bill was the very sink of
Fraud and Deceit. The Sharper who heard the other Sharper commending the
Third, pretending not to be acquainted with the qualifications of either, and
arming himself with his own Weapons, with a doleful deliberation answered, That
he was just then come abroad to borrow 4000 Royals upon A Pawn that was worth
Eight. They all accosted one another with gilt Chains that were to past for
Gold, counterfeit Bills that were accepted, sham Securities, false Notes, Plate
they had borrowed for a Feast, and bits of Glass and Bristol stones under the
title of Diamonds. It was wonderful to hear the discourse that passed betwixt
them. One said, Honesty is the best Policy, and plain dealing is a Jewel. I had
rather die in a Ditch than do a base thing. I stand upon my Reputation, it is a
great blessing to be afraid to show ones Face; this has been my Education from
my Cradle. Another of the Cheats answered. There is nothing like keeping touch,
an honest Man's Word is as good as his Bond, I never desired ill-gotten Riches,
I will have nothing that way require restitution, my Soul is more precious to
me than all the World, I would not be guilty of one Cheat for all the Riches in
the Earthy, I value my conscience above all the Universe contains. Thus were
these Dissemblers disguising their fly designs with fair Speeches, when the
Hour came upon them, and every Sharper believing his companion, they all ruined
one another. He that had the false Chain gave it for the counterfeit Bill, he
that showed the Glass Diamonds exchanged them for the borrowed Plate. The Three
ran to the Goldsmith, the other with his Bill to the Banker to compound for
half in ready Money before the Cheat of the Chain was discovered. The Banker
told him the Bill was not his, neither did he know any such Man, and seat him
away with a Flea in his Ear. Away slunk the Sharper with-his Bill instead of
his Tail betwixt bis Legs, saying, O Dog, what a trick had he served me, but
that the Chain was made of old Iron. He that parted with the false Diamonds for
die Place being at the Goldsmith's selling it for lest than the weights,
rejoiced to think how he had bubbled the other with bits of Glass. In comes the
right Owner, and seeing his Plate swing in the Scale calls an Alguazil and
seizes the Cheat for a Thief, and they fell together by the Ears. At the noise
out runs he with the false Diamonds: He that was selling die Plate cried out,
That Rogue sold it to me; The other answered, He lies, he stole it from me. The
Goldsmith cried, That Scoundrel would have sold me pebbles for Diamonds. The
owner of the Plate was for seizing them both; The Scribe was for securing all
three till the matter were decided. The Alguazil seized the two Cheats, and the
Scribe led the owner of the Plate by the Cloak; after the Rogues had well
buffeted one another, and thus well-attended by the Mob, they were led to Goal,
and there put into custody of the Hangman's Master of the Wardrobe.

There is a small Island on the Coast of Denmark, in which there are Five
Towns. The Lord of this place was very poor, rather because he coveted much,
than that he wanted for any thing. God had afflicted the Inhabitants with a
general inclination in them all to be Projectors, so that the Land seemed to be
infested with as many Monsters as there were Men. All the Neighboring People
shunned these Islanders as they would the Plague, for the very Air that came
from them was so contagious, it consumed their Stocks, blasted their Fields,
wasted their Treasure, and ruined their Trade. So prodigious was the natural
Proneness to Projecting in that Country, that the very sucking Babes instead of
Daddy and Mammy, cried nothing but Project. The whole Island was a confused
Chaos, for Man and Wise, Father and Son, Neighbor and Neighbor, were ever
jangling and bawling about their Projects, and they were as intoxicated with
them as if they had been drunk with Wine. The Lord of this place, (Avarice,
which is one of the worst Devils that distract the World, having gained the
ascendant over him) ordered a general gathering of Projects. Legions of
Projectors assembled before his Palace, with Skrips and Scroles of Paper stuck
in their Girdles, run through their Button Holes, and peeping out of their
Pockets. The Lord having made known his Wants, demanded their Assistance, and
they all at once laying hold of their Papers, and crowding till they had almost
stifled one another, in an instant heaped up four Tables with their Memoirs.
The hurry being somewhat over, he began to look over them. The first Paper he
opened was Entitled to this effect: A Project for getting an infinite quantity
of Silver and Gold, without asking, or taking it from any body. A difficult
proposition in my mind, says the Lord. The second: How to gather unmeasurable
Treasure by taking what they have, from all Men, and enriching them by taking
it away. The first part, quoth the Lord, of taking from all Men, I like; put as
to the second, which is to enrich them by taking it from them, I am dubious,
yet let them look to that. The third: An easy, pleasing, and just Project for
amassing of many Millions, in such manner, that they who are to pay them shall
not miss them, but rather shall think they are bestowed on them. This I approve
of, leaving the persuasive part to the Projector. The fourth Project undertakes
to make what is deficient to superabound without adding any thing, or taking
away, and without giving any Body cause of Complaint. A Project so inoffensive
can have nothing of truth in it. The fifth, which offers to furnish all that
shall be desired, directs to take by fair and foul Means, and to ask of all
Men, and they will give themselves to the Devil. This Project having to do with
the Devil, seemed practicable. The Author encouraged by this Approbation,
added: And I propose, that those who levy it, shall be a comfort to them that
suffer by it. The Devil put it into his Head to let slip that Word, Furies
possess the Projectors, who thunder out Reproaches against him, calling him,
Sot and Dog, and crying, Thou Scoundrel, Hell it self could never have proposed
a Comfort fort in Tax-gatherers, they themselves being the greatest of
Grievances. They called one another Sons of Projectors, as it had been Sons of
Whores, condemning one another Proposals, and each approving only of his own.
In the height of this Fray, many of the Lords Servants came running, and crying
the Palace was a-fire in three several places, and the Wind blew high. Just
then began the Hour, the Smoke was great, and the Flame ascended. The Lord in
that Consternation knew not which way to turn himself. The Projectors bid him
sit still, and they would set all to rights in a moment; and rushing out from
his presence, some laid Hands on all they found in the House, casting the
Cabinets, Tables, Glasses, and all that was of value, out at the Windows;
others with Sledges overthrew a Tower; others saying; the Fire would cease as
soon as it had vent, uncovered a great part of the House, breaking down the
Rooss, and destroying all that stood in their way. None of them, went about to
quench the Fire, but all were employed in pulling down the House, and
confounding all that was in it. The Lord seeing the Smoke decrease, went out,
and found, that the Common People with his Officers and Servants had overcome
the Fire, yet at the same time perceived the Projectors were tearing up the
very Foundations, had demolished his Palace, and spoiled all his Furniture:
Incensed and raging at this hideous sight, he cried out, Dogs, you are worse
than the Fire, and such art all your Projects, it were better I had been burnt,
than to have given ear to you, so destructive are all the Remedies you apply.
You overturn a whole Heuse for fear a Corner of it should fall, and throw the
best Goods into the Street pretending to save them. You feed a Prince with his
own Limbs, and pretend to maintain him, when at the same time he is devouring
himself. If the Head devours its whole Body, it will remain a Cancer and not a
Man. Villains, justly did the Fire come to burn me for gathering and suffering
you to live, but when it perceived me in the power of Projectors it ceased,
concluding I was already consumed. Fire is the most Merciful of Projectors for
Water quenches it, but you inctease in spite of all the Elements. Antichrist
will be a Projector, and shall burn you all alive, and keep your Ashes to make
Lie to wash out the Stains of all Commonwealths. Princes may be Poor, but when
once they have to do with Projectors, they cease to be Princes to avoid being
Poor.

Bauds and Jiles.
The Bauds and Whores had gathered a wicked Council, where they railed at the
Purses they could not come at, and spoke ill of Money that was out of their
reach. The ancientest of the Baudes, mumbling her Words betwixt her Gums with a
hollow Tone, proceeding from, the want of Teeth, grunted out these Words to the
Assembly; The World is now at the last gasp, it is a starving Age, things are
at the worst, Fairings and New-yearsgifts are long since out of date,
Love-Offerings are searce remembered, Money is come to that pass no body knows
it, and it is vanished from our sight, a Grown Piece is shown about as if it
were an Elephant, and Guinea's are Styled of Blessed Memory Promises have
succeeded in the place of ready Coin. A Compliment, with, You may rely upon my
Word; is the common Stop-gap, and an empty Note passes for current Cash. Your
Spruce Beaus with Bushy Wigs and long Sword-knots, will reduce you to a Morsel
of Bread. Our business is to have and to hold, to seize the ready Rino, and to
be paid beforehand, I recommend to you certain Men that are half rotten, that
live in the space betwixt Dotage and the Grave, that trim up a walking
Skeleton, and lay up for no Heir bat their Luxury; paying well for the weakness
of their Limbs. Interest takes away all squeamishness, shut your Eyes, and stop
your Noses, as if you were swallowing a Purge; a Bitter Draught (...) sometimes
a wholesome Medicine. Make account that you burn old Lace for the Silver, or
suck a Bone to get out the Marrow. I have half a dozen of dry old Dotards. who
spit Pieces of Eight for every one of you. I do not desire a third, but shall
be satisfied with some small Allowance to keep up that Reputation I have
preserved all my Life. She said, and closing her Chin with the tip of her Nose,
made a Face like a Nutcracker. One of the young Harpies replied; Thou
Antiquated Contriver of Delight, Coupler of Male and Female, Tacker of Nations,
Joyner of Giblets; and Counterfeiter of Faces, consider we are too young to be
sold to impotent Curmudgeons, make use of your Rhetoric among the decayed
Governants, who are but Walking Carcasses playing about the Grave, at
Butterflies do about a Candle, till they drop into it. Young Blood is more
inclined to the Flesh than to Money, and prefers pleasure before Riches,
therefore let me advise you to choose some other Trade, for Quality bos now
taken up that of Bawding, and I hope to see rotten Eggs thrown at their Coaches
instead of the Pillory. Scarce had the Night-walker spoke the last Word when
the Hour began, and a whole Shoal of Creditors rushing in fell upon them. The
Landlord seized the Beds and Hangings for House Rent, the Upholsterer their
Clothes for the Hire of his Goods, till both with a hideous Noise sell soul of
each other. At the same time a Broker puts in for his Clothes, The Wenches they
Shreiked, calling them, Rude unmannerly Fellows, threatening what they would do,
and swearing they would never put up such an Affront. The damned old Baud
blessed her self with both Hands, and roared as high as the loudest. In comes a
Bully to one of the Jilts, and without asking Questions draws his Sword, and
falls upon the Creditors, calling them Thieves and Robbers. They drew, and in
the Fray overturned and broke all the Goods in the Room. The Wenches ran to the
Windows, crying, Help, Help, Murder, Murder. At this Summons up comes an
Alguazil with all his Retinue, bidding them keep the Kings Peace. The Broil
grew hottest upon the Stairs, till out they rusht into the Street, some
Wounded, others with their Clothes rent. The Ruffian with a broken Head, but
without Hat or Cloak, took sanctuary in a Church. The Alguazil entered the
House, and seeing the old Woman, laid violent Hands on her, saying, Art thou
here still, old Beelzebub, after having been thrice banished? Thou art the
Ringleader of all this Mischief. Then seizing her with the young Fry, and
securing all they had, he drove them away half Naked, with their Hair about
their Ears, to Goal, all the Rabble attending and shouting, Away with the
Whores.

The Lawyer.
A Councellor at Law whose greatest Learning lay in his grizly Beard, like
Sampson's Strength in his Hair, sat in a Room better furnished with Books than
he was with Conscience. His whole Study was how to embroil his Clients, not to
consult his Authors, and yet was so proud of his Library, that being a mere
Ignoramus, it might truly be said, he knew not the value of it. He had gained a
great Reputation by his Roaring Voice, his moving Gestures, and a wonderful
fluency of Tongue, wherewith he bore down all other Lawyers. His Chamber could
scarce contain his Clients, every one pressing forward to lay his Case open,
and empty his Purse. All his Answers were: I am fully informd. I have Studied
the Case. Your Right is undeniable. It agrees with the express Letter of the
Law, It is as clear as the day. There is no difficulty in this Suit. It is a
Case adjuged. The Law is directly on your side. It will easily be determined.
The Judges are for us. Your Adversary has nothing to say for himself. All that
has been done is void in it self. That judgment must be Reversed. Be Ruled by
me. Some he ordered to Petition, others to Appeal, others to Demur, others to
put in their Interrogatories, others to bring their Writ of Error, and others
to Suborn fresh Witnesses. All that immense number of Volumes was turned over,
and nothing resounded but an unintelligible confusion of Law Gibberish. The
Councellor demanded his Fee, the Solicitor His due, the Attorney his Reward,
the Clerk his Perquisites, and the Scrivener his Pay. Whilst they were in this
Debate the Hour began, and the Clients unanimously, as if it had been one Man,
cried out; Good, Mr. Sergeant, in all Suits the Adversary is the least of
Evils, for he Sues at his own Cost, and you Plead for us at our own, and you,
the Solicitor, the Clerk, and the Attorney, run away with our Money. The
Adversary waits for Judgment, and pursues upon an Appeal, but you and your
Adherents give a definitive Sentence in your own behalf. Our Suit may go for
and against us, but in the following of it we must of necessity be cast four
times a day, so that in the end we may obtain our Right, but have lost our
Money. All those Authors cannot persuade us, but it is a madness to spend what
we have, to get what another Man has, and perhaps be at last disappointed. We
had rather have one Adversary than five, for supposing the Suit should go on
our side, it will be when it has ruined us. Lawyers defend their Clients, as
Seamen do their Ships in a Storm; throwing over all they have, that if it be
Gods will they may be brought into their Port empty. The best Advice is to
agree amongst car selves, for by agreeing we shall save what you take from us.
We are all going to Compound pound with our Adversaries. Your best Revenues
arise out of our Obstinacy, and if we by Compounding should lose all we sued
for, at least we shall gain all that you lose. We would advise you to put a
Bill upon your Door, for we think it better to spend our Money upon Whores than
Lawyers; and for your part, since your only Business has been to set Men
together by the Ears, it will be your best course to turn Soldiers or Statesmen.

The Vintners.
The Vintners, a perverse Generation, who raise the Price of their Wine, at the
same rate that they Brew, Water and Debase it, selling the Rain disguised and
discolored with Sloes, and the Dregs of their Hogsheads, for the Juice of the
Grape, were met in a Tavern to the number of 6 or 7, with as many Bullies and
Highwaymen, and a Quorum of Draggle-Tail Jilts newly whipped out of Bridewell,
who Danced themselves Dry, and Drank to Dance again. The Bumpers flew about
like Lightning, to the Tune of Three in a Hand. Delicate Wine, quoth one of the
Sparks, perceiving the Cheat, and winking upon the Knave that was to Pledge
him. The other, who feared it would breed Frogs in his Belly, rather than fend
Fumes into his Brain, replied, This is truly a Rich Wine, and we Poor Rogues,
for the Waters belong to the Rich and not to the Poor. The Vintner hearing
their Flouts, called them Sots, bidding them Drink and hold their Peace. Drink
and Swim you should have said, replied one of the good Fellows. This minute
began the Hour, and the whole Company growing Mutinous, threw the Pots and
Glasses at the Vintner, crying, Inhuman Water-seller, we are more like Drowned
Rats than Drunkards, thou make us pay by the Quart for the River Water thou
bring in by the Hogshead, and would put the Fox upon us when thou have made
mere Geese of us. We should wear Jack-boots to drink in your House, that we
might keep the Water from our Legs. The Vintner having nothing to say for
himself, cried, Water, Water, as if his House had been a-fire, and rouling his
Hogsheads into the Street, knocked out the Heads of them, letting the Liquor
run down the Channel.

Pretenders to an Employment.
A Swarm of 32 Candidates, all aiming at one Employment, were waiting to speak
witn the Nobleman in whose Gift it was. Each of them fancied himself as
deserving, as the rest unworthy of it. Every one blessed himself and admired at
the Madness and Impudence of the rest, for pretending to what he imagined to be
due to him alone. They beheld one another with Evil Eyes, and Hearts full of
Malice, and Meditated how to Slander and Defame. Their Looks were Sower and
Starch't, but their Joints in continual Motion. Every time the Door creak'd
they made a thousand Bows on all Hands, and as many Submissive Grimaces. Not so
much as a Page could pass by without a Loving Salute and kind Look. The
Secretary happening to rush through the Room, their Submissions were so
profound, as if they would have kissed the Ground he trod on. He casting a
Glance like a Shame-faced Girl, pressed through, saying, Excuse me, Gentlemen,
I am now in haste. The Nobleman called for his Desk, and sat to Dispatch
Business, when upon a false alarm thinking themselves summoned to appear, one
of the Candidates cries, It is I, another, I come, and others, Here I am,
crouding themselves to death against the Door. The poor Lord understanding what
a Peal of Petitions attended him, knew not which way to turn himself. He
silently cursed himself, saying, It was one of the greatest Blessings in the
World to have to give, provided there were none to ask; and that Favors, that
they might not be a plague to him that bestows them, ought to be freely
offered, and never sued for. The Dunners impatient of delay, wasted inwardly,
considering there was but one Employment, and the Candidates were many. They
Calculated the Account Arithmetically, dividing one betwixt 32, and then says
they, What comes to every Man's share? Then would they have subtracted 32 from
one, but that could not be, therefore every Man supposed himself that one, and
applied, it cannot be to all the rest. The Lord considered, he could please but
one, and must disoblige 31, however to be rid of them, he resolved they should
be admitted, and in order to it put on a stern Countenance, and looked like a
Statue, that he might appear with more Majesty. In they rushed in a Crowd, and
he perceiving they would all Tongue-pad him at once, said; There is but one
Employment, and you are a Number, I would gladly bestow the place upon one, and
stisfie you all, As he had dropped the last Word the Hour commenced, and the Lord
bestowing the Employment upon one, entailed the Reversion of it upon them all
one after another, World without end. The wretched Presumptive Heirs, began to
wish one another dead, praying for Plurisies, Asthma's, Consumptions, Plagues,
Apoplexes, Fluxes, sudden Deaths, and all manner of Disasters. Scarce Were two
Minutes past since the Entail, when every Man thought his Predecessor had lived
to the Age of Methusalem; and though the, Tenth Man computed his turn could not
come till 500 years after, yet every Man was pleased to wait the death of his
Predecessor. Only the 31th finding by his reckoning that his turn fell out
exactly with the end of the World, and after the coming of Antichrist, said; My
Possession and the general Conflagration hit exactly together, I shall make a
fine Business of my Employment; when I am burnt the day of Judgment, who will
oblige the Dead to pay me my Wages? For my part, I wish the 30th Successor a
long Life, for when the Employment comes to him, the World will be at the last
gasp. The Lord left them striving to outlive and destroy one another, and went
himself away in a passion to see them protracting their Ages beyond Doomsday,
and even coping with Eternity. He that had carried the Employment stood amazed
to consider what a long succession of Heirs he had got, and at last slunk away,
resolving to eat light Suppers, and prevent taking Cold. The rest looked upon
one another as so many mutual Plagues, and reciprocally cursing their Lives,
each fancied Diseases in the other, and added to the number of his years, every
Successor threatening his Forerunner with Death, giving him over as a gone Man,
and wishing him in the Hands of Physicians; which is the same as to be
delivered up to the Hangman.

Mumpers that borrow, never to pay.
A sort of Men that borrow after the manner of the day that is past, never to
return again, who snap at a Purse as a Spider does at a Fly that is entangled in
her Web, lie tumbling in Bed till the Evening for want of Rags to cover their
Nakedness. Among them they had laid out Half a Crown they had Mumped, in
Wafers, Ink, Pens and Paper, all which they had consumed in begging Letters all
to the same effect, expressing how urgent the Occasion was, their Reputation
lying at stake, and even their Life, with Assurances of a speedy Return, and
Professions of Eternal Acknowledgment. However in case they should not meet
with Money, they concluded with the Ne plus Ultra of impudent Beggary, desiring
in case there was no ready Cash, they would be pleased to send them something
of value to pawn, which should be most carefully secured. By way of Postscript
they begged Pardon for the Boldness, protesting they would not be so free with
any other Person. They had drawn about an Hundred of these Notes to be
dispersed in all the Corners of the Town, whither they were conveyed by one of
the Fraternity, a notable Spunger that had a Tongue well hung, and with his
grave Beard and long Cloak not a little resembled a well traveled Mountebank.
The Herd of Letter Beggars remained computing how much Money the Messenger
would bring, and a cursed noise there was about the Sum. Nor did it stop here,
for they wrangled about the laying it out, and having given one another the
Lie, at last they leaped out of their Beds, with such Fragments of Shirts that
there was no occasion to take them up to discover their Lower Parts. In came
their Mumping Post with an Air that spoke no Relief; both his Hands were at
liberty, and his Arms open, which foreboded Emptiness. All that appeared was a
great Bundle of Notes. They all stood amazed, seeing their Contrivance had
ended in empty Answers, and in a doleful Tone said, What have we got? No Money,
(replied the poor Scoundrel) you may divert your selves with Reading, since you
have no occasion of Telling. They began to open the Notes. The first was to
this Effect; I was never so much concerned at any thing in all my Life, as my
not being at present in a condition to serve you in a matter of so little
value. He might have served me (quoth the Reader) and have had more cause to be
concerned. The Second Note; Sir, had I received yours yesterday, I could have
obliged you, and been proud of the Occasion. A Curse of yesterday, (says he)
that is the daily Plague of all Mumpers. The Third Note; It is such a miserable
time. O Damned Almanackmaker, (cries the Shark) we ask for Money, and you tell
us what Weather it is. The Fourth Note; Sir, your want cannot be so grievons to
you, as to me it is that I cannot relieve you. Who the Devil told you so
(exclaims the poor Wretch) do thou pretend to Divination thou Miser, and
Prophesy when you ought to give. No more reading (they all cried) and making a
Hellish Charm they added; It is now night, to make up what has been expended
let us gnaw the Wafers of the Letters for our Supper, and sell these and two
other Parcels of Notes we have by us to the Confectioner, who will give at
least four Royals for them to Paper up Comfits, wrap Sugar, and lay under
Biscuits in the Oven. Says the Letter-Carrier, This Trade of Borrowing has been
out of the World these ten years. A Man had better give what he asks, than
endure the Gestures and Scurvy Looks of those he Accosts; and if you calculate
the whole, the Expense of Paper and Shoes is greater than the Profit, your
only way is to look cut sharp. In this posture were the Paper-Mumpers when the
Hour began, and the ligh^est of Equipage said; We are very Ceremonious with
other Men's Money, and if we expect it should fly in at our Windows we may die
in a Ditch. Rhetoric is no good Picklock, and fine Words reach the Ears, but
not the Pockets, to listen to one that begs is the Devil. It is much easier to
take than to ask. When all Men board, it is no time to wait their generosity.
Our business is to steal barefaced, and with consideration, that is,
considering we must steal in such manner, that there may be enough for the
Accuser, for the Glerk; for the Constable, for the Attorney, for the
Solicitor, for the Councellor, for the Jailer, for the Judge, and for our
selves, for when what is stolen ends, the Hangman begins. My Friends, if they
banish us, it is better than that they should bury us; if they Pillory us, it
breaks no Bones, and as for the shame of it, none of our Spectators have any;
if they whip us, we may be content, for Beggars must not be Choosers, and at
least we shall have the satisfaction of hearing our white Skins commended, and
as soon as the show is over, the Doublet bides the Lashes. If they put us upon
the Rack we are in no danger, for all they endeavor is to make us speak the
truth, which we never do, therefore let us be like the Tailors, and we are safe
enough, To be sent to the Galleys is only going into the Kings Service with a
The Galley Slaves have always their Heads Shaved.
bald Pate, and Galley Slaves serve only to supply the want of Sails. If they
shall Hang us, Which is the utmost extremity, that day twelvemonth Will be a
year, and every Man that is Hanged honors his Parents, for tho he be never so
mean a Scoundrel, the Blockheads of the Spectators say, He is very well born,
and of a good Family. Nay, if it were only for the pleasure of chousing the
Doctor and Apothecary at ones death, a Man might be well enough pleased to dye
of the Hempen Disease. Gentlemen, mind your Hits. Scarce were the last Words
out of his Mouth, when wrapping the Sheets about them, and swallawing the Oil
that was in a Lamp, they let themselves out of the Window with a Blanket into
the Street, and away they all scoured to search Chests, Pick Locks, and Dive
into Pockets.

Ruffians and physicians.
Two Ruffians were brought to the Gallows for half a dozen Murders. One of them
had already taken his swing, and the other was mounted on the Ladder with the
Hangman astride over his Shoulders. Among the Crowd of Spectators two
Physicians riding after Fevers and Plagues, made a halt, and beholding the
Criminals began to weep like Children with such a Deluge of Tears, that the
People about them asked, Whether those that suffered were their Sons. They
answered, They did not know them, but wept to see Men dye without paying any
thing to the Faculty. That moment began the Hour, and the Criminal spying the
Doctors said, Gentlemen of the Faculty, here is room for you if you please, for
you have killed enough to deserve my place, and your skill in dispatching Men
renders you worthy of the Hangman's. Galen and Hippocrates must not send all to
the Grave, Hemp is as effectual as an Aphorism. Those Mules that carry you
about to commit so many Murders, are no better than Ladders to mount you to the
Gallows. This is a time to speak truth, had I used the Recipe instead of the
Dagger, I had not come to this end, tho I had massacred all the Spect^^ors. I
beg a dozen Masses for my Soul, which you may easily foist into one of the
Wills you forward.

A lean ragged Chemist, The Chemist.
who looked as if he had extracted the Juice out of his Flesh, and calcined his
Clothes, had wheedled a Miser to give Ear to him, as he stood at a Fellow's
Door that sold Charcoal, and was telling him, I am a Natural Philosopher, and
by the Grace of God a Chemist. I have found the Philosophers Stone, which is a
Medicine of Life, and produces a transcendent Transmutation infinitely
multiplicable; for with the Powder of this Stone by Projection, I turn into the
purest and most refined Gold Quicqsilver, Iron, Lead, Tin, and Silver. I can
make Gold of Grass, Egg-shels, Hair, Blood, Piss, and of the very Dirt. This I
can do in a few days, and with small Expense. I dare not discover my self to
any body, because, if the King should hear of it, he would clap me into Gaol to
save India Voyages, and the trouble of digging in the Mines. I know you to be a
Person of Discretion, Quality and Worth, and therefore have resolved to trust
you with a Secret of such importance and so admirable, that in a few days it
will make you Master of many Millions. The Miser listened to him with a greedy
Ear, and so wrapped in Contemplation of the Millions, that his Fingers wagged for
eagerness of telling them. His Avarice could not contain it self within bounds,
but gusht out at his Eyes, and he had in his imagination already converted his
Frying-Pans, Spits, Kettles, and Candlesticks into Bars of Gold. He asked, what
would be the Charge of the Operation; The Chemist replied, Little or nothing,
for 50 Crowns was enough to convert all the World into Gold and Silver, because
the greatest Expense would be in Lymbecks and Crucibles, for the Elixir, which
is the vivifying Spirit of Gold, would cost nothing, and might be had gratis
every where; neither should a Farthing be spent in Charcoal, because he
sublimated, digested, separated, rectified, and circulated all with Lime, and
Dung. The Coal man was, listening to this Tale of a Tub, fretting to hear him
say he would use no Charcoal, but just then began the Hour, and the Coal-man
well powdered with Charcoal Dust, and smelling of the Devils Perfume, falls
upon the Chemist, saying, Thou Vagabond, Scoundrel, Rascal, why do thou feed
up that honest Man with imaginary Gold? The Chemist in a fury gave him the Lie,
which the Coalman so readily answered with a Cuff, it was scarce discernible
which was first. They both fell to Loggerheads, and in a trice, the Chymist's
battered. Nose ran like a Lymbeck. The Miser could not part them, not daring to
meddle because of the Dust and Smoot. They stuck so close to one another, it
was impossible to discern which was the Coalman, or who had smooted the other.
At length they were parted by the People that passed by, but in such a
condition, they looked as if they had been rolled in Lamblack, and trimmed with
Snuffs of Candles. Says the Charcoal-man, This poor Devil tells thee he will make
Gold of Dirt and old Iron, and at the same time his Clothes are all in tatters,
and he looks as if he had been robbing the Rag-woman. I know these Fellows, for
one of them cheated a Neighbor of mine, and made him lay out at my own House
at least a thousand Crowns in Coals only, and that in the space of two months,
telling him he would make Gold, and he only made Smoke and Ashes, but at last
ran away with all he had. But I (quoth the Chemist) will perform what I
undertake, and since you make Gold and Silver of Coals, and of the Stones, Dirt
and Rubbish you throw among them, and of the Cheats of your Weight, why may not
I with my Art, and the Assistance of Rualdus, Geber, Avicen, Morienus, Hermes,
Vulstadius, Crolius, Libavius, and Hermes 's Smaragdine Table, make Gold as
well as you. The Charcoal-man in a Fume replied, Because all those Authors make
you mad, and you make him that believes you a Beggar. I sell Coals, and you
burn them, which is the reason I convert them into Gold and Silver, and you
turn them into Soot. The true Philosopher's Stone is to buy cheap and sell
dear, and a Pox on all your Catalogue of hard Names. I declare, I would with
more satisfaction freely give my Coals to burn you with all your Papers, than
sell them for ready Money. As for you, Sir, you make account, that this day you
became Master of your Money, and if you desire to increase it, Trade is the
only thing that multiplies Coin, and makes one Pistol in a month produce
another. But if you are weary of your Bags, empty them into a House of Office,
and whenever you repent you may take them out with more ease and cleanness,
than ever you will recover them from the Bellows and Distillations of this
miserable Wretch, who being himself a mere Ragamuffian, pretends to out do, the
Treasures of India, and defy the Mines of Potosi.

The French Pedlars, and Proud Spaniard.
Three Frenchmen were traveling into Spain over the mountains of Biscay; one of
them trundled before him a Wheel with the implements for grinding Knives and
Scissers; another carried before and behind two great fardles of Bellows and
Moustraps, and the third had a Box of Combs and Pins. A Poor Spaniard who was
traveling into France a Foot with his Cloak on his Shoulder, met them about
half way in the ascent of a scraggy steep hill. They sat down to rest in the
Shade and began to confer notes. The Spaniard being asked, whether he
traveled, Answered, He was going to France, being fled from Justice for some
unlucky pranks; that thence he would go into Flanders to appease the Judges,
and gain Honor in his Kings Service, because a Spaniard out of his own Country
could not serve any other Master. Being again asked, how it came he had no
Trade or Handicraft to maintain him in that long Journey. He replied, The
Spaniards had no Trade but War, that those who were poor and honest borrowed or
begged by the way, and those that were not so, Robbed, as they did in all other
Countries. Moreover, he said, He admired they traveled from France through
strange Countries and desolate Mountains with their goods, being always in
danger of falling into the hands of Highwaymen. He desired they would inform
him what moved them to leave their Country, and what profit they could propose
to themselves in that lumber they were loaded with, which at a distance made
them look frightful, and put Travelers into a quandary to determine what they
were. The Grinder who stammered the best Spanish of the three, said, We are
Gentlemen disgusted at the King of France, and have lost our Fortunes by being
Malcontents, but I have made three Journeys into Spain, where with this Wheel
and these Stones I have gathered many Spanish Pistols, which you call Doblones.
The Spaniard with a sour look replied, Much good may do the King of France with
his faculty of curing the Evil, if he suffers Grinders and Pedlars to be
Malcontents. Quoth the Grinder, You ought to look upon us Grinders as a
Land-Fleet, for with these Stones we sharpers and wear away your bars of Gold
more than your Knives and Scissers; take notice of this cracked pot that
drivels out the Water; this serves us to convey home our Plate, without being
exposed to the Troubles of the Sea, and Dangers of Storms; these Wheels instead
of Sails carry us into all parts, and being dispersed through all Countries
with our Grind-stones, Combs and Pins, we gently draw after us the Revenues of
your Indian Mines; and you may be assured it is no small Treasure that France
catches in its Mouse-traps, and sucks in with its Bellows. Swoons (says the
Spaniard) tho I knew not all this, yet I could easily perceive your Bellows
blew away our Money, and your Traps increased your Stock, but diminished not
our Mice; and I have observed, that ever since you sell Bellows, we spend more
Coals, and our Pots boil never the better; that since you bring us Traps, we
are devoured by Traps and Mice; that since you grind, all our Tools rust, wear,
notch, and grow dull; and that in grinding our Knives you spoil them, that we
may have occasion to buy more of you. I am now convinced you Frenchmen are the
Lice that devour all parts of Spain; that you bite us with the Teeth of your
Combs, and grind us with your Stones; nor do I think that scratching is any
remedy against this itching, but that it increases it, and makes us tear onr
selves to pieces with our own Fingers. I hope in God I shall soon return, and
then will make it known there is no remedy against this itch, but picking you
out, and pressing you to death. What shall I say of your Combs, but that they
have made it fashionable to be bald, by wearing all the Hair off of our Heads.
I will make the Spaniards more chearly of their Mice, their Dandruff, and their
Rust, that you may go to Hell to vend your Combs, Bellows, and Moustraps. At
this moment began the Hour, and the Spaniard foaming with Passion, said, The
Devil is at my Elbow, tempting me to Murder you all, and make these Mountains
as famous as formerly Roncesvalles, for the overthrow of Charlemaign. The
Pedlars seeing him change Color, and Rave, rose up gabling amain, crying, Mon
Dieu, and calling him Coquin. In an ill hour did they name it, for the Spaniard
drawing his Dagger, and running at the Grinder, made him quit his Wheel, which
receiving the Stroke, tumbled down the Rocks, and was beaten to shivers. Mean
while the Trap Merchant threw a Pair of Bellows at him, but he falling on with
his Dagger cut all the rest, and clove the Traps. The Comb Peddler laying down
his Box, began to throw Stones, the other two followed his Example. All three
plied the Spaniard, and he answered them all, there being such plenty of that
sort of Ammunition in the place that they stumbled upon it. The Frenchmen kept
their distance for fear of the Dagger. The Spaniard guarded himself with his
Cloak, and giving a Kick to the Pin-Box, it tumbled down the Rocks, and flew
open, strewing the Mountain with Pins and Combs; he seeing the Merchandise
confounded, cried out; I have already begun to do my King good service; and
seeing some Passengers on Mules come up and part them, desired they would give
him a Certificate of the Victory he had obtained over the Vermin that infested
Spain. The Passengers laughed, understanding the cause of the Fray, and carrying
away the Spaniard behind one of them, left the Frenchmen busy stopping the
Holes in the Bellows, patching together the Mouse-traps, mending the Wheel, and
picking up the Pins that were scattered about the Clifts. The Spaniard being at
a good distance, cried out to them; If you were Malcontents in your own
Country, ye Scoundrels, thank me for making you so in mine.

Italy Dancing on the Rope, France and Spain watching to catch her if she falls.
Italy once the Mistress of the World, and now only retaining the Memory of its
former Grandeur, seeing its vast Monarchy cut out into so many Parcels, to
enlarge the Dominions of several Princes, and its Territories rent asunder to
patch up many scattered States, was now at length convinced how easy it was
for others to take from her all that she alone had with wonderful felicity
taken from them all. Now therefore finding her self poor, and extremely light,
as being eased of the Burden of many Provinces, she resolved to turn
Rope-Dancer; and for want of Ground to walk upon, exercised her self upon the
Sreight Rope, to the astonishment of the whole World. She fixed the ends of her
Rope, the one at Rome, and the other at Savoy. France and Spain were the
Spectators. The two Kings kept a watchful Eye upon her, observing to which side
she inclined as she Danced, each striving to be ready to catch her if she fell.
Italy perceiving what they aimed at, laid hold of the Republic of Venice, and
grasping it with both Hands as a Pole to poise her, leaped and skipp'd at a
wonderful rate; sometimes making as if she would fall to one side, and
sometimes to the other, diverting her self with the eagerness of both Parties
stretching out their Arms to catch her, and surprising others with her Skill in
recovering her self, and deceiving them both. As they stood thus upon the
catch, the Hour began, and the King of France seeing no probability of laying
hold on her, began to loosen the end of the Rope which was six't in Savoy, that
she might come tumbling toward him. The Spanish Monarch perceiving it, clapped
in the State of Milan and Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily as Supporters. Italy
skipping in the Air, discovered that Vevice, which she used as a Pole to poise,
at the same time, crucified her, and therefore casting it from her, and laying
hold of the Rope, she said; So much for Rope-Dancing, for it is not for me to
rise high, when the Lookers on wish I may fall, and the Pole that should poise
crucifies me. Then suspecting the support of Savoy, she betook her self to
Rome, saying, Since all are for seizing me, I Will take sanctuary in the Church,
where; if I chance to fall, I shall not want some body to absolve me.

The Kingdom of Naples, and Duke of Osuna
The Neapolitan Courser, from whom some have stolen his Oats, and others drawn
away his Hay, while some strove to make of him a Gelding, others a Mare, and
others a Post-Horse, perceiving, that whilst he was in the keeping of that
incomparable Viceroy and invincible Captain General the Duke of Osuna, he could
cope with Bucephalus, his Furniture, being composed of the Treasures of Venice
and Brindisi. That he had made him a Sea Horse by his many glorious Naval
Victories; that he had turned him to Grass in Cyprus, and Watered him at
Tenedos, when he dragged after him the mighty Ship Sultana from Thessalonica,
for which Action Neptune owned him for his first begotten Son, brought forth in
opposition to Minerva. He remembered that Great Duke had shod him with the
Turkish Half Moons, and that kicking up his Heels he had dashed out the Teeth
of the Venetian Lion at the prodigious Battle near Ragusa, where with only 15
Sail he defeated 80, obliging them shamefully to retire with the loss of many
Galleys and Galleasses, and of the best of their Men. Calling to mind these
Triumphs, and considering he had not now so much as a Horse-Cloth, but was
gaul'd, and Snuffled because they had thrown Feathers into his Manger; and that
he was now put to draw a Coach, having been once so Mettlesome, that die
Frenchmen, tho good Jockeys, could never sit him; The Miserable Condition he
saw himself reduced to, drove him into a desperate Melancholy, and that into
raving Madness, so that Neighing fiercely, and Breathing Fire, he thought to
have imitated the Trojan Horse, and kicking and plunging to have overthrown the
City. At the Noise, in came the Magistrates of Naples, who throwing one of
their Gowns over his Head blinded him, then stroaking and speaking him fair,
they put on his Collar and Fetters; but as they were tying him to a Ring in the
Stable, the Hour began. Two of them that were farthest off said; It was more
convenient and cheaper to give the Courser at once to the Pope, than every year
to send him a Nag with a Purse, for by their Malicious Eyes it might be judged
the Popes Nephews would some time overlook him. The others surprised at this
Motion, answered; That the King of Spain had secured him against that
Distemper, by placing three Castles on his Forehead as a Spell, and that they
would sooner cut off his Legs, than see him serve like a Mule under long black
Trappings resembling a Pall. The two first replied, They talked like Heretics
in refusing to be Papists, and that no Saddle would fit the Courser like that
of St. Peter. The others in a Passion said; That to prevent the Heretics
making the Pope loose his Stirrups in that Saddle, it was convenient only the
King of Spain should mount the Horse. Some were for the Mitre, others for the
Crown, and Words passing, at last they came to Blows, so that a terrible Havoc
had been among them, but that the Elect of the People came in in the Godspeed,
and understanding the cause of the Quarrel said; This Horse, tho hard Mouthed,
has had many Masters, and for the most part has gone to them of his own accord,
and not suffered himself to be led. It is requisite he be carefully looked
after, for there are in Italy many a-foot that look for Baggage Horses, and
Jockeys ready Booted and Spurred, and the old Horse-stealer who catched him
sometimes before, and has now got a back Door to the Stable. Neither is it
convenient any French Groom should Curry him, for they tickle and do not make
him slick, and pray look to the Monsieurs who wear the Canonical Robes that
they may have the better opportunity to throw their Leg over him.

The Czar of Moscovy consults about raising Taxes.
The Great Czar of Moscovy being exhausted by the continual Inroads of the
Tartars, and frequent Encroachments of the Turks, found himself necessitated to
impose new Taxes upon his Subjects. To this effect he summoned his Favorites,
Servants, Ministers, Counselors, and the Commons of his Court, and spoke to
them to this effect; That they could not but be sensible of the great Expense
he was at in maintaining an Army to protect them against the Malice of their
Neighboring Enemies; That no State could subsist without Taxes; That those
which were imposed in pressing Necessities were always just, and must be
accounted no burden, being employed in the defense of those that pay them, who
purchase their Security, Lives, and Estates, with that small Pittance, which in
a moderate and well regulated Tax falls to every Man's share to be disburst;
That he had assembled them to consult their own convenience, and therefore
expected their Answer would be suitable to their Common Interest. The first
that spoke were his Creatures and Ministers, saying; The Proposition was so
good and just, it carried along with it its answer and concession; That all was
due to the support of the Prince and Defense of the Country, and therefore he
might contrive according to his pleasure, to lay whatever Taxes he thought fit
upon his Subjects, because all that they paid was for their own Interest and
Security; and consequently the greater the Burdens he laid upon them, the more
he would convince them of the confidence he reposed in their Loyalty, and the
greater would be their Honor. The Czar heard them with satisfaction, but not
without some mistrust, and therefore ordered the Commons to answer for
themselves. They, whilst the Courtiers Harangued, had privately whispered
about, and pitched upon one to be their Speaker, and deliver their Sentiments.
He haying taken a convenient place, said; Great Sir, your Dutiful Subjects,
whose Mouth I am, render you their most humble Thanks for your Care in
Protecting and Defending them; They yield a blind Obedience to your Will, and
wholly submit themselves to your Pleasure, as becomes a People born under your
Jurisdiction, who have ingrafted in them an hereditary Love and Reverence for
you, and they beg Leave to put you in mind (...) is their Glory, they have made
this appear during your whole Reign, which God long continue over us; They are
sensible you make their Protection your Care, and that it is that which makes
yon descend from being a Sovereign over (...) and their Fortunes to become a
Father to every one, a Testimony of your Goodness which they infinitely value;
They are not ignorant of the many pressing and unexpected Aceidents which bring
upon you unavoidable Expenses, not to be spared with Honor to you or Safety to
them, and they are convinced you are too far exhausted to defray them. I, in
the Name of all your Subjects, do freely offer all they possess without
reserving any thing, but must also offer two things to your Consideration. The
one is, That if you now take all your Subjects have, you will drein that Source
which is always to supply you and your Heirs; and if you undo them, you do that
which you fear your Enemies should do, and the Consequence is so much the more
fatal to you, by how much their being ruined by the Enemy is dubious, and by
you certain; and they who advise you to destroy your self, to prevent being
destroyed, are rather Pensioners to the Enemy, than faithful Counselors to
you. Remember the Countreyman ( in Aesop) to whom Jove gave a Hen that every
day laid an Egg of Gold for his maintenance; He suffering himself to be deluded
by avarice, fancied, that a Fowl that laid every day a Golden Egg must have
rich Mines of that Metal within her, and therefore thought it better to seize
all at once, than receive it by little and little. The Gods having so ordered
it, he killed the Hen, and was left without the Treasure or the Egg. Do not
you, Great Sir, verify this Fable of the Philosopher, for if you do, you will
become a Fable to your People. A Prince of a poor People, is rather a Poor Man,
or Poverty it self, than a Prince. He who enriches his Subjects has as many
Treasures as he has Subjects, He who empoverishes them has so many Hospitals,
he has as many Terrors as Men, and fewer Men than Enemies. Riches may be
forsaken at any time, but Poverty cannot. We seldom endeavor to quit the
former, but always the latter. The other thing I offer to your Consideration
is, That your present Wants proceed from two Causes. One, the immense Frauds
and Depredations of those about you. The other, the present extraordinary
Emergencies. There is no doubt but the first named is the foremost as to time,
and whether it be not the greatest, belongs to you to examine. Divide therefore
the Supply you require as you shall think fit, laying one part on those who
have made a property of your Revenues, and the other as a Tax upon your
Subjects, and then none but a Traitor can complain. Thus had he spoke when, the
Hour began, and the Czar rising up said; Let them that have taken it from me
restore what is wanting of what I had, and what is wanting after that let my
People pay; and that this may not be delayed, all you and your Friends, who at
a distance like Spunges have sucked my Revenue, shall be left as you were when
you came to my Service, only allowing your Salaries. So great and universal was
the Joy of the Commons hearing this just Decree of the Czar; that they
unanimously gave him the Title of Augustus, and kneeling before him said; As an
Acknowledgment we agree to pay whatsoever you shall impose upon us, and that
done will of our own accord double the Sum, and ordain, that this Free Offering
may remain as a perpetual Duty payable every time you shall resume what has
been taken from you, whereby it will come to pass that Covetous Men will be
afraid to receive what you freely give them.

The Dutch their Rise and Growth.
The Hollanders, who are beholding to the Sea for the Ground they live on, which
is only some scraps of Land they have stolen from it, under the shelter of
heaps of Clay they call Dykes; having quelled their intestine Broils by an
universal Trade, after they had surreptitiously erected themselves into a Free
State, and extended their Territories by Treachery, pretending to be the
first-begotten of the Ocean, and conceiting, that the Sea, which gave them the
Land it once covered for their Habitation, would not refuse them that which
compasses it, having covered it with Ships and Peopled it with Pirates,
resolved at once in several places to encroach upon the East and West. They go
to our Fleets for Gold and Silver, as our Fleets go for it to the Indies. They
look upon it as the cheaper and shorter way to take it from those that bring
it, than from the Earth that produces it. The negligence of an Admiral, or the
favor of a Storm, furnish them, with Plate at an easier rate than the Mines
could do. In these Undertakings they have been forwarded, favored and assisted
by all the Princes of Europe, who behold the Grandeur of the Spanish Monarchy
with envious Eyes. Encouraged by these powerful Supports, they have established
a Trade in India, settled Commerce in Japan, and still persisting after many
Disappointments, have at length possessed themselves of the best part of Brazil,
This was writ before the conclusion of the Peace betwixt Spain and Holland,
when the Dutch stood possessed of a great part of Brazil, and invaded the
Portuguese Conquests in India.
where they have not only the power of Government, but the Profit of the Sugar
and Tobacco, which enriches them and beggars us. In this place, which is the
inlet to the East and West Indies, they reside like Cormorants, ready to
swallow Ships and whole Fleets, alarming Peru and Potosi; for that it appears
by Geography, that they may gradually, without wetting their Feet, steal to
those Mountains, if weary of the Sea, they should think much to creep along the
Coast down to Rio de la Plata, and Buenos Airs, and to secure to themselves
the Streights of Magellan. That World Devouring Assembly sat consulting over a
Terrestial Globe, and Sea Chart, with a pair of Compasses, leaping over Climes
and Countries, and making choice of Provinces that were none of their own, and
among them the Pensioner with a Pair of Scissers in his Hand. ready to cut out
the World according to his fancy. In this posture they were when the Hour
began, and a decrepid Old Fellow snatching the Scissers out of his Hand, said;
Gluttons, who are greedy of Provinces always dye for want of Digestion, no
Surfeit so dangerous as that of Dominion. The Romans, from a narrow spot of
Ground too little to Sow half a Bushel of Corn, swallowed up all their
Neighbors, and extending their Avarice brought the whole World under the Yoke
of their first Plough; and it being certain, that whosoever pours himself out,
wastes as much as he extends, so they no sooner had much to lose but they began
to lose much; for Ambition gathers more than Force can preserve. Whilst they
were poor they conquered the rich, who making them rich and being left poor,
took to themselves the Customs inherent to Poverty, infesting them with those
of Riches and Luxury, and by that means destroyed them, revenging themselves on
them with the very Riches they gave them. The Assyrians, Greeks, and Romans are
so many Skeletons to instruct us; it is fitter for us to take warning by, than
to imitate those ruined Monarchies. The more we raise our small Weight, and the
nearer we bring it in the The Stilyard, which weighs great or small things by
putting forward or drawing back the weight upon the Beam.
Roman Balance of Power to the great Mass we would outweigh, the less we shall
appear; but the more we draw it back, the better our small Portion will turn
the vast weight that stands against it; and if we draw back to the last Notch,
one Pound of ours will poise a thousand of theirs. Traiano Bocalini hinted at
this Secret in the Weight of his Politic Touchstone, and it is verified in the
Monarchy of Spain, from which we aim to draw away Weight, which added to ours
will diminish it by the addition. Of Subjects to become a Free State was
prodigious; to keep our selves so, is a Work that requires all our application.
France and England, which assisted us to cut off from Spain that part of its
Dominion which was formidable to them, will not for the same reason permit us
to swell to that greatness they may have cause to fear us. The Ax which joins
to it self all it cuts off from the Tree, will not be esteemed a useful
Instrument, but rather an Encumbrance. They will bear with us as long as they
think we stand in need of them, but if once they imagine they can have occasion
for us, they will meditate our Ruin and Destruction. He who sees a Beggar on
whom he has bestowed Alms grown rich, either asks him to refund, or lend. We
can gain nothing, but what the Princes who look on will covet for themselves.
As they despise the Neighbor that is upon the losing, so they fear him that is
upon the getting hand. We by dispersing act for the King of Spain against our
selves, for should be to divide and weaken us, wilfully lose the Countries we
take from him, it were in him a Stratagem and no Loss, and he will never be so
able to take what we have, as when he has suffered us to take what he has so
far from him and us. Brazil rather sucks and unpeoples Holland than strengthens
it. It is enough for Thieves not to restore what they have stolen, without
continuing their Thefts for ever, which sooner prefers them to the Gallows than
to the Throne. The Pensioner snatching back the Scizars in a Pet, said; Tho
Rome lost it self, yet Venice holds out, and was at first but a Town-stealer as
we are. The Gallows you speak of is oftener the Lot of the Unfortunate than of
Robbers, and all the World over the great Thief hangs the little one. He that
Picks a Pocket is ever a Thief, he that stole Provinces and Kingdoms was always
a King, the Right of Monarchs is in the longest Sword. It is natural for one to
be engendered out of the Corruption of another, he that is Corrupted is the
Cause of him that is Engendered. A Carcass complains not of the Worms that eat
it, because it breeds them. Let every Man look to himself that he does not
putrify, otherwise he will be Father to his own Worms. All things consume, but
the small sooner than the greater. When it shall come to pass that they fear
who pitied us, we will pity them we feared, which is a good exchange. If we
can, let us be what they are, who were what we are. All the hints you have
given are good, let not the Kings of France and England hear of them, but do
you put us in mind hereafter, for that is an Obstacle in the beginning, which
proves good Advice when well advanced.

The Duke of Tuscany his Favourite's Advice.
The Great Duke of Tuscany, who by adding five Letters, which compose the Word
Great, to his Title, has gained the ill will of all other Princes, was private
in his Closet with a Servant whom he entrusted with his greatest Secrets. They
discoursed of the Beauty of his Cities, the greatness of his Territories, the
Trade of Leghorne, and the Victories obtained by his Galleys. From this they
changed Subject, and fell upon the great Honor his Family had attained to,
being Allied to most Monarchs and Princes of Europe by its Matches with France,
whereby the Kings of France, Spain, and Great Britain, were by the Mothers side
descended from it. Thus were they discoursing when the Hour began, and the
Servant, as it were in a Prophetic Rapture, said; Sir, Your Highness of a
Private Citizen was made a Prince: Memento, Homo: Whilst you were content to be
a Prince, you was the richest among them, and now you look upon your self as
Father in Law of Kings, and Son in Law of Emperors, Pulvis es: and if you
happen to be Father in Law to France, and the Cures of Match-making fall upon
you, In pulverem reverteris. Your Country is Fruitful, your Cities Wealthy,
your Ports full of Trade, your Galleys successful, your Alliances great, and on
all these accounts your State is truly Regal; but this minute I have
discovered in it such Stains as sully and lessen the value of it, which are
these; The Remembrance the Subjects retain that once they were Equals; The
Repubick of Luca which started up in the midst of us; The Garrisons the King of
Spain has in Tuscany; And the addition of the Title Great to that of Duke,
which all your Neighbors envy. The Duke, who before had not reflected upon any
of these things, said; What Method shall I use to take out these Stains? The
Servant answered, They are so grounded in, it is impossible to take them out
without cutting off the Piece, which is a Remedy worse than the Disease,
because it is better to be Stained than Ragged. If the Stains I speak of be
taken out with the Piece, your Highness will scarce have a Rag left, but will
be rent to tatters. The nature of these Stains is, they are cleansed by sinking
in deeper, and not by being taken out. Your Highness must make use of Fasting
Spittle, and suck in by little and little, and what you now spend in Portions
for Queens, lay it out in stopping the Eyes and Ears of those who observe you,
that they way not perceive you suck.

The State of Venice its Policy.
The most Serene Republic of Venice, which in regard of its great Wisdom and
Prudence, is as it were the Brain of Europe where the Judgment resides, was
assembled in full Senate. That Assembly was Composed of several Sounds, some
more solid, others more quick, the common difference betwixt old and young, yet
all Skillful, some by Experience, and others by Information, making together
such a Harmony, that all the Princes in the World dance to their Music. The
Doge Crowned Head of that powerful Free Nation sat on a high Throne with three
Counselors on each side; on his Right was one Chief of the Quarantie, and on
the left two; next these were the Secretaries who count the Balls, and in their
places stood two Officers whose business it is to gather them The Silence was
stupendous in so numerous an Assembly, and so far exceeded that of a Desert,
it was hard to persuade the Eyes, but that the Audience was made up of Statues
and not of Men, so very mute were the very Diseases in the old, and so bridled
the fierceness of the young. At length the Doge broke the Silence with these
Words; Malice brings Discord into the World, Double-Dealing continues it, and
Dissimulation makes him that sows it beloved even by him that suffers by it.
The Wars we have occasioned among our Friends, not those we have made with our
Enemies, have given us Peace and Victory. We shall be free so long as we employ
others in subduing one another. Our Light springs from Dissension, we are like
the Spark that is produced from the collision of the Flint and Steel. The more
Monarchs batter one another, the more we shine. Italy, since the decay of the
Empire, is like to a Rich and Beautiful Heiress, who, her Parents dying, was
left to the Care of Guardians and Trustees, and desires to be Married. But the
Trustees having divided her Fortune between themselves, and being loath to
restore, and covetous to keep what they have, some of them misrepresents her to
the King of Spain who courts her, and the others to the King of France who asks
her in Marriage, at the same time finding those Faults in the Suitors which
they see in themselves. These false Trustees are the Princes of Italy, and
among them it is not to be denied but that we also have seized a great part of
her Fortune. The two Suitors now press hard to carry their Mistress. We have
made use of the King of France to put by the Catholic King, who being so near
a Neighbor in Naples and Milan, makes signs to her, and from his own Windows
overlooks her. The most Christian King, who being at a distance could not
gallant, nor so much as see her, and therefore made Love by Letter; now by the
assistance of Savoy, Mantua, and Parma, and his approach to Pignerol, he Ogles
and Courts her, and this obliges us to cheat him of her. This is easy to do,
because there is less trouble in casting out the French, than in bringing them
in; they expel others with their Fury, and themselves with their Haughtiness.
However this Snare must be so laid, that at the same time we break the Match,
we may receive Thanks for promoting it. The Most Christian King has bent his
thoughts upon Lorrain, his Success in Germany is dubious, and Subjects poor,
which things discourage his Partisans in Italy, so that we shall not find any
great difficulty in attaining our ends, for his own Motions will disguise ours,
and we need not raise Jealousies in those that have confided in him, since
their repentance saves us that labor. It is my Opinion we shall subdue the
King of France by encouraging him to go on in his great Undertakings, and by
heightning his credulity. Our utmost endeavors must be used to raise the
Esteem he has of his Favorite, for this Man who takes from him all that he
adds to himself, lessens him as he grows great. As long as the Subject has the
ascendent over his King, and the King is subject to his Servant, the Subject
will be hated as a Traitor, and the King undervalued as of a mean Spirit. The
way to destroy a King publicly with safety is to stand up for his Favorite. I
know not whether Ravilliac was more fatal to his Father than Richlieu has been
to him. This I know, that betwixt them they have robbed him of both Parents,
the first of his Father, the second of his Mother. May Richlieu continue, for
he is like a Disease which by continuance either consumes it self, or him that
endures it. Lewis the 13th had at that time no Issue, and consequently it was
supposed the Crown would devolve to his Brother, the Duke of Orelans*
It is requisite we cast an Eye upon the Succession of the Crown of France,
which is like to fall to the Kings Brother, whose generous Nature we have
reason to hope we may impose upon. He is like a Fire that may be blown away,
yet kindles it self. He is disobliged at the Favors he receives, whereby he
has offended the King of Spain, and sown the Seeds of Dissension, which we may
improve to our benefit. France is dissatisfied at the Prime Minister's,
pretending to be of the Blood Royal, which he claims by forged Genealogies, and
is disgusted to see all Places of Profit and Trust in the Hands of his Kindred
and Friends They remember the Beheading of Montmorency, and the Banishing so
many great Men and they suspect that Violence and not Right will take place in
the Succession to the Crown. The Affairs of Germany are past composing, the
Palatin being dispossessed, the Duke of Lorrain outed, and the Duke of Saxony
and other Protestants of the Empire conspiring against the House of Austria.
Italy seems to despair of Peace by reason of the Garrisons the French have
within it. The King of Spain has his hands full with the Dutch, who have taken
what he had in Holland, and aim to rob him of what he has, being already
possessed of the best part of Brasil, which furnishes their Fleets with the
Trade of Sugar, Tobacco, and Brasil Wood, and having fortified themselves in
one of the Leeward Islands. Besides all this he is engaged to support the
Emperor and maintain the State of Milan against the French. We, like the Spring
in a Striking Watch, must move these Hands every hour and every moment without
being perceived, continually sounding abroad without ever turning back. Our
Politics work like the Glass-makers, who blow things into form, and we sow
Fire to produce Ice. Hither was he come when the Hour began, the wonderful
influence whereof inspiring the Politic Brain of a Republican of the
Capi-Duchi, made him Discourse to this effect. Venice is the very Figure and
Resemblance of Pontius Pilate Probo. Pilate out of mere Policy condemned the
Just and washed his Hands: Ergo. Pilate dismissed Barrabbas, who was Sedition
it self, and apprehended Jesus that was Peace it self. Igitur. Pilate
positively said, What I have written, I have written. Tenet consequentia.
Pilate delivered the Peace and Safety of the World to Mutiniers, to be
crucified. Non potest negari. All the Assembly lifted a Cry, and fell into
Confusion, the Doge ordered the Republican, Nemine contradicente, to be put
into Irons, and that his Genealogy should be enquired into, for that it was
visible he was some way defended from some body that depended on another, who
was a Friend to some one that was acquainted with some Person that came from
another that had something of a Spaniard.

The Germans, Lutherans, and Calvinists.
The Heretical Germans, among whom there are as many Heresies as Men, who
consume themselves in supporting the Tyranny of the Swedes, and the Treachery
of the Electors of Saxony, and Brandenburg, and the Landtgrave of Hesse,
perceiving themselves infected with the French Disease, resolved to cure
themselves at once. Considering that the Salivation of so many past Calamities,
nor the Flux they were put into at Norlinguen, nor the many Bleedings, Usque ad
animi deliquium, of so many overthrows, had availed nothing, they gathered all
the Physicians, Chemists and Mountebanks they could find, and having made known
to them their Distemper, asked their Advice thereupon. Some were of Opinion,
that the only Remedy was to Purge out the French Humors that were crept into
their Bones. Others affirming the Distemper lay altogether in their Heads,
prescribed Medicines to carry off the Humor, and discharge them of dull
Notions, by the Help of Hypocrates his Tetragonum so much applauded by Galen,
to which the smoke of Tobacco exactly answers. Others more Superstitious, and
Magically inclined, affirmed it was no Natural Disease they were troubled with,
but were exagitated by Evil Spirits, and that as Persons possessed they stood
in need of Exorcisms. In the midst of the Learned Dispute the Hour began, and a
Physician of Prague with an Audible Voice said; There is no Cure for this
Disease of the Germans, because all their Maladies and Distempers are only to
be Cured with a Regular Diet, and as long as Luther and Calvin keep their
Taverns open, and they have thirstty Throats, and as long as they do not
abstain from French Cooks Shops and Bawdyhouses, they will never be so
temperate as they ought to be.

The Grand S^gnior, the Advice given him (...) a Spanish Morisco, ref^^^d by
Sinon B^^^a.
The Grand Signior or Emperor of the Turks, a Monarch raised by the Forgeries
and Deceit of Mahomet to a vast Dominion, summoned together all his Vissers,
Bassa^s, Beglerbegs, Generals, and other Eminent Men of his Mighty Port, all or
most of them being Renegadoes, as also the Christian Captives, who lying in
perpetual Slavery, suffer a lingering Death in the Seven Towers of
Constantinople, without hope of Redemption by reason of the Pride of that
Haughty Monarch, who looks upon it as a Diminution of his Grandeur to Ransom
Slaves, and deems that Heavenly Virtue of Mercy as proper only to the the
Vulgar. The Concourse was therefore extraordinary, and greater the Expectation
of all Men, because there had been no Precedent of such an Assembly in the
Memory of Man. The Grand Signior looking on it as too great a condescension
that his Voice should be heard, or his Person seen by his Subjects, being
feated on a lofty Throne behind a Curtain which allowed only some scant passage
to the sight, made a sign to the Assembly to give Ear to what things one of the
The Moriscoes were the Race of the Moors in Spain, most whereof were
counterfeit Christians, and conspired to bring in the Moors again, for which
reason they were all expelled by King Philip III.
Moriscoes, who had been expelled Spain, offered to him by way of advice. The
Morisco, after prostrating himself at the Emperor's Feet, sacrilegiously
adoring, arose again and said: We the true and constant Mahometants, who
through the course of a tedious Captivity in Spain, have for many years
privately entertained in our Hearts the Law of the Prophet descended from Agar,
humbly acknowledging the unparallelled goodness of the Almighty Monarch of the
World, the Great Emperor of the Turks, in receiving us the miserable Relics of
that Expulsioh, have resolved among our selves to do his most Potent Majesty
some considerable Service, which must be grounded on our Knowledge and
Experience, having no Fortunes to offer, as being a Multitude stripped of all
we possessed. To this effect, the first thing we propose is, That for the
Honor of our Nation, and as a Reward to our invincible Generals and
Commanders, in continuing the Memory of their Exploits, it is convenient, that
after the manner of Greece, Rome, and Spain, Colleges and Universities be
erected, aad Rewards be assigned to Learning, for by it, after the Death of the
Monarchs, and Extirpation of the Monarchies, the Greek and Latin Languages
still gloriously survive, and in them in spite of Death, do still flourish
their Heroic Actions, Virtues and Names, being rescued from the Oblivion of
the Grave by those Studies which enriched their Minds, and made their Nations
cease to be Barbarous. The second Proposition is, That the Laws and Customs of
the Romans be received, so far forth as they are not directly opposite to our
Law; to the end that Policy may be advanced, Disorders suppressed, Virtue
Rewarded, Vice punished, and the Distribution of Justice may be so established,
that neither Affection, Malice, nor Bribery may have place, but a sure and
universal Method be settled in all parts. The third is, That for our greater
Benefit in Fight our crooked Cimiters be changed for Spanish Tucks, because
they are more handy either to defend or offend, the great circular motion of
cutting being saved by thrusting, by which means whenever we have come to
Handy-blows with the Spaniards, we have sustained unspeakable Loss, that Nation
exceeding all others in handling their Rapier and besides the Swords are
lighter of carriage, and easier to weild. The fourth, That to preserve Health,
and recover it when impaired, the use of Wine be by all means allowed, because
moderately taken it is the best Vehicle of Nutriment, and most Efficacious
Medicine. It is also a rich Fund to increase the Grand Signior's and his
Subjects Revenues, there being several Liquors produced by the Grape which
create a considerable Trade. Nay, it is more powerful and effectual than Opium
to raise the Spirits and excite the Blood to bold Undertakings. Neither ought
the prohibition in our Law which has been already partly dispensed with, to be
any hindrance, for a proper interpretation to our purpose may be found. For the
putting all we have proposed in execution, we offer to furnish Schemes and
Directors, who shall carry it on without any Charge or Trouble to the Public;
and are assured it will add much to the grandeur and glory of all the Great
Emperor of Constantinople 's Dominions. Scarce had he uttered the last Word,
when Sinan Bassa, a Renegado, started up, foaming with rage, and said; If all
the Devils in Hell had conspired against the Turkish Monarchy, they could not
have invented four such cursed Plagues as have been proposed by this Morisco
Dog, who among Christians was an ill Mohammedan, and would be an ill Christian
among the Turks. These Fellows would have rebelled in Spain, and here they
would destroy us. The reason for expelling them there was not greater than
this, it will be convenient we revenge our selves on those who sent them among
us by returning them back. Don John of Austria had not more destructive Designs
against our Power, when at Lepanto opening the Veins of so many Janisaries, he
caused the Fish to swim in Blood, and made a new Red Sea not inferior to the
old. The Persian Green Turbant does not more maliciously aim at the overthrow
of our Empire; Nor did D. Peter Giron Duke of Ossuna, and Viceroy of Naples and
Sicily, with his Fleets and Land Forces, and Terror of his Name more fiercely
endeavor to obliterate the Memory of our Half Moons, whose light he often
sullied, when our Vessels scarce thought themselves secure of him at Pera and
Constantinople, than thou infernal Dog with those four Proportions have
labored to do. Helhound, Monarchies are upheld by the same Arts that erect
them. They have always been raised by Soldiers, and always corrupted by
Pendants. Kings hold their Dominions by the Sword, not by their Books. Armies
gain and defend them, not Universities. Victories make them great and
formidable, not Arguments. Battles bestow Kingdoms and Crowns, Learning Caps
and Degrees. Whenever a State begins to assign Rewards for Learning, Dignities
are conferred on Drones, Craft is honored, Subtlely exalted, and Favor
Rewarded, and then the Conqueror depends on the Doctor, the Soldier on the
Scholar, and the Sword on the Pen. The ignorance of the People is the greatest
security of Princes, Learning which instructs makes them mutinous. Learned
Subjects rather conspire than obey, rather examine their Sovereign than respect
him. No sooner they understand, but they despise him. No sooner can they know
what liberty is, than they desire it. They can judge whether he that Reigns is
worthy to Rule, and then begin to Reign over the Prince. Learning is the cause
that Peace is sought after, because it stands in need of it, and Peace that is
sought after draws on the most dangerous War. No War is so destructive as that
he endures who seems to covet Peace; The latter sues with Words and Embassies,
and the former makes its advantage of the fear that appears in the Entreaties.
When a Nation affects Scholars and Writers, Gooso Quils place of Swords and
Muskets; Ink in writing is more meritorious than Blood spilt; a Sheet of Paper
signed is of more force than Armor proof against Shot; and the Hand of a
Coward by virtue of the Pen extracts from the Inkhorn Honors, Revenues,
Titles, and Grandeur. Many Vile Wretches wear the Black Robe. Many raise
Estates by their Writings, and many great Men are desended from Scriblers.
Rome, when beginning in a small circumference, scarce big enough to sow two
Bushels of Corn, it grew to a vast Commonwealth, used neither Doctors nor
Books, but Soldiers and Weapons. All there was Violence and no Study, they
ravished the Women they wanted, subdued what was near, and aimed at what was
farther off. No sooner did Cicero, Brutus, Hortensius, and Caesar introduce
Harangues and Declarations, than they began Seditions, and conspiring destroyed
one another, and others themselves, and even the Commonwealth. The Emperors and
the Empire were destroyed, and overthrow by the ambition of the Orators. Even
among Birds only those suffer imprisonment in Cages which talk and sing, and
the more perfectly they do it the closer they are kept. Then the Schools were
made the Magazines against Arms, Orations sanctified Crimes and condemned
Virtue, and whilst the Tongue reigned Triumphs were subject to the power of
Words. The Greeks suffered by the same itch of Learning, they were proud of
their Academies which vied with their Armies, and their Philosophers were a
plague to their Generals. Wit became the Judger of Valor, and they grew rich
in Books and poor in Triumphs. You say their Heroes still live in their famous
Authors, and their Language still survives tho their Monarchy be extinct. The
same happens to a Dagger which wounds a Man, which continues when the Man is
gone, and yet that is no satisfaction to the dead Man. It were better the
Monarchy survived, tho dumb and without a Language, than that the Language
should last without a Monarchy. Greece and Rome are become Echoes, forming in
the hollow emptiness of their Majesty, not whole sounds, but the very
extremities of absent Words. Those very Authors that extolled them could allot
themselves but so short a Life at the pleasure of the Reader, that in some it
reaches only the Understanding, in others goes not beyond Curiosity. Spain,
whose People in danger were always prodigal of Life, covetous of Death, and
impatient of Age, when with unparallelled Resolution it raised its Head out of
ruin, grew to a mighty Flame from scattered Embers, and became a prodigy from a
Skeleton, rather attended to furnish Matter for Writing, than to Write, and to
deserve Praises than to Compose them. Their Drums and Trumpets spoke for them,
and all their Speeches were repeated Huzza's before Battle. They furnished the
World with Subject of Admiration under Viriatus and Sertorious; they gained
glorious Victories for Hannibal; they obliged Caesar, who till then every where
fought for Honor, to fight for his Life, and they exceeded Valor and
Resolution it self at Numantia. Yet of these and many other their Brave Actions
they writ nothing, all was Recorded by the Romans. Their Valor made use of
Foreign Pens, they thought it enough for them to Act, and for the Latins to
Write. As long as they knew not how to be Historians, they deserved t^^m.
Artillery was not long since invented to take off Lives before secured by
distance, to overthrow the strongest Walls, and to bestow Victories by aim, not
by true Courage; but presently after was Printing invented in opposition to
Cannon, it is, Metal against Metal, Ink against Powder, and Letters against
Bullets. Wet Powder takes no effect, there is no doubt but it is moistened by
the Ink that sends down Orders to provide and dispose it. There is no doubt but
there is a scarcity of Lead to make Bullets, ever since it is consumed in
casting of Letters. But it was Battles that gave us Empire, Soldiers gained
the Victories, and the Victories the Rewards, which ought always to be bestowed
on those who always made us Triumph. They who called Letters and Arms Sisters,
knew nothing of their Pedigree, for no Families are less of Kin than Saying and
Doing. The Steel is never joined to the Quill but to cut it, but the Quill with
those very Wounds it receives from the Steel revenges it self. Most
contemptible Morisco, it is our desire that among our Adversaries there be many
Learned, and among us many Victorious, for it is Victory over our Enemies that
we covet, and not their Practices. The second thing you propose, is to receive
the Laws of the Romans, which if once you had compassed you had ruined all. Our
whole Empire would run into confusion betwixt Plaintiffs and Defendants, and
Inferior and Superior Judges, and the People would be all taken up in the
Employments of Counselors, Sollicitors, Atturneys, Clerks, Apparitors,
Sergeants, and other Pependants of Courts. Thus War which now makes choice of
Men will be forced to take up with the Refuse of the Embroilers of the Nation,
and there will be more Suits, not because there will be more occasion, but
because there will be more Laws. Following out own Methods, we enjoy as much
Peace as we stand in need of, and as much War as we please to Make with our
Neighbors. The Laws in themselves are just and good, but where there are
Lawyers they are dull and senseless. This cannot be denied; since the Lawyers
themselves own it as often as they impose what sense they please upon the Law,
supposing of it self it has none. Every Judge affirms he is an interpreter of
the Law, and by giving a meaning to it, supposes it has none. I for my part am
a Renegado, and was a Christian, and do avouch as an Eye Witness, there is no
Law eitheir Civil or Rational but what has as many meanings as there are
Lawyers, Commentators, or Judges, who give it so many that it proves at last to
have none at all. When then there is no reason to dispossess a Man of his
Estate, there never wants a Law, which being either strained, or ill
interpreted, is ground enough for a Suit, and both the Plaintiff and Defendant
are in the end Sufferers. Consider now what Two wholesome Propositions have
been made by this thankful Morisco. The third thing is, that we should change
our Cimiters for long Swords. In this particular, as there is no considerable
ill cosequence to obstruct, so I can find no great advantage to encouraging us
to put it in execution. The Half Moon is our distinctive Character, and that we
always brandish in our Cimiters. To take up the Fashions and Customs of Enemies
is a Ceremony proper to Slaves, and a Ga^^ for Conquered People or at least it
is an men or forerunner of both. If we are to be permanent, let us stick to the
old Proverb, which, says, Let that ever be done, which was always done; for by
keeping to it we shall be free from Novelties. Let the Christian thrust and the
Turk hew, and let this Morisco expelled by the former be impaled by the latter.
As to the fourth and last point, which relates to the use of Vineyards and
Wine, let thirsty Souls agree about it with the Alcoran. No small toleration
has been given in this case long ago. But I must observe, that if there be an
universal Toleration of Wine and Taverns, it will only serve to enhance the
price of Water, and to make us buy Rain by the Quart. My Opinion is therefore,
weighing what has been proposed, that this Cur is a greater Enemy to those that
harbor, than to those that expelled him. All the Assembly heard this Discourse
with profound silence. The Morisco looked pitiously, a cold sweat running down
his Forehead. Then Hali, the Prime Vizier, who stood next to the Curtain that
was before the Grand Signior, after consulting his Looks, said; Christian
Slaves, what say you to what you have heard? They seeing the blindness of that
deluded Nation, and perceiving they loved their own barbarity, and placed their
Security in Tyranny and Ignorance, abhorring the light of Learning, and the
Justice of Laws, caused a Spanish Gentleman who had been 30 years in slavery,
to answer for them all, which he did in these Words. We Spaniards shall not
advise you to any thing that is for your good, because it would be a piece of
Treachery against our Monarch, and an Offense against our Religion; neither
will we deceive you, because we do not stand in need of frauds to defend our
selves against you; therefore we Christians have resolved thus silently to wait
our doom. The Grand Signior influenced by the Hour, and drawing the Curtains
before his Throne, (a thing never before seen) with an angry Voice, said; Let
those Christians be set free, their generous goodness shall be their Ransom,
Cloth and furnish them plentifully for their Voyage out of the Estates of the
Moriscoes. And let that Dog be burnt alive for proposing of Innovations, and
all that shall follow his Example shall suffer the like pain. It is my choice
to be called Barbarous Conqueror, rather than be Learned and overthrown. All
our knowledge must be to know how to overcome, for an ignorant People is the
safety of a Tyrant. I command all here present to forget what they heard from
this Morisco, the powers of the Soul shall obey my Orders, as well as the
Corporal Senses, therefore let your Memories dread my Anger. Thus the Hour gave
to every one what they deserved, the Barbarous Infidels were hardened in their
Ignorance, the Christians obtained their Liberty, and the Morisco was punished.

The Dutch Proposals to the Indians of Chile, and their Answer.
A Dutch Ship by stress of Weather was forced into one of the Ports of Chile is
the Coast of America on the South of Peru.
Chile. The Indians, guarded that Harbor, being a People who in that Harbor,
being a People who in that Conquered World Manfully defended their Liberty, to
the damnation of their Souls in their Idolatry, with Weapons in their Souls in
their Hands attacked the Ships Crew, thinking they were Spaniards, whose
Dominions enclosed them, and from whose Subjection they have still exempted
themselves. The Captain pacified them, saying, They were Hollanders, and came
as Ambassadors from that Commonwealth with a Message of importance to the
Caciques and Chief Men. Then sweetning these Words with rich Wine brewed after
the manner of the North, and mollifying them with Butter and other Rarities,
they were admitted and caressed. The Indian who commanded gave an account to
the Magistrates of the new People that was arrived, and of their Intentions.
All the Principal Men and a great number of People assembled with their Weapons
in their Hands. This Nation is so provident against Possibilities, and so
jealous of Appearances, that they receive Ambassadors with the same precaution
as they meet an Enemies Army. The Captain of the Ship came before them,
attended by 4 of his Men, and a Slave serving as an Interpreter; They asked of
him, Who he was? Whence he came? To what purpose? And, From whom? He answered,
not without some dread of the Warlike Audience. I am a Dutch Captain, and come
from Holland, a Commonwealth in the West, to offer you our Friendship and
Trade. We live in a Land which the Sea from above looks down upon with
indignation to see it dry below its billows. We were not long since Subjects,
and part of the Dominion of the Great Monarch of Spain and the New World, where
only your Valor has exempted it self from his Crown, which like, the Sun
extends its compass round the Earth. We gained our Liberty with immense labor,
because the Severity of Ring Philip the Second preferred the Bloody Execution
of The Two Counts, Horn and Egmont.
two Noblemen, before the Sovereignty of so many Provinces. Revenge inflamed
our Courage, and carrying on a War which lasted above 60 years without
interruption, we have sacrificed Two Milions of Men to those two Lives, and
made the Fields of the Low Countries an universal Burialplace to all Europe.
Our Success has made us absolute Masters of half those Countries, and not so
satisfied we have taken many strong Holds in the other Provinces, have gained
large Dominions in the East, and in Brazil have Conquered Pernambuco and
Paraiba, enriching our selves with Brazil Wood, Tobacco, and Sugar; And to
conclude, of Subjects that we were to the King of Spain, are become his most
implacable Enemies. We have taken it into our Consideration, that the Spaniards
have not only subdued these Provinces, but that in few years they have
destroyed in them many Towns, peopling them again with Strangers, so that there
scarce remains the Memory of the Natives in their Tombs, and that the mighty
Emperors, Kings, Caziques, and other Princes, are so wholly extinct and buried
in Oblivion as if they had never been. We perceive that you alone (either that
you are Wiser, or warned by the Fate of others) maintain an Hereditary Liberty,
and by your Valor the American Race is preserved from slavery. It is natural
for every Creature to love its likeness, and since you and our Commonwealth so
much resemble one another, it was decreed to send me through such vast Seas,
and such dangerous distance, to tender you their sincere Amity and Friendship,
and to offer not only for your Defense, but to promote your further Designs to
furnish you with Ships, Cannon, Officers and Soldiers, who are such as are
praised and admired by all by whom they are not feared. By way of Trade they
offer you free Commerce in their Dominions, with a Brotherly and perpetual
Alliance, desiring for themselves the freedom of your Ports, and the settlement
of a League Offensive and Defensive upon equal Terms on both sides. And the
more to express their Affection, by their great Interest they will secure you*
the Friendship of many Kings, Princes and Commonwealths their Confederates. The
Indians returned a courteous Answer, telling him, That to receive his Proposals
it was enough to hear him, but in order to give their Answer they must consult
in Counsel, and the next day at the same time would give him their Resolution.
It was so agreed, and the Dutchman, knowing the Indians are naturally inclined
to Toys and Curiosities, the better to gain their Affections he presented them
with Barrels of Butter, Cheese, Casks of Wine, Swords, Hats, and
Looking-glasses, and lastly a Telescope, highly extolling the use of it,
saying, By the help of it they might see Ships at Ten or Twelve Leagues
distance, and discover by their Colors whether they belonged to Friends or
Enemies, that the same they might do by Land. He added, that with it they might
find Stars in Heaven which they had never seen before, nor could not be
discerned without it; That through it they might plainly discover the spots in
the Face of the Moon, which look like Eyes, and Mouth, and might perceive a
black spot in the Circle of the Sun. That it wrought these Wonders by drawing
with those two Glasses close to the Eyes things that were at a vast distance.
The Principal Man among the Indians asked for it, and the Dutchman having
opened it to the due distance, and instructed him how to use it, delivered it
to him. He clapped his Right Eye to it, and levelling it toward the Mountains,
set up a Cry that testified his Admiration to the rest, telling them, He had at
four Leagues distance plainly seen Men, Beasts and Birds, and the Rocks and
Shrubs, so near at hand that they seemed bigger than natural close, to the
farthest Glass. Here the influence of the Hour affected them, and they having
gabled in their Language some Discourses in appearances passionate, he that
took the Glass holding it in his Left Hand directed his Discourse to the
Dutchman in these Words. An Instrument that finds a Spot in the Sun, proves the
Moon a Liar, and discovers what Heaven hides, is a mischievous Instrument, a
Glass Pickthank, and cannot be grateful to Heaven. Its attracting things at a
great distance, is a sufficient cause to raise a Jealousy in us who are far
removed from you. With this doubtless it was you discovered us so remote, and
through it we have descryed the design you labor to hide under your Specious
Offers. By this Artifice you pry into the Elements, and thrust your selves into
Sovereignty. You, as you say, live dry below the Water, and wrest your Land
wrongfully from the Sea. We shall not be such Fools to take those for our
Friends who could not be good Subjects, nor shall we trust them with our
Habitations who have stolen theirs from the Fishes. You were Subjects of the
Kings of Spain, and having usurped his Dominion, value your selves upon being
Rebels, and would have us through a fond credulity become a Prey to your
Treachery. Neither is it true that we resemble you, for in maintaining that
Native Country which Nature gave us, we only defend what is our own, we
preserve our Liberty, but do not steal it. You offer to assist us against the
King of Spain, yet confess at the same time you have taken Brazil from him,
which was his; if you take the Indies from him who took them from us, how much
more reason have we to be afraid of you than of him. You must observe that
America is a rich Beautiful Harlot, and since she was false to her Husbands,
she will never be true to her Bullies. Christians say Heaven punished the
Indies because they adored Idols, and we Indians say, Heaven will punish the
Christians because they adore the Indies. You think you carry Gold and Silver,
and you only carry well colored Envy and precious Misery. You take from us,
that you may have for others to take from you. That which makes you our
Enemies, makes you Enemies to one another. Be gone then within two hours out of
this Port, and let us know if you want for any thing. If you have a mind to
gain our good will, since you are so good at Invention, invent an Instrument to
remove what is by us at a great distance, for we promise you we will never look
upon your Country nor Spain with this that attracts things that are far off.
Carry away this Glass Spy, this Discoverer of the Firmament, for we have no
need of it, being able with the help of our Eyes only to discover more in you
than we like; and let me tell you, the Sun is beholding to it for showing you
the black spot in his Circle, or else for the color sake you would have
endeavored to cut out and stamp him into Money.

The Blacks consult how to deliver themselves from Slavery.
The Blacks assembled in mighty numbers to consult about obtaining their
Liberty, a thing they have often earnestly solicited. The numerous Concourse
being seated and silent, one of the chiefest among them, who in that swarthy
Audience appeared blacker than the rest, and had proposed this Affair in the
Court of Rome, spoke to this purpose. There is no cause for our slavery but our
color, and color is an accident, not a crime. Yet certain it is, those who
Lord it over us have no color for their Tyranny, but our color, which is
produced by the presence and nearness of the greatest Beauty, to wit, the Sun.
Flocky Heads, and clotted Hair, squab N^ses, and Blubber Lips, are no better
grounds for our Captivity. Many Whites might be Slaves if th^se three things
carried is, and it were more reasonable they should be so who are hideous with
their mighty N^ses like Rudders in their Faces, and snivle through Elephants
Trunks, than we who have nothing to loose by the Pox, and are the very
Opposites to the Snouts. Why do not the Whites consider, that if we look like
Blots among them, one of them looks like a Stain among its. Did they make
Slaves of the Mulattoes, it were more excusable, for they are a Rabble without
a King, a Compound betwixt Light and Darkness, Wainscot Paces compared with
White Men, Foils to the Brown, the next degree to the Blacks, and the very
Picture of Soot. In all Ages there have been Men of our Complexion Famous for
Martial Exploits, Learning, Virtue, and Sanctity, it is needless for me to
repeat a Catalogue of them, for they are sufficiently known. Nor can it be
denied, that we are preferable to the Whites for not endeavoring to disguise
the color Nature gave to our Skins. Among them the Women that are swarthy or
brown, plaster themselves like Walls to become White, and they that are White
never satisfied with Whiteness wash to increase it. Only our Women contenting
themselves with their Natural Complexion, are beautiful in the dark, and the
whiteness of their Teeth shining the brighter through their blackness, when
they smile they sparkle like the Stars in the night. Neither do we belly our
Age, dye our Hair, or wear false Locks. Why then are we contemned and
chastised. This is it I offer to your Consideration, that you may consult what
Means may be us^d for obtaining our due liberty and rest. The Hour prevailed,
and a Black whose Head through Age was become gray, contrary to the received
Opinion, that Black takes no color, rose up and said. Let Ambassadors be
immediately sent to all the Kingdoms in Europe, with Two Proposals. The first,
That if Color be the cause of Slavery, they will take notice of the Red Beards
for the sake of Judas, and pass by the Blacks on account of one of the three
Kings that came to Bethlem. And since Cats and Dogs of that color ar^ hateful,
it will be but reasonable there be no Men nor Women of it, and let him in our
Name propose means for the speedy destruction of all Fox heads with their
Appurtenances. The second Proposal is, that they mix their Breed with ours, and
blending their Brightness with our Sootiness, produce a mungril Race, that so
Swarthiness may become Fashionable; being sufficiently warned by the clearness
of the Garmans and Flemmings, who have Embroiled and Distracted the World,
stained so many Fields with Blood, and filled so many Nations with Rebellions
and Heresies; but particularly let them remember the Frenchmens yellow Beards.
It is a custom in Spain to Sneeze at the Blacks by way of contempt. England in
the year 1640. This was spoke in the Person of K. Chapter the I. in whose time it
was writ.
As for our Ambassadors, let them take this Advice along with them, that if the
* People Sneeze at them they may take Snuff for their comfort and shall answer,
God Bless us; bestowing the Prayer upon themselves.

The mighty Monarch of England, whose Island is the most Beautiful Mole upon
the face of the Ocean, having Assembled his Parliament, spoke to them as
follows. My Dominions are encompassed by the raging Sea, hemmed in and defended
by the Waves; my Kingdoms, as to the Public Worship are of the Reformed
Religion, but in their hearts they are Catholics. I have engrafted the Papal
power upon the Regal, wear at once the Crown and Miter, and have two Heads, the
Spiritual and the Temporal. I suspect, tho it is not visible, as Spiritual
Schism among my Subjects, and that the City which holds St. Peter's Keys
influences the private Councels in London. This is of so much the more
dangerous consequence by how much it is the more Private. It is a great
Eyesore to me to behold the Rebellious Hollanders grown up into a
Commonwealth. I confess, mine and my Ancestors jealousy of the greatness of
Spain, has raised them from a contemptible Spawn to a Bulk that exceeds the
British Whale. I see them daily encroaching upon the East and West Indies, and
am devoured by the Lice I bred. I know, most years they have rich Fleets from
their stolen Dominions, and sometimes they snap all, or a considerable part of
those that belong to the King of Spain, which brings them in inestimable
Treasure. By Land so many years continual exercise has made them Soldiers, with
the reputation of innumerable Victories; and their experience in obeying has
rendered them fit to Command. By Sea their Ships are not to be counted, their
Fortune is matchless, their Conduct not to be Paralelled, and their Reputation
above their Neighbors. On the other side, I see my Neighbor the King of
France (whom I hate upon ancient grudges) aspire to the Empire of Germany and
Rome, having already got footing in Italy, being possessed of Towns, favored by
some Princes, and in all appearance countenanced by the Pope. He is a Youth
born and grown up amidst Arms, and gained Triumphs with them when he was
fitter to have played with Toys. I now look upon his Subjects to be wholly
united, since he has demolished all the strong holds of the Huguenots,
Lutherans, and Calvinists, and vested the power of the Government in the
Catholics alone: Neither do I on this account esteem him the better Catholic,
but believe him a crafty Politician, and am persuaded, he is in himself a
Time-server, that he only aims at his Interest, and believes in what he would
have, not in that he adores; a Religion many follow under the name of another,
yet he dissembles, because his design being to work himself into the possession
of Naples and Milan, he thought it convenient to favor the Catholics, as
being infinitely the stronger party; They are beholding to their number, not to
their Doctrine. He pretends a Catholic zeal because it is the best color to
disguise his ambition of enlarging his Dominions in Italy, and he is a much
beholding to his Hypocrisy as to his Valor for his Conquests. In Germany by
calling in the Sweeds, and stirring up the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh,
and the Landtgrave of Hesse, he has sworn In verba Lutheri He laid hold of
Calvin's Conscience to seize the Duke of Lorrain's Dominions; and thus he is a
Janus in Religion, looking upon the Turk with one Face, and upon the Pope with
the other; Cardinal Richlieu being made his instrument to wind him into that
Court. This causes my Nose to swell at him, because I consider, that for the
compassing his ends he has made no account of (...) power, but h^ taken (...)
up with the fortune of the Hollanders, despising England as if he were
furnished with another wonderful Joan of Are, or Maid of Orleans. I have so ill
a relish of all these actions that they set my Teeth on Edge, and the very air
I breath is nauseous; to which, adding the success of the Isle of The, it
causes a loathing in my Memory. It occurs not to me with whom I can join in
Confederacy to clip the Wings of these two Neighbors, unless with the Phil.
the 4th then young.
King of Spain, who is a Great, Rich, and Mighty Monarch, being Lord of the
most Warlike Nations in the World, and in the prime of his Age; yet I cannot
but take notice, that my Honor and Reputation are engaged in restoring the
Palatine; and I cannot expect it from the Catholics, and consequently must not
hope it from the Imperialists and Spaniards, by reason of the difference of
Religion, and that the Protestants are already sick of the House of Austria.
Besides, I guess the King of Spain has not forgot my Journey to his Court,
since I have not forgot my return to my own, the memory whereof is renewed by
the attempt of my Ships upon Cadiz. I would willingly reduce the Most Christian
King to his former bounds, for like a Flood, he is swollen above his Banks, and
has spread himself over all Europe; and at the same time would pull back the
Dutch to what they were. It is your parts to advise what methods will be most
proper for this undertaking; but at the same time you are to understand, that I
am not only resolved, but eager to go my self in Person, because I am of
opinion, that a Prince who being engaged in a necessary War, does not himself
lead his People, rather condemns his Subjects to carry Arms, than makes
Soldiers of them, and they being thus drove like Criminals, suffer more then
they Act; whence it comes, they expect their Liberty, and revenge no less by
being overcome than by overcoming. There is as much difference betwixt leading
and sending of Armies, as betwixt jest and earnest, as appears by experience.
Answer in relation to the Public without meddling with my safety; and let me
hear nothing in your opinions that looks like Self-Interest. Inform my
understanding, do not perplex it. This said, they all looked upon one another
with an awful silence, and after consulting together in private, the Speaker
returned this Answer. Your Majesty, Great Sir, has contrived so to place your
Question, that you have taught us how to Answer; an Art highly to be valued by
Kings, because it creates perspicuity and a good understanding. Truth is but
one, it is plain and clear, few words express it, multiplicity confounds it; it
breaks little silence, falsehood leaves none unbroken. The Reflections you have
made on the King of France and the Hollanders are worthy your Royal
consideration. The imminent danger requires a manly and speedy resolution. The
King of Spain is at this time the only Confederate can promote your designs,
and will be the more effectual if you join with him in Person to crush these
two troublesome Neighbors. And your Majesty may observe, there is as great
distance betwixt Acting and Commanding, as is betwixt Words and Deeds. I
confess your Heirs are too tender to be forsaken. But it is a less evil to
leave them young, then Childishly to bear them company being a Father. Scarce
had he uttered these Words, when an old decrepit Senator, whose grisle clotted
Beard covered all his Breast, his head hanging down, and the hunch of his back
through Age rising above it, lifting himself up by the help of his staff said.
There is no doubt but it is a great rashness to* advise his Kingdoms swarm with
concealed Catholics, whose number is known to be great, but suspected to be
much greater. Your Majesty has Subjects fit to be entrusted with such an
undertaking, let an Army of our own Religion be sent under the Command of the
Chief Men who are suspected to be Catholics: Thus their Allegiance will be
secured abroad, and fewer Enemies will remain at home. Do not venture your
Person in which we venture our all, and which alone secures all; for, from the
Speakers opinion I gather he Plots like a Papist, and does not advise like a
Councellor. The whole Assembly fell into confusion, and in this disorder the
Hour began, and the King changing color said: You two instead of Advising have
Distracted me. One says, if I go not abroad in Person my Enemies will deprive
me of my Kingdom. The other, that if I go it will be taken away by my Subjects,
so that you will have me stand more in awe of my Subjects than of my Enemies.
The Condition I am reduced to is Deplorable. It remains, that every one of you
within 24 hours, lay before me by whose and by what means I am reduced to this
pass* naming Persons and Causes without sparing one another; otherwise I shall
suspect you all, for the blame lies only among you that advise me; for I am now
resolved to attend my Affairs both at home and abroad. The King of France goes
abroad without having Issues or hopes of it, and leaves a Kingdom divided on
several accounts, the Nobility stained with the Blood of Montmorency, the
Huguenots suppressed, but not without thoughts of revenge, the Country eaten up
with Taxes, and the whole Kingdom groaning under the Oppression of the Prime
Minister; and you would have me who have Issue, and less Obstacles to obstruct
me, stay to rock and play with my Children. France and Holland are become
formidable because I have lived at home at my ease, if I appear not abroad they
will be my ruin. If I stay for fear of my Subjects, I encourage them to contemn
me. If once my Enemies are assured I cannot go abroad, I shall not be able to
secure my self against them, and if I go abroad and perish, at least I shall
gain the Honor of the Attempt, and prevent the Scandal of Cowardice. That King
who acts not himself in defense of his Crown, furnishes them with an Excuse who
do not assist him. It will be unjust to punish those that follow his Example,
for he cannot be Judge of the Crime he taught, nor condemn what was learnt of
him by those who imitate him in forsaking the Defense of their Country. Be gone
all of you immediately, and consult according to your Duty what is best for my
Service, preferring it before your own Lives, and my Quiet, for I promise the
more sharp the truth you deliver shall be, the better I will look upon it; and
do not perplex me with the pretense of carrying all the Nobility along with me,
for Experience demonstrates, that no Man ever assembled them in an Army, but he
lost them and himself. The Rings measured by the Bushel at Cannas testify it
to the unspeakable sorrow of Rome. So the Wood of Pavia made the Sepulcher of
all the French Nobility, and of their Kings Liberty. So the Spanish Armada
under the Duke of Medina Sidonia, which coming to invade this Kingdom, enriched
the Shoars with its Wreck. And so King Sebastian who lost his Nobility, his
Crown, and his Life in Africa. The Nobility united causes Confusion, and
occasions Ruin, because they know not how to Command, and will not Obey, and
consequently their Pride breaks an Military Discipline. I will take with me a
few that have gained Experience, the rest shall stay to be a Check to the
Licentiousness of the Multitude, and a Curb to Mutiniers. I have Occasion for
such Men as think they cheat me in exposing their Lives for Sixpence a day,
not for those who having exhausted my Treasure that they might go, claim a
Title to my Revenue because they went. It were good that all the Nobility were
Trained, yet it were not safe. Private Persons must not Arm Madmen, nor Kings
the Nobility. Take this along with you by way of Instruction, and there will be
the less to distract your Consultations, and my Resolution will the sooner take
effect.

The Jews and Monopanti in Council for embroiling Christendom, and draining its
Wealth.
At Thessalonica, a City of Macedonia, seated at the bottom of the Gulf to
which it gives its Name, and subject to the Emperor of Constantinople, by the
appointment of Rabbi Saadias, Rabbi Racabarbaniel, Rabbi Solomon, and Rabbi
Nisin, was held a general Assembly of the Deputies of all the Jews in Europe.
Thither resorted for the Synagogue at Venice Rabbi Samuel and Rabbi Maimon, for
that of Ragusa Rabbi Abenezra, for that of Constantinople Rabbi Jacob, for that
of Rome Rabbi Chaminiel, for that of Leghorn Rabbi Cersonni, for that of Roan
Rabbi Gavirol, for that of Prague Rabbi Mosche, for that of Vienna Rabbi
Berchai, for that of Amsterdam Rabbi Mier Armaac, for that of Oran Rabbi
Asepha, for the Jews in Masquerade, who Trade under the disguise of the
Christian Habit and Language, Rabbi David Bar Nachman. With these joined the
Monopanti, a Republican People inhabiting certain Islands, who lying in the
Black Sea, betwixt Moscovy and Tartary, are politickly maintained against their
fierce Neighbors, rather by Cunning than force of Arms or strength of
Fortifications. The Natives are Men of inextricable Subtlety, thorough-paced in
Hypocrisy, absolute Masters of Dissimulation, and of so deceitful a Presence,
that all Religions and Nations take them for their own. Trade gives them
multiplicity of Faces, and charges their Countenances, and Interest shifts
their Souls. They are Governed by a Prince called Pragas Chincollos. By his
Order there came to this Sanhedrim Six of the most Learned Men in the Doctrine
of Raking and Griping, the first was called Philorgiros, the second
Erictotheos, the third Danipe, the fourth Arpi Trotono, the fifth Pacasmazo,
and the sixth Daper Bazalas. The Assembly seated themselves orderly, according
to the Pre-eminence of each Synagogue, giving the First Seat to the Monopanti
in Courtesy as they were Strangers. After Silence was made, Rabbi Saadias
having repeated the Psalm, In exitu Israel de Egypto, made the following
Speech. We the first Generation of the World, who are become the Offcast of all
Ages, and dispersed Multitude, living in Captivity and miserable Contempt,
perceiving the whole World entangled in the inextricable Snares of Discord,
have assembled our selves together to consult our Interest amidst the present
Tumults, that we may raise our selves upon the Ruins of all others. I conf^^s
Captivity, Plagues, and Obstinacy are our Inheritance. Fears and Jealousies are
the first begotton of our Understandings, and we were ever Malcontents against
God, ever valuing the Diety we made, before that which made us. From the first
beginning his government was irksome to us, and we followed the interpretation
of the Devil in opposition to his Law. When his Omnipotency governed us, we
rebelled, when he gave us Governors we disobeyed. Samuel who governed in his
Name was thought burdensome, and we gathering an ungrateful Assembly, though God
was our King, asked of God another King. He gave us Saul, and him a Tyrannical
Right over us, declaring he would make Slaves of our Children, and take away
our Estates to give to his Servants; and he aggravated this punishment, saying,
he would not take him from us tho we should beg it of him. He said to Samuel,
that it was him they despised, not the Prophet, or his Sons. To fulfill his
Curse, that Saul continues among us at all times, in all Places, and under
several Names. Since then he oppresses us with infamous and miserable Thraldom
in all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, and God permits every King should be a Saul
to us who left God for Saul; Our Nation remained Criminal in the sight of all
Men, all cast it from themselves, all retain, and all are ashamed of retaining
it. We reside not in any place, but whether we came expelled from another. We
rest no where, but where they are desirous to cast us out, and all dread we
should be drove upon them. We cannot but own there is no congruity between our
Words and our Actions, and that our Mouth and our Heart never were united in
adoring the same God; our Mouth always called upon the God of Heaven, our Heart
ever gave Idolatrous Adoration to God and Usury. Being under the conduct of
Moses, when he went up to the Mount for the Law, we made it appear, that the
Religion of our Souls was Gold, and any Creature framed thereof. There we
adored our own Jewels in the Calf, and our Avarice took for its Deity the
resemblance of the sucking Cattle. We admit not of God in any other Metal, and
in this we receive any Insect for a God. He well understood the Disease that
caused our insatiable Thirst, who made us drink up our Idol reduced to Powder.
A mighty Vengeance followed this Crime; yet tho it slew many thousands, it was
a warning to few, for whereas God afterward did for us all that we could ask,
still he did nothing but what we grew weary of. He stretched out the Clouds
like a Canopy to cover us in the Desert from the scorching heat of the day. He
strengthened with the fiery Pillar the weak light of the Moon and Stars, that
they assisted with its glittering motion might overcome the darkness of the
night, and represent the Sun in its absence. He commanded the Wind to shower
down our Harvest, and disposed the Regions of the Air into wonderful Barns,
pouring thence our Sustenance ready dressed in the Manna with all the seasoning
every Pallat could desire. He caused the Quails descending like Rain to become
Game and Nets for our Entertainment. He dissolved the immovable Rocks into
running Streams, and caused Springs to gush from the Stones to recreate our
Thirst. He dried up the bottom of the Sea into an easy Road for our Feet, and
raised the Waters perpendicular, heaping up their smoothness into Liquid Walls,
detaining in a secure Structure the Waves and Billows, which became a straight
way for our Forefathers, and a Sepulcher to Pharaoh and his Army. His Word
raised a Vermin, and listed Frogs, Flies and Locusts in his Army for our
service. There is nothing so weak, whereof God does not make up invincible
Hosts against Tyrants. With such small Soldiers he vanquished the formidable
Enemies Squadrons, glittering in their Steel Armor, vainglorious in the
bearings of their Shields, and flourishing in the Feathers of their Crests.
These wonderful Mercies which our King and Prophet David celebrated in the
105th Psalm, which begins Horula Adonai, were requited by our Obstinacy and
Ingr^titude with a loathing and dislike of our Food, and with Oblivion of the
Way opened through the Waves of the Sea. Many times God chastises with what he
gives, and rewards with what he refuses. Such Forefathers are a scandalous
Genealogy of our Perverseness. We are generally looked upon as obstinate in
endless hopes, whereas in reality we are the most desperate People in Nature:
We are the Ne plus ultra of Incredulity; and hopes nor is any thing to be hoped
of us. Because Moses stayed a little on the Mount, we despaired of him, and
asked a God of Aaron. The reason why it is said we are obstinate in everlasting
hope is, because we have so many Ages expected the Messiah; but neither did we
receive him in Christ, nor do we expect him in any other. The cause of our
saying always, that he is to come, is not that we desire him, or believe it,
but by these delays to disguise our being the Fool that begins the 13th Psalm,
saying in his Heart, There is no God. The same says he, who denies him that
came, and waits for him that is not to come. This is the Language of our Heart,
and rightly considered it is the Quare of the 2d Psalm, Fremuerunt gentes, and
populi meditati sunt inania adversus dominum, and adversus Christum ejus. So
that we say we always hope, to conceal our always despairing. Of the Law of
Moses we retain only the Name, giving it to the Exceptions the Talmudists, have
forged to belie the Scripture, disguize the Prophecies, invalidate the
Precepts, and dispose Consciences to Worldly ends, instructing our Atheistical
Inclinations with Seditious Politics for the convenience of a Civil Life, and
adopting us of Sons of Israel Sons of Mammon. When we had a Law we kept it not.
Now we keep it, it is no Law, farther than in the very sound of the three
Letters. It was necessary to declare what we were, to excuse what we are, and
to promote what we aim to be, advancing our selves upon the wild
Extravagancies, which like a Frenzy possess all the Earth; for now not only the
Heretics rise in Arms against their Enemies the Catholics, but the Catholics
themselves in hostile manner invade one another. The Protestants of Germany for
many years past have strugled for a H^retick Emperor, and in this they are
favored by the most Christian King, who acts as if he were not so, and
connives at Calvin and Luther. The Catholic King opposes them all, to keep in
the House of Austria the Supreme Dignity of the Roman Eagles. The Hollanders
encouraged by being successful Traitors, aspire to raise their Treason into a
Monarchy, and of Rebellious Subjects to the King of Spain, dare presume to
become his Competitors. They wrested from him what he bad in them, and they
proceed rob him of what is so far from them, as Brazil and India, designing to
extend their Conquests over his Crown. We have been no small Instruments in
promoting these Usurpations, by means of the Sham Christians, whom under
disguise of the Portuguese Language we have applied to undermine him, upon
pretense of being his Subjects. All or most of the Princes of Italy have
harbored the French in their Dominions, pretending they read the Popes
inclinations in his Looks, and interpreting his silent Toleration for a
positive Command, Ex motu proprio. The King of France has practiced an unbeard
or Stratagem against the Monarch of Spain, The Duke of Orleans, and Queen
Mother of France, upon disgust went into Flanders, where they had Pensions from
the King of Spain, who entertained them to breed Divisions in France.
discharging upon him all his Family under the Title of Malcontents, that he
might consume the Pay of his Army in Pensions and Prosents. When was it ever
known that a King made Ammunition of his Mothers and Brothers Teeth against
another, that they might eat him up by morsels. It is a beggarly invention, and
yet most pernicious. To wage War by Mumping, looks more like jest than earnest.
We have Synagogues in the Dominions of all these Princes, where we are the
principal Element in composing of this Confusion. At Roan we are the Purse of
France against Spain, and of Spain against France. In Spain, disguising our
Circumcision by our Habit, we su^^^ that Monarch with the Stock we have at
Amsterdam amidst his Enemies, who make a greater advantage by ordering us to
delay the payment of the Bills, than he does by receiving them. This is indeed
an extra ordinary Riddle, to wit, to serve and ruin Friends and Enemies with
the same Money, and to cause him that pays it to make his advantage over him
that receives it. The same we do in Germany, Italy, and Constantinople, and we
have knit this indissoluble knot by placing the supply every one expects in the
hands of his greatest Enemy. For we furnish Money, as he that lends upon
Interest to one that plays and looses, that he may loose the more. I do not
deny but the Monopanti are the Boxkeepers of Europe, who furnish Cards, Dice
and Candles, and at length the Box runs away with all the Gold and Silver,
leaving the Gamesters nothing but Noise, Ruin, and a desire of Revenge, which
they encourage, that their Gaming House, which is the end of all Men, may never
have an end. Thus far they are the true Copies of our Original. True it is they
have much the advantage of us in the manner of worming themselves in, because
they are the Jews of the New Testament, as we are of the Old, for as we did not
believe that Jesus was the Messiah that came, so they believing that Jesus was
the Messiah already come, they let him slip through their Consciences in such a
manner it seems he never came to, or for them. The Monopanti believe him, as a
grave Author says we expect him: Auream, and Gemmatam Jerusalem expectabant. A
Jerusalem of Gold and Precious Stones. Both we and the through differing
Principles and unlike Means tend to the same end, which is to destroy
Christianity which we would not receive, and they after receiving have
rejected. And this is he reason we have met to join a Confederacy of Malice and
Deceit. This Synagogue has taken it into consideration, that Gold and Silver
are the true Sons of the Earth which make War against Heaven, not only with an
hundred hands, but with as many as dig, cast, coin, gather, tell, receive, and
steal them. They are two Subterranean Demons, yet beloved of all Mortals. Two
such Metals, that the greater Body they have, they have also the more Spirit.
No Estate or Condition despises them, and if any Law condemn, the Lawyers and
Interpreters of it bring them off. He that thinks it an undervaluing to dig
them, values himself upon gathering them. He who is too great to ask of him
that keeps, courteously receives them of him that offers. And he who thinks it
too great a labor to earn them, esteems it an art to steal them. He that says,
I will not have them, at the same time means, Give me them. And he who cries, I
receive nothing, speaks truth, because he snatches all. As it were a falsehood
should the Sea pretend it does not swallow up the Springs and Brooks, since
drinking up the Rivers which suck them up, it also licks up Brooks and Springs;
so great Men prevaricate when they say they do not receive from the Poor and
Beggars, whereas they devour the Rich, who swallow up the Poor and Beggars. The
Premises being granted, it will be most proper to level the Strokes of our
Interest at Kings, Commonwealths, and Prime Ministers, in whose Stomachs all
the rest cause a Surfeit, which being by us stirred up will prove a Lethargy,
or Apoplexy in their Heads. Let the Monopanti have the pre-eminence of giving
their Opinion first, what method they judge most proper for our advantage. They
having buzzed about their sly thoughts from one to another, agreed that
Pacasmazo, as the most fluent of Tongue, and abounding in Words, should speak
for them all, which he did in this manner. The Goods of the World belong to the
Industrious, and Fortune follows the Dissemblers and the Bold. Crowns and
Scepters are sooner usurped and snatched, than inherited or deserved. He who in
Temporal Preferments is the worst among the Wicked, is the most deserving
without exception, and grows till he suffers himself to be outdone in Villainy,
for in all Ambitious Attempts, Justice and Honesty make Tyrants Criminals. No
sooner these begin to use moderation, but they depose themselves. If they will
continue their Tyranny, they must not suffer any signs to appear abroad that
may prove them so. The Fire that burns a House, casting out the Smoke, calls
People to quench it with Water. Let every one take as much of this Discourse to
himself as suits with his purpose. Money is the true Circe, which changes into
sundry forms all that come near or fall in love with it. We our selves are the
Example. Money is a disguised Deity, which in no place has any public Altar,
but is privately adored in all parts. It has no particular Temple, because it
slides into all Churches. Riches is an universal Sect, in which most Souls
agree; and Covetousness is an Arch Heretic beloved by all Politicians, and the
Reconciler of all Differences in Opinion and Humor. We therefore perceiving he
is the most wonderful Magician and Negromancer, have chosen him for our North
Star, and make him our Loadstone to point to that Pole that we may not stray
from our Course. This we perform so artificially, that we leave him to the end
we may have him, and despise him that we may gather him. This we learned of the
deceitful Pump, which by being empty fills it self, with what it has not;
attracts what others have, and easily sucks and dreins the full with its own
emptiness. We are the very resemblance of Gunpowder, which being small, black,
and close rammed, gathers vast strength and swiftness from its close
imprisonment. We do the mischief before the noise can be heard, and as we open
one Eye and shut the other to take aim, we carry all before us in the twinkling
of an Eye. Our Houses are like the Barrels of Guns, they are discharged at the
Keys, and charged at the Mouth. Yet though we are such, we have Countenances
and Manners that suit with all Men, and therefore we seem not Strangers to any
Sect or Nation. The Turk takes our Hair for a Turbant, the Christian for a Hat,
the Moore for a Cap, and you for a Veil. We admit not of the Name of a Kingdom,
Commonwealth, or any other, but only that of Monopanti. We yield all Titles to
Kings and Commonwealths, we take from them the power abstracted from the Vanity
of those noisy Words. We lay our Design that they may be Lords over the World,
and we over them. To attain so glorious an end, we have not found any to (...)
with in Confederacy on equal Terms, like you, who are at present the sharpers
of Europe; you only want our quality to complete the subverting of all, which
we offer you entire, by way of Contagion or Infection, to be transmitted by
means of an infernal device found out against Christians by us here present;
which is, that as Treacle is prepared with the sharp poison of the Viper,
because it is the moisture that goes the quickest and most directly to the
Heart; for which reason being compounded with many Simples of Efficacious
Virtue, it conveys them to the Heart to defend it against Poison, which is the
design of the Medicine; so we have invented a counter-Treacle to convey Poisons
to the Heart, by falling upon the Virtues and good works that go to it, and to
carry to the Soul the Vices, Abominations and Errors, which on these Vehicles
will slip into it. If you resolve upon this Alliance, we will give you the
Receipt, with the weight and number of Ingredients, and furnish Apothecaries
well versed in the composition, in the contriving whereof, Danipe, Alkemiastos,
and I, have taken great pains, and our labor is nothing inferior to the
Trochisks of the Viper. Be ruled by our Pragas, for you need not cease to be
Jews, and at the same time will learn to be Monopanti. At the very uttering of
these words the Hour had its effect, and Rabbi Maimon one of those that came
from the Synagogue of Venice rising up, and putting aside with his hand a
Fathom and a half of Snout, that he might come the closer to the Ear of Rabbi
Saadias, whispered these words Rabbi, I smell a Rat in that word, be governed,
we must keep a sharp Eye upon these Fellows, for to me they look like famely
Pharaos and subtle encroachers. Saadias replied, Now at length I am convinced
they are the very Manna of instruction, for they taste as every one would have
them. The best way is to say little, and give them a bait in the Trap as to
Republican Mice. Christotheus seeing the numbling Dialogue, said to Philargiros
and Danipe. I smoke the Jealousy of the wicked Jews: Let every Man of the
Monopanti give himself a lick of the Golden Calf, and they will all fall upon
their Knees. They all run upon Snares and Contrivances against one another, and
Rabbi Saadias, to amuse the Monopanti, said, We look upon you as discoverers of
the Land of promise, and the true basis of our designs, that we may be united
in a mischievous body, it will be requisite we consult the methods, and
conclude and sign Articles at our next meeting, which we appoint three days
hence. Pacasmazo covering his Snake Skin with Doves Feathers, said, The time
was sufficient, and the resolution discreet; but that it was requisite, exact
secrecy should be observed. Then taking out a Book bound in Sheeps skin with
the Wool on, which was curiously interwoven and wrought with Gold Thread, he
gave it to Saadias, saying, This Jewel we give you as a Pledge. He took it, and
asked, Whose works are these? Pacasmazo answered, The works of our words. The
Author is Nicolas Matchiavel, who composed the thorough Base to our Trebel. The
Jews attentively looking upon them, and particularly observing the binding in
Sheeps skin; Rabbi Asapha, who was Deputy for Oran said, This is some of the
Wool the Spaniards tell us in their Proverb, which says, they that go to fetch
it are fleeced before they return. Thus they parted, both parties contriving to
meet again like the Steel and Flint for to batter, bruize, and beat one another
to pieces, till they struck fire against all the World, for founding the new
Sect of Monetism, changing the name of Atheists, into that of Moneymongers, or
Monetists.

The general Assembly of all Nations for redress of grievances.
The Subjects of Princes, Commonwealths, Kings and Emperors assembled together
at Liege, a Neuter Country, to consult about their Affairs, redress their
Grievances, vent their Spleen, and breath out their thoughts before stifled
under the fear of Sovereign Power. There were people of all Nations, Conditions
and Qualities. The number was so great it looked more like an Army than an
Assembly, for which reason they made choice of the open Fields to meet in. On
the one hand it was surprising to behold the wonderful variety of Garbs and
Countenances; on the other the Ears were Confounded, and Attention it self
deceived by the strange diversity of Languages. The voices seemed to rend the
Air, and resounded in the same manner, as when in the heat of harvest time, the
Fields ring with the indefatigable noise of Grasshoppers. The most piercing cry
was, that raised by the Women tearing their Throats with Actions altogether
distracted. All was full of tumultuous Madness, and raging Discord. The
Republicans would be governed by Princes, and the Subjects of Princes were for
erecting themselves into Commonwealths. This controversy set a Noble Savoyard
and a Commoner of Genoua together by the Ears. The Savoyard complained, That
his Duke was the perpetual motion, and consumed his Subjects with continual
Wars, to hear up his Dominions which are ever ready to sink betwixt France and
Spain. That his safety consisted in embroiling the two Kings at the Expense of
his Subjects; to the end, that they two being employed against one another,
neither of them might swallow him, since both those Princes alternatively,
first one and then the other Conquer and Defend him; all which the Subjects pay
for, being never allowed any respite to breath. When France attacks, Spain
supports him; and when Spain invades, France defends him; and whereas, neither
protects him for his sake, but to obstruct the others enlarging his Dominion by
that accession, and becoming a nearer and more formidable Neighbor, the
Defense is often as fatal, if not more to the Subjects, than the Invasion. The
Duke retains a secret ambition to be thought the Founder of the Liberty of
Itatly; bearing before him, the better to draw to his party the Sea of Rome.
The History of Amadee, surnamed the Pacifick, because some Persons impiously
Malicious, have suspected he designs to reduce the Pope to his bare stock of
Pardons in indulgences. The Duke is Disceased of the Distemper of King of
Cyprus, is perplexed with the remembrance of having been Lord of Geneva, and
grows sick with the desire of being Supreme among the Italian Princes. All
these motives are spurs to his Ambition, which rather stands in need of a Curb;
and for these Reasons, I come to propose, that Savoy and Piemont may be formed
into a Common wealth, where Justice and Wisdom Govern, and Liberty Reigns. What
Liberty Reigns? Quoth the Genoese, Damming himself to the pit of Hell. Thou art
certainly mad, and having never lived in a Commonwealth, do not know the
misery and slavery that attends it. All the Politics in the World will never
make us set our Horses together. I who am a Genoese, Born under that
Commonwealth, which by its nearness and the great contentions betwixt us is
well acquainted with you, am come to persuade your Duke, with the assistance of
us the Commons, to make himself King of Genoua; and if he accepts not of it, I
will go make the same offer to the King of Spain; and from him to the King of
France, and so from one to another till I find one that will take pity on us.
Tell me, thou ungrateful wretch, to the goodness of God toward you, in making
you the Subjects of a Prince: Have you ever considered how much easier it is to
obey one, than many met together in one room, but as divided in Manners,
Inclinations, Opinions and designs. Do not thou observe, Monster, that in
Commonwealths, the Government being Annual and Successive through several
Families, it is consequently under an awe, and Justice is not freely
distributed, for fear least those who shall Govern the next twelve Months or
three Years should revenge themselves on him that governed before? If a
Republican Senate consist of many it is all confusion; if of few, it only
serves to corrupt the security and excellency of Unity. Nor is this remedied by
the Duke, who either has no absolute Power, or lasts but for a time appointed.
If the Government be equally divided betwixt the Nobility and Commons, they
make up an Assembly of Dogs and Cats; For the one part proposes Snaping and
Barking, and the other answers, Scratching and Clawing. If they be Rich and
Poor, the Rich contemn the Poor, and the Poor envy the Rich. Consider now what
will be the issue of Envy and Contempt. If the Power rest in the Commons,
neither will the Nobles be able to endure them, nor they bear not being such.
Now if only the Nobility rules, I can compare the Subjects to nothing but the
Damned in Hell, and such are we the Commons of Genoa: Nay, could I say worse of
our condition, I should think this too little. Genoa has as many Commonwealths
as Nobles, and as many Slaves as Commons; and all these Commonwealths meet in
one Palace, only to reckon up our stock, that they may squeeze us either by
enhancing or abasing the value of money, and as if they were informers against
our estates, their continual study is to depress us into Poverty. They make use
of us like Sponges, sending us abroad into the World, that plunging in Trade,
we may suck Riches, and when they perceive us swollen with cash, they squeeze
us out for their own use. Tell me then, thou Cursed abominable Savoyard, what
it is you aim at by your Treachery, what can be your infernal design? Do not
you perceive that the Nobility and Commonalty transmit their Power to Kings and
Princes, in whom being removed from the Prince of the former, and lowness of
the latter it composes a supreme head, authorized by a Peaceful and
disinteressed Majesty, over which the Nobility dares not insult, and under
which the Commonalty does not groan. They had fallen soul of one another, had
not they been prevented by the muttering of a drove of Legislators, driven by a
Rabble of Women, who with open mouths confounded them, Shreiking, and threatened
to fall on with their Teeth. One of them of such Transcendent beauty that it
was increased by the hideousness of passion, which is an Affection that adds
Deformity even to the fierceness of Lions, delivered her self in these words.
Tyrants, for what reason have you alone made Laws against Women without their
consent, according to your own fancies, whereas they are an equal part of the
two wherein Human Government consists. You exclude us the Schools merely
through Envy, because we shall exceed you; and deny us the use of Arms for fear
you should be Conquered by our Anger, as you are already by our Smiles. You
have constituted our selves the Supreme Judges of Peace and War, and we suffer
under your extravagancies. Adultery in us is a crime punishable with Death, and
among you it is a mere Jest. You will have us be good, that you may be wicked,
and require us Chaste, that you may be Lewd. We have not a sense but what you
keep under hatches; you tie up our Feet, and Hoodwink our Eyes. If we look, you
say we are impudent; if others look on us we are dangerous. And thus under
color of Modesty you Condemn us to forfeit our Reason and Senses. It is your
Jealousy, you Scoundrels, not our own weakness, that often persuades us to act
that against you, for which you are most watchful over us. More are made wicked
by you, than would be so of themselves. If you senseless Rascals make your
selves the forbidden fruit to us, it follows of necessity, we shall all become
so many Eves against you. Very many are good when they are put into your hands,
and you force them to be wicked; and you receive none so wicked, but most of
you oblige them to be worse. All your Gravity consists in the wild hairiness of
your Faces; and he who thinks his Beard will make the bigest brush, thinks
himself the ablest Man; as if the strength of the Brain lay in long Bristles,
which rather look like a Tail than a Head. This is the day these grievances
must be redressed, either by allowing us a share in Learning and Government, or
by giving us a hearing, and doing us right against the Laws Established;
Enacting some more favorable for us, and repealing others that are prejudicial
to us. A Doctor whose beard hung in daglocks down to his Heels, seeing the
Women in a crowd and bent upon mischief, relying on his Eloquence, attempted to
appease them with these Words, It is not without much dread I undertake to
oppose your sentiments, considering Reason it self is often overcome by Beauty,
and Rhetoric is of no force compared with your Charms. However, tell me, what
law can you be entrusted with, since the first Woman proved her self such, by
breaking the Law of God. With what safety can weapons be put into your Hands,
since with an Apple, you struck to the ground all the generation of Adam, not
so much as those that were hid in the distance of futurity escaping? You say
all Laws are against you, this were truth, had you said, you were against all
Laws. What Power is there to compare to yours, for tho you do not judge
according to the Laws studying them, you judge the Laws by means of the Judges
corrupting them. If we make Laws, it is you that break them. If Judges govern
the World, and Women the Judges; it is the Women that govern the World, and
debauch them that govern it; for the Women they love are more prevalent with
many than the Laws they read. What the Devil said to the Woman took place with
Adam, of that God said to him. The influence of the Devil is great over Human
Hearts, if he speaks through the Mouth of one of you. Woman is a Rarity that
ought to be feared and loved, and it is very hard to fear and love the same
thing. He who loves only her, hates himself; and he who hates only her, hates
Nature. What Law is there which your Tears will not blot out, and what Equity
is of force against your Smiles? If we have Employments and Preferments, it is
you that spend the Profits in your Dresses. You have but one Precedent to
quote, which is your Beauty; When did you ever urge it that it did not take
place? Or, Whoever saw it that did not submit? If we suffer our selves to be
bribed, it is that we may bribe you. If we strain the Laws, and incline
Justice, it is for the most part because we advise with your Charms; you run
away with the Prize of the Villainies you command us to act, and we are left
with the Scandal of Corrupt Judges. You envy us our Military Employments,
whereas you are beholding to War for the happiness of being left Widows, and we
for being buried in Oblivion among the Dead. You complain that Adultery is a
Capital Crime in you, and not in us. Why you Charming White Devils, if one slip
of yours Dishonours Parents and Children, and stains a whole Generation, how
can you fancy Death too servere a Punishment? whereas the Honor of many
innocent Persons is infinitely valuable above the Life of a Criminal. But let
us judge by your Works how you value the Penalty. You cannot count the
Adulteries you are guilty of, because they are innumerable, and among us they
are so rare we have nothing to count. Death is a Punishment that deters others
from falling into the same Crime, but where does this appear by you? To
complain of our guarding you, is to complain that we value you, for no Man
takes pains to secure what he despises. By what I have said it appears you are
absolute Ladies of all things, all things are subject to you; you enjoy Peace,
and are the occasion of War. If you would aks that which many of you want, ask
for Moderation and Brains. Scarce was the Word Brains out of his Lips, when all
the Women together discharged their Fury upon the Wretched Doctor in the Storm
of Blows, Scatches, and Pinches, and so outrageously did they pull his Beard
and Hair, that they left him as smooth as if he had been new Shaved, and looked
more like an old Woman, than the Reverend Interpreter of the Law. They ahd
quite stifled him, but that a multitude of People came in hearing he Noise and
Outcries. Among them a French Monsieur, and an Italian Monseignor, had already
made known to one another their Displeasure by some good Bangs, and saluted
their Countenances with Cuffs, followed by Kicks and such like Familiarities.
The Frenchman fretted with Rage, and the Italian foamed with Anger. Italians
and Frenchmen flocked to them on all hands, the Germans interposed, and having
with much difficulty appeased them, asked the caused of their Strife. The
Frenchman gathering up with both Hands his Breeches, which in the Scruffle were
fallen over his Legs, answered: All Nations are met here this day, to redress
their Grievances, and I among the rest was discoursing with others of my
Countrymen concerning the miserable condition France is in at present, and how
the French are oppressed under the Tyranny of Cardinal Richlieu. I was laying
open with what art he pretends the Kings Service, at the same time he degrades
him. How he covers the Fox under the Purple Robe. How by Embroiling all
Christendom, he diverts all from looking into his Practices. How his Subtlety
makes a Property of his Princes Favor. And how he had put the Power of Sea and
Land, Governments, Preferments, Armies and Fleets, into the hands of his
Kindred and Confederates, defaming the Nobility, and raising the Unworthy. I
was putting my Countrymen in mind how the Marshall D'Ancre was hacked and
hewed in pieces, and called to their remembrance Monsieur de Luisnes, and how
yet our King cannot rid himself of Prime Ministers, showing how this last was
the only Friend to the other two, whose Reputation he established by blackning
his own. I was discovering to them, how of late years, Traitors have hit upon
the most pernicious Art that ever Hell invented, for perceiving that to usurp
Kingdoms is become Treason, and that he who attempts it is punished as a
Traitor, the better of secure themselves in their wicked Practices, they usurp
the Kings, calling themselves Favorites, and thus instead of being punished as
Traitors, they are adored as Kings of Kings. I was proposing, do now propose,
and will again propose in the general meeting, that for the perpetuating the
Succeession, establishing of Kingdoms, and extirpating this Sect of Traitors,
an inviolable and indispensible Law should be enacted, ordaining, That
whatsoever King of France shall subject himself to a Favorite, he and his
Heirs shall Ipso facto, forfeit their Title to the Crown, and their Subjects be
absolved from their Oath of Allegiance, for the Salique Law, which excludes
Femanes, does not prevent so manifest a danger as this that cuts off
Favorites. I added, that at the same time it should be ordained, That
whatsoever Subject under the Title presumed to usurp his King, should suffer an
infamous Death, and forfeit all the Estate and Honors be stood possessed of,
his Name for ever remaining scandalous and execrable. Now that distracted
Bergamasco never considering what was said by me, who never so much as once
thought of the Nepotes of Rome, called me Heretic, saying, that in detesting
Favorites I detested the Nepotes, for that Favorite and Nepos ^re two Names,
yet but one and the same thing; and tho I had not spoke a Word tending to that
mad Notion, he attacked me as you all beheld. The Germans with the rest of the
Spectators were surprised and amazed. With much difficulty the directed each to
his Post, and dispose the Multitude into a silent Auditory to hear the
Propositions which were to be made in the Name of them all by a ruddy Lawer who
had set them all a madding, and put into their Heads such wild and extravagant
Demands. Two Trumpets gave the signal for silence, when he standing upon an
eminent place in the midst of the Multitude, which swarmed about, delivered
himself in this manner. The thing we all aim at is the general Liberty of all,
to be purchased by contriving how we may be subject to Justice not to Violence;
That Reason may govern us, and not the absolute Power of the Will; That we may
belong to those who Inherit, not to them that Ravish us; That we may be the
Care of Princes, not their Merchandise; and in Commonwealths, Companions not
Slaves, Limbs not Lumber, Bodies and not Shadows. That the Rich Man hinder not
the Poor from growing Rich, nor the Poor grow Rich by plundering the Wealthy.
That the Nobleman despise not the Commoner, nor the Commoner hate the Nobleman.
And that the whole Care of the Government be employed in encouraging the Poor
to grow Rich, and Honoring the Virtuous, and in preventing the contrary. Care
must be taken that no one Man become greater and more powerful than all the
rest, for he who excels all others destroys equality, and they that suffer him
to exceed encourage him to conspire. Equality is the Harmony in which consists
the Music of the Commonwealths Peace, for when disturbed by any Excess it
becomes Discord, and that before was Consort becomes Noise. Commonwealths are
to be so united with Kings, as the Earth (which represents the former) is with
the Sea (representing the latter;) These always embrace one another, yet so as
the Earth always defends it self against the encroachment of the Sea by its
Banks, the Sea always threatens the Earth, wears and endeavors to overflow and
swallow it up, and the Earth ever fixed and unmoved opposes the perpetual
motion and inconstancy of the Sea. The Sea swells with every Wind, every Blast
makes the Earth fruitful. The Sea grows rich with what the Earth commits to it,
and the Earth with Hooks and Nets drains and depopulates the Sea. Even as all
the Security and Shelter against the Sea is in the Land, which furnishes
Harbors, so Commonwealths are a Refuge against the Revolutions and Storms of
Kingdoms. Commonwealths ought always to make War with their Heads, seldom with
their Hands, they must have Armies and Fleets ready in the greatness of their
Stock, which is the Celerity that lays hold of all Opportunities. They are to
make War upon Kings by setting them one against another, for Monarchs, tho they
be Fathers, Sons, Brothers, and Relations, are like Steel and the File, which
tho not only near Allied, but the same Substance and Metal, yet the File
always cuts and wears away the Iron. Commonwealths are to assist rash Princes
so far as may serve to overthrow them, and the more cautious far enough to make
them rash. It is their best Policy to Honor Trade, because it enriches and
carries Men throughout the World, gaining them Practical Experience, by which
they discover the Ports, Customs, Government, Strength and Designs of their
Neighbors. The Study of Politic and Mathematics ought to be encouraged as
advantageous to the Public, and nothing ought to be so much contemned as
Idleness, tho under never so specious a Title, or Riches devoted to Luxury. All
Public Sports shall consist of the Exercise of Fire-armes, and handling of
other Weapons, as is used in Battle, that they may be at once Useful and
Diverting; at the same time Sports and Exercises, and then will it be decent to
frequent the Theaters, when they are Academies. All Formality of Garb is to be
absolutely condemned, and all the distinction betwixt the Rich Man and the Poor
must be, that the former extend Relief, and the latter receive it; and Virtue
and Valor shall make the difference betwixt the Nobleman and Commoner, for
those Virtues were the foundation of all ancient Nobility. I will here drop a
few words out of Plato, let him that has need of them gather them up, for I
don't know to what purpose I bring them, but some body or other perhaps may
know to what purpose he spoke them in the 3d Dialogue, De repub. vel de Justo.
They are these. Igitur rempublicam administrantibus praecipue, si quibus aliis
mentiri licet, vel hostium, vel civium causa in communem civitatis utilitatem,
reliquis autem a mendacio abstinendum est. If it be lawful to any to Lie, it is
chiefly allowable to them who govern the Commonwealth, either on account of the
Enemies, or Citizens for the common advantage of the City, all others are to
abstain from Lying. I cannot but reflect, that whereas the Catholic Church
condemns this Doctrine of Plato's Commonwealth, yet there are many that value
themselves upon being his Commonwealth. Let us now come to what is proposed by
the Subjects of Kings. These complain, that they are all become Elective,
because those who are and continue Hereditary, elect Favorites, who become
Kings by their Election. This is that enrages them, because the French tell us
that Princes, who for the better government of their Kingdoms wholly give
themselves up to their Favorites, are like Galley Slaves who travel by force,
turning their Backs to the Port they go to; and that the Favorites are like
Juglers, who the more they deceive the more they ent^rtain, and the better they
conceal their slight from the Eyes, and baffle the Senses and Understanding,
the more they are valued and praised by him that pays for their Tricks to
divert himself. Their chief Art consists in making him believe that is full
which is empty, that there is something where there is nothing, that those are
Wounds in others which are but Bruises in his Armor, and that they throw away
what they hide with their Hand. They say they give him Money, and when he looks
upon it he finds Dirt or Rubbish. These Companions are vile, but these Men make
use of them for want of better, and so they affirm those Kings are equally to
blame who will not be what the great God made them, and those who would be what
he made them not. They presume to say, that an absolute Favorite brings upon
Kings the same that Death does upon Man, (i. e.) Novam formam cadaveris. A new
Form of a Carcass, to which follows Worms and Corruption, according to the
Opinion of Aristotle, in his Prince. Fit resolutio usque ad materiam primam,
that is, there remains nothing of what was, but the bare resemblance. So much
for this Point. Next let us go upon the Complaints against Tyrants, and the
reason there is for them. For my own part I know not who I speak of, or who I
speak not of, whoever understands me may explain me. Aristole says, He is a
Tyrant who has more regard to his private Interest than to the Public.
Whosoever can tell Tale or Tidings of any who are not comprehended under this
definition, may give an account of them, and they shall be well rewarded. They
complain more grievously against Tyrants who receive benefits of them, than
they that are oppressed by them; for the Benefits of Tyrants make Men Criminals
and Accomplices, and their Severity proves them Virtuous and Deserving. They
are of such a Nature, that Innocence in their Dominions must he miserable that
it may be happy. A Tyrant in respect of his Covetousness and Avarice is a Wild
Beast, in respect of his Pride a Devil, and in respect of his Riotousness and
Luxury all manner of Wild Beasts and Devils. No body conspires against a Tyrant
sooner than himself; whence it follows, it is easier to kill a Tyrant than to
endure him. The favor of a Tyrant is ever fatal, the greatest good he does him
he favors most, is to delay doing him harm. Polyphemus in Homer is the Emblem
of Tyrants. He favored Ulysses, discoursing with him, and enquiring into his
Merits, he heard his Entreaties, saw his Distress, and all the Kindness he
offered him was, that after eating all his Companions he would devour him last.
Let no Man hope more favor from a Tyrant that devours those under his power,
than to be the last eaten; and it is to be observed, that tho the Tyrant grants
it as a favor, he that is to be eaten takes the delay for an addition of
Cruelty. He that is to devour you after all the rest, begins to eat you in all
those he eats before you. The longer he delays feeding on you, the longer you
have to lament you shall become his Food. Ulysses was preserved by the Giant as
Sustenance, not as a Guest. To keep him in his Den in order to transfer him to
his Stomach, was more like burying him alive than entertaining him. Ulysses put
him to sleep with excess of Wine. The Bane of Tyrants is sleep. You that are
subject to them cast them into a sleep, harden your Spikes at the Fire, put out
their Eyes, for that done it was no body did what every one desired should be
done. The Tyrant Polyphemus cried, Nobody had blinded him, because Ulysses with
wonderful sagacity had told him his Name was Nobody. He named him with desire
of revenge, and defended him by the double meaning of the Word. Tyrants
themselves excuse those that kill them, or put out their Eyes. Ulysses made his
escape disguised with a Sheeps Skin among the Sheep he kept. That which a
Tyrant most carefully preserves, preserves his destroyer against him. Having
premised thus much, it remains to tell you, that we Subjects are met here this
day to consult how we may defend our selves against the Arbitrary Power of
those who either mediate, or immediately govern kingdoms and Commonwealths* The
chief Heads I have to offer to this purpose are these. That all Counselors be
fixed for ever in their Posts, without hoping to rise a step higher, because
there is no room for Application or Justice, where a Man has one Charge and
aims at another, and the Ambition of ascending to another more eminent
Employment makes him look upon himself as a Passenger not a Resident, so that
his Charge serves only to purchase, that he aspires to, and being thus,
distracted he attends neither, not that he has, because he designs to leave it,
nor that he desires because as yet he has it not. Every Man is useful in that
Post where he has gained Experience; and troublesome where he learns the first
Rudiments, because they remove from Business they were versed in, to that they
do not understand. What Honors are conferred on them must still be such as are
proper to their Profession, not mixing Civil and Military, lest the Sword and
the Gown render the Habit disagreeable, for the Gown is cumbersom to the Sword,
and the Sword disdains to be hid under the Gown. The next thing is, that
Rewards be indispensable, that is, not only that they be not bestowed on the
unworthy, but that they be not permitted to pretend to them, for if the Reward
of Virtue be exhausted on Vice, the Prince or Commonwealth will be robbed of
their greatest Treasure, and the Metal of which the Recompense consists will
become base and contemptible. Neither the Deserving nor Undeserving must expect
it, the former because it must be immediately given him, the latter because he
must never have it. Gold and Diamonds were better employed in making Fetters to
secure Criminals, than in Military and Honorable Ensigns bestowed on Vagabonds
and Vicious Persons. This Doctrine was well received among the Romans, who with
a Branch of Laurel or Oak rewarded more Wounds, and Victories over Cities,
Provinces and Kingdoms, than it bore Leaves. Let only the Brave and Experienced
be admitted to Counsels of State and War; let the Blood they have spilt and
their Qualifications, not the Pride of long Genealogies, be their
Recommendation. The Brave and Fortunate are to be preferred to Military
Employments. To be Fortunate as well as Valiant is a great addition. Lucan
gives this advice,

-- Fatis accede, Deisque,
Et cole felices, miseros fuge.
I have always read these Words with delight, and this admirable Poet (let who
will deny it) with attention as preferable to all but Homer for Politics and
Military Sense. The Courts of Justice are to be filled with Learned and
Disinterested Persons. He who is not Covetous, is subservient to no Vice,
because Vices induce the Interest for which they are sold. Let them know the
Laws, but not more than the Laws. Let them cause them to be obeyed, not make
them obedient to their Wills. This is the very Touchstone of Judgment. I have
said, you may now say what occurs, and propose the most convenient and
practicable Redress against your Grievances. He ceased, and the Auditors being
a multitude of several Nations and Languages, there ensued such a confused
buzzing of unintelligible Jargons, that it sounded as if the whole Clack of the
Tower of Babel had been turned loose in that place. They understood not
themselves, nor one another. All was filled with Contention and Discord, and by
their Looks and Actions they appeared like an Assembly of People Distracted, or
Possessed. Then the Congregation of Shepherds, to whom the Sheepskins bound about
with Slings are rather a reproach than a defense against the Weather, said.
They must be heard immediately before any others, because their Sheep had
rebelled, saying, that they had kept them from the Wolves who eat them by one
at a time, to the end they themselves might shear, flea, kill, and sell them
all at at once. And that since the Wolves at most devoured, one, two, ten, or
twenty, their design was, that the Wolves should guard them against the
Shepherds, not the Shepherds against the Wolves. That they looked upon the
Hunger of their Enemies as less prejudicial to them, than the Avarice of their
Guardians, and had brought the Shepherds Dogs as Evidence against them. There
was not one Soul but said, We guess what they would be at, the Sheep are no
Fools if they bring this to pass. At this stand they were when the Hour
affected them, and being all enraged, some cried, We are for the Wolves;
Others, They are all Wolves; Others, It is all the same thing; Others, They are
all bad; and many others contradicted them. The Lawyers perceiving them ready
to fall to Loggerheads, in order to appease them said. It was a Case that
required mature Deliberation, therefore advised to defer it till the next day,
and to have recourse to the Churches to implore a Blessing on their Debates.
The Frenchmen hearing that Word, cried out, If there must be recourse to the
Churches we are undone, and we fear the same should befall us as did the Owl
when she was sick. She advising about her Distemper with the Fox, whom she
judged the most skilful among the Beasts, and also with the Rook whom she took
for a Physician because she often saw him upon Carrion Mules, they told her
there was no remedy for her but to repair to the Temples, The Owl hearing their
Opinion answered, Then my Case is desperate if the remedy is only to be found
in those Holy Places, for I have left them all in the dark, sucking the Oil out
of the Lamps, and there is not an Idol that I have not bewrayed. The Italian
hearing this Discourse, with all his might cried out. The Comparison is allowed
you, and we make bold to put you and all such as feed upon the Church in mind
of what Homer relates of the Mice, when they fought with the Frogs, for then
they having recourse to the Gods for their assistance, all the Deities excused
themselves, some saying they had gnawed their Hands, others their Feet, others
their Garments, others their Crowns, and others the Tips of their Noses, so
that there was none but missed some part of his Image, and bore the marks of
their Teeth. Apply this Fable you Calvinist, Lutheran, and Huguenot Mice, and
then consider who is there in Heaven to relieve you. Good God, what a hideous
Tumult and Hurlibury the Monsieurs raised against the poor Italian, the
Confusion of Hell is nothing compared to it. The whole Multitude ran great
danger in endeavoring to pacify them. At length with held but no silence,
they all parted, all complaining of what they endured, and every one raving,
that he might change his Condition with another.

The Hour expires, Jove stops further Proceedings.
As these things were in agitation upon Earth, and the Gods attentively looking
on, the Sun said. The Hour is now at the last gasp, and the Shade of the Gnomon
will in a trice touch the Number Five. Great Father of all, do thou determine
whether Fortune shall proceed before the Hour expire, or else wheel and roll
back as she used to do. Jove answered, I have observed, that during this Hour
which gave to every Man what he deserved, those who because they were poor and
despicable, were also humble, are become proud and intolerable; and those who
being rich and respected were consequently vicious, perverse, arrogant, and
wicked, seeing themselves poor and abject, are become penitent, bashful, and
pious, so that the consequence is, that those who were good Men are become
Knaves, and the Knaves good Men. This little time may suffice to satisfy the
Complaints of Mortals, who seldom know what they ask of us, for such is their
frailty, that he who does ill when he can, forbears when he can do it no
longer, and this is not repentance, but a forced refraining from wickedness.
Oppression and Misery curb, but do not correct them. Honor and Prosperity make
them act, that which if they had sooner attained them they would always have
acted. Let Fortune direct her Wheel and Globe in their former course, and cause
Merits in the Wise, and Punishment to the Senseless, wherein our infallible
Providence and Divine Presence shall always be assisting to her. Let all Men
receive what she distributes, that is, either Frowns or Smiles, since neither
are bad in themselves, for patiently enduring the former, and magnanimously
contemning the latter, they both become equally advantageous. And let him that
receives and makes his misfortune of what he takes to himself, complain of
himself, and not of Fortune, who gives to all indifferently and without favor
or affection. We permit Fortune to complain against Men, who making a wrong use
of their Prosperity or Adversity, defame and curse her.

Fortune restores her Wheel to its former motion.
At this time it struck Five, And the Hour of all Men was at an end. Then
Fortune well pleased with what Jove had said, changing Hands, began again to
ravel up the Cares of the World, and unwind what was wound backwards, which
done fixing her Globe on the Regions of the Air, she slid down as if it had
been upon Ice, till she found her self upon Earth.

The Gods take leave, and break up the Assembly.
Vulcan, that Blacksmith God who keeps time with his Hammer, cried, It is
hungry Weather, and I being in haste to obey, left two Ropes of Garlic a
roasting at my Forge, to break my fast with the Cyclops. All-ruling Jove
ordered Meat to be brought, and immediately there appeared Iris (Chambermaid to
Juno) with Nectar, and Ganimede with a Platter of Ambrosia. Juno, who spyed him
by her Husbands side, and had more mind to suck his Blood than to swill the
Heavenly Liquor, spitting Fire, and hissing like an Adder when his Tail had
been trod, said, Either this Bardash or I must reign in Olympus, or else I will
sue for a Divorce in Hymen's Court. Had not the Eagle the Rogue bestrided slunk
away with him, she had made Hawks Meat of him with her Nails. Jove began to
blow his Thunderbolt, and she said, I will snatch it from you, to destroy that
Sodomite Page. Minerva, the Product of Jupiters Noddle, who, had he been a
Blockhead, could never have been born, with fair Words soothed Juno enraged
with the sight of her Husbands Vile Cup bearer. But Venus in a sum heightened
her Jealousy, scolding like a Butter-whore, and rated Jove as if he had been a
Chimney-sweeper. Then Mercury letting loose his Clack, said, All would do well,
and therefore desired them not to disturb the Heavenly Banquet. Mars seeing the
Ambrosia handed about in China Dishes, like a roaring Bully Deity cried out;
Dam your Coffee-Dishes, let the Moon and other Petty Goddesses drink out of
them. Then mixing Bacchus and Neptune, he swallowed down both the Gods at two
or three pulls, and laying hold of Pan he sliced him out, and cutting up his
Flocks of Sheep, devoured them by Wholesale. Saturn stayed his Stomach with
half a dozen Children. Mercury, like a true Spunger, stuck close to Venus, who
was cramming her Chops with Biscuits and Sugar Plums. Pluto drew out of his
Snapsack some Griskins, Proserpine had provided for his Journey; Vulcan, who
stood gaping, perceiving it, came limping toward him, and courteously
intruding himself with much Ceremony, began to lay on and swallow. The Sun, who
is the Father of Jollity, pulling out his Lute, sung a Hymn in praise of
Jupiter, running division without end. Venus and Mars being offended at the
gravity of the Tune, and seriousness of the Words, he to the harmony of a pair
of Tongs roared out a Bawdy Song, and she rattling a pair of overgrown
Castinets, danced a Jig as if she would have skipp'd over the Heavens, and
shaken her self to Attoms, tickling with her wanton motions the Hearts of all
the Gods. Her Dance set them all into such an itching, that they could not hold
their Hands or Feet still. Jove, whose Mouth watered at the lend Motions of the
Goddess, said; This is a Farewell to Ganimede, and no Quarrel. He gave them
Leave, and they being all full and satisfied, slunk away, crying, The Devil
take the hindmost; and the lot fell to the Eagle-striding Cup Bearer.

FINIS.

