His Majesty's Declaration from Breda, April 14. 1660.
-- We do declare a Liberty to tender Consciences; and that no Man shall be
disquieted, or called in question for Differences of Opinion in Matters of
Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom; And that We shall be
ready to Consent to such an Act of Parliament, as upon mature Deliberation
shall be offered to Us for the full granting that Indulgence.

House of Commons, Jan. 10. 1680.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, That the Prosecution of
Protestant Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, is at this time grievous to the
Subject, a weakening the Protestant Interest, an encouragement to Popery, and
dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom.

THE Conformist's second Plea FOR THE Nonconformists.

WHEREIN The Case of the Non-Conformists is further stated; and the Suspension
of the Penal Laws against them, humbly moved with all due submission to the
Magistrate.

By a Charitable and Compassionate Conformist: Author of the former PLEA.

Sed neque Imperiale est Libertatem dicendi denegare, neque Sacerdotale quod
sentiat non dicere. S. Ambros. ad Theodos. Ep. 29. -- There has been left, for
any thing I find to the contrary, in all well-governed Polities, a kind of
latitude more or less, and power in the Magistrates, even in those Courts that
were Strictissimi Juris, upon fit occasion to qualify and mitigate something
the Rigor of the Laws by the Rules of Equity. Bp Sanderson's Sermons, 1 Vol. p.
112. Ad Magistratum.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

To all that are entrusted with the Administration of Justice, and Conservation
of the Peace, by what Title soever they are honored; The Charitable and
Compassionate Conformist, does most humbly present these Papers.
Noble and Worshipful;
NO Cause can come before you, wherein you are so nearly concerned, as you are
sincere Protestants, than in this of the Dissenting Protestants, because your
Religion is touched and concerned in it; you cannot hurt that in any sound part
of the Professors of it, tho in a few things differing from you, but very
sensibly, one of you must be affected with it; and what you do to them, you do
to your selves, and your own Religion, except you account Life, and Soul, and
Body, to be nothing without Formalties. As you are Gentlemen of noble Birth and
Education, and as Persons of Estates, and of Hospitality, of Wisdom, Justice,
and Experience, you are most obliged with all Skill, Judgment, Tenderness,
Mercy and Impartiality to give your selves true Information, in the state and
deserts of this great Matter; and so to proceed with them, as showing a Copy of
those Characters of Virtue, impressed upon your Spirits in your Proceedings
with them. As Gentlemen by Birth and Blood, your Extraction derives to you the
most amiable Qualities, and purest Endowments of human Nature; this Extract of
noble Nature sublimated by ingenuous (much more by pious and christian)
Education, must needs dispose you to a nobler kind of Behavior, and a greater
Benignity, than inferior Persons of a courser and more mixed Metal. A truly
virtuous Gentleman, comes nearest to the true gracious Christian: but when the
true Gentleman is become a true Christian, then even Enemies and Offenders, may
expect much more than Humanity from him. You are not troubled with Parricides,
Murderers, and Robbers, not with obstinate Heretics, nor with perjured
Persons, (but such as fear an Oath) nor traitorous equivocating Jesuits, when
the Nonconformists are brought before you, but with Men of an ingenuous
Education, and what they want of a noble Birth, they have made up in the better
sort of natural Endowments, improved by liberal Education, advanced by Grace,
and preferred to be the Ministers of God, and therefore in a sort your Equals,
as in other respects your Inferiors, and therefore worthy to be treated with a
due respect. They may expect from you the highest Civility, patient hearing,
the calmest Arguing, Courtesy and Condescension, and an extreme unwillingness
to act nigh to a Rigor. You should sooner from a Generosity proper to your
Degree, give them what they want, than take from them the little which they
have; and be as much troubled to send them to a Prison, as to be sent into one
your selves. He that can easily be severe, or cruel, has put off Humanity, and
does act with great Negligence and Forgetfulness, and is so far unfit to act.
If a Man be a Prisoner of War, at the Mercy of a Gentleman, the Gentleman
considering what he is himself, acts like himself, and uses him as a
distressed Friend, that was but a while before an open Enemy. The
Nonconformists for whom I plead, are your own, if you please (...) think them
so, and you may with as much ease, and more honor, with less troub^^ and more
safety, and comfort, make them your own, than disown, and use them as tho they
were your Enemies. As Ministers, they have chosen a Calling which the Prince of
Darkness hates, and persecutes; they need your Countenance and Succor, against
the Powers of Darkness; their business in the World, is rightly to inform, to
better and save the World; they deserve your Assistance and Prayers for
success. Had they chosen a secular way of Life, they might with the same
Education and Parts, have filled and adorned other Seats as well as the Pulpit;
had they all turned Physicians, Lawyers, Statesmen, as some have done, or to
other Trades and Arts, they might have had a greater Plenty, without
disturbance, Dangers, Losses, or Indignities: But shall all these Miseries and
Afflictions come upon them, First, Because they cannot change and desert their
Calling? Next, because they cannot be idle or unprofitable in it? Consider, and
compare them dishonored and afflicted, with your honored selves: Are you
Christians? so are they; are you Scholars? so are they: are you Gentlemen? they
come not far behind you; are you Protestant Magistrates? they are Protestant
Ministers: The difference between you is, you are in Power, and they are out of
Favor: I will not so far dishonor you, as to compare you with those infamous,
broken, ravenous, vile sort of Men, that witness against them. If I may not be
pardoned those Epithets, I will prove that, and much more, of many of them. But
noble Sirs, how much beneath you is it, as Men of Honor, to give Countenance
to many of such, as are not fit to come within your Doors, except to receive
Justice from you, against any that have the unstained repute of honest Men,
only because they are Preachers of our same common Faith. But noble Gentlemen,
let me compare the Informers, and them against whom they witness (and for whom
I plead;) the one is a Teacher of the way of Life, the other is ignorant, or
walks in the way of Darkness; the one makes Conscience of an Oath, and of his
Word, but the other knows not what an Oath is, and fears not to be forsworn (I
say nothing in this Opposition Oratorically, but truly and upon Proof) the one
studies, knows, and performs his Duty to God, and his King, and to all Men
according to his Knowledge; the other knows neither, and makes no Conscience (in
appearance) of either: he is for the King and you, but as he is for the Devil,
for what he can get by his Service; he is ungodly and profane, a daily
Transgressor of the King's Laws, as well as God's; and more than one have been
cut off by the Sword of Justice, having first been rejected by all honest Men;
the one lives a poor contented Life, praying for his King, and for all orders
of Men, and praising God, fares hard, and goes meanly, whilst the other runs in
debt, cheats his Creditors, swears and damns, and robs on the Highway, or
breaks open Houses. In a word, the one walks in the way of Godliness and
Honesty, and labors to draw others with him; the other neither goes in
himself, nor suffers others to enter that would. And behold, and be astonished
ye Heavens at this! the one is in danger of losing all he has, and suffering
because he has no more to lose, for laboring to save Souls; and the other
hopes to be rewarded with a third part of many of his Neighbors Goods. A surer
way it is to turn Informer, than play the Thief, or cheat his Creditors; but
all has not done their Work: the end of many has been according to their
Work! All this is spoken of some of them. You are Gentlemen of Estates, and
cannot think that the ruin of thousands of Traders, Farmers, Tenants, yea the
impoverishing of many of good Condition, can be a Service to the Commonwealth.
If you do not suffer an immediate Loss, yet hundreds will, and what is a Loss
to so great a part, will be an impairing of the whole. That great Statesman,
Sir Walter Rawleigh, in the Parliament 35th of Elizab. spoke these Words:
Historic. Collect. etc. of the 4 last Parliaments of Q. Eliz. p. 76. by Mr.
Townshend.
I am afraid there is near 20000 of them ( the Brownists) in England, and when
they are gone, who shall maintain their Wives and Children? Had there been but
20000 Dissenters in England, they had been rooted out before now, if some had
prevailed! But who shall maintain a far greater number of Wives and Children,
when their Husbands and Parents are undone by the Penal Laws? And who will get
by it? not the King; his third part, if come into his Exchequer, will not
countervail the loss of his Subjects. What have the Poor got this many Years?
or what have they got, that could neither keep, nor get, nor pay their Debts,
before they took to Informing?

As many of you as are Gentlemen of Hospitality, relieve many poor at your
Doors, or other-where; can you think it a Charity to relieve Beggars? and issue
Warrants to make many Beggars; that either cannot dig, or beg, or that keep
many to their Labors, that else would beg? that bear their Burdens in the
Commonwealth, and are no burden to it!

Your Place and Office requires Wisdom. And I may be bold to say, That the
Renowned Sir Matthew Hale, was as wise, as strict, as just, as able a Lawyer as
the ablest of you all that keep the Chair; it is no disparagement of the
learnedest and gravest of you all, to take him for an Example, See his Life, by
Dr. Gilbert Burnet.
whose Moderation toward Dissenters is a part of his noble Character; you have
known what has been the concurring sense of all our Parliaments since 1672.

If none of these shall be your Precedents, I beseech you be pleased to
consider, it is your Wisdom to understand the Duty of your Places, and the
Matters that are brought before you; especially in Cases that concern the
Liberties, Livelihoods, and Estates of many thousands in the Land. I humbly
conceive you cannot with a clear Conscience, proceed against the Dissenters,
except you understand, 1. The matters for which they suffer, and that you may
see in several Writings. 2. Attend to the scope and reasons of the Acts, upon
which you proceed. 3. Distinguish between Preacher and Preacher, between the
sound and the unsound; and other Circumstances, and choose rather to give up
your Commissions, than to act against God, and your Conscience, by punishing
Well-doing, as if it were Evil doing. That Preaching and Praying which tends to
Men's Salvation, and to no evil end; either to the King, or his Government,
cannot be punished safely, without being accessory to the evil Intentions of
those designing Men, who were the Politic Promoters of those Laws, nor without
great obstruction of true Godliness, and of a most desirable Union among
Protestants. 4. You ought not to act like mere Machines, or irrational
Instruments; If so, the Weak and the Rash, that can but write their Names to a
Warrant, or a Mittimus, might be as fit as you, for your Offices: but as Men of
Understanding, Wisdom, Conscience and Religion; and if the Laws are hard, and
too severe for mere Nonconformity, be Intercessors with the King and
Parliament, for his Subjects, and your fellow Christians.

As Just Men; Try the fitness of the Witnesses, whether they are Boni and
Legales: Punish not Religious Assemblies of peaceable Men, under the odious
names of Routs and Riots; and let not the sound, profiatble, and peaceable
Preachers, be ruined with a measure of Punishment, only due to the turbulent
and rebellious. And if by many Years Experience, you find no Sedition or
Disturbance to the Kingdom, only to the minds of some that are too
controversially disposed to Passion and Contention, or if you find it only to
be a Schism, a Church-matter, leave it to the Churchmen to judge it according
to their Law. If you maintain the Civil Peace, you are happy Instruments in the
Government, and what more is required of you?

Noble and honored Gentlemen, I do not presume to dedicate this as to Patrons,
but humbly offer and submit the Reason and Argument to your Consideration, and
suggest two things. 1. If we believe a Catholic Church, of the same Faith, in
different Forms and Modes, why shall not our Fellow Subjects and Natives,
professing that Faith in a different Form, share in your Charity, as parts of
the Catholic Church? To love them, as Christians of the Catholic Church, and
of the same Faith, with our National Church in all things; and yet punish them
that preach Catholic Doctrine, and observe all the Ordinances of the Catholic
Church, is an odd kind of Love and Charity. 2. If there be any among us that
are holy, sanctified Preachers, and Hearers, they shall be saved in the last
day: You know the Process of that great day of Judgment, for what Causes the
unrighteous shall be condemned: -- I was naked, and ye clothed me not; in
Prison, and ye visited me not.: Mat. 35.43. O how will it agree with this, to
say, I was in Power, and I execated the Laws, to distress of Goods, and
Imprisoment, to Banishment, to Abjuration? How will it sound in that Day, I was
in Prison, and ye committed me; I was banished, and ye banished me; I was
impoverished, and ye impoverished me; what ye did to the Preachers whom I sent,
yet did to me: -- When you shall be judged, what will you plead, or how can you
pray, Thy Kingdom come, and obstruct the coming of it, to any People in any
place in the Land? If there be nothing in what I humbly offer, reject it? if
there be any Conviction in any thing, be pleased to consider of it.

Philagathus.

THE Conformist's second Plea FOR THE NON-CONFORMISTS.
IT must be confessed that there is some turpitude in all Apologies, either
imputed or committed. To Preface a Book with an Apology, when the matter is
good, is to put a foul face upon a good matter; but then, it is a foul face
only in some Men's Eyes, which are diseased, and will appear, if not beautiful,
yet tolerably handsome, to the eye of them, that look for nothing perfect and
free from humane frailty, and that make daily use of a Towel, and fair Water
themselves. Plead for my self I must, and I shall make some requests with my
Pleas, that so if I may not come off without guilt and blame, I may come off
with my Pardon.

I did not think the Reverend Non-Conformists so few or weak, as to need an
Advocate, in some things, of another Judgment, and so far, of the other side;
for as they are most sensible of their own condition, so they can both
rationally, and pathetically, open and plead their own Cause, and in my mind,
they have said a great deal to purpose, if after all, it will be to purpose. I
am sure had I been one of them, I could not have said for them, what they have
done. But knowing how ill they are represented, I was resolved in what I could
to do them right, and therein to express my Compassion, proportionable to my
Religion, which as such, is not confined, but Catholic: and if my Charity and
Compassion must extend to all, that call on the Name of the Lord Jesus, I am
certain I must show it to them, whom I take to be sound in Faith and Worship,
and whom I have known, and heard, and by whose Works I may profit, if I have
not. My request to them is, that they would believe there are many in the
Church of England, that wish an Union, they with us, and we with them, and it
must needs be so in all them that are animated by the same Holy-Spirit of
Truth, Faith, and Love. I do also beg their pardon, that I have pleaded for
them with no more Life and Strength.

I do understand and I easily believe, that many of the Reverend Conforming
Churchmen are offended, that a Conformist should plead for the
Non-Conformists: It has seemed to some almost incredible, and to look like a
Cheat, or a Jesuit in Masquerade. I am glad I am not to be tried by Judges of
that Complexion, by whom I am condemned at the very first sight of the Title
Page, and that it has found Approbation from them, whom I take to be of a
better Temper.

Before I plead, I do humbly beg their Pardon and Excuse, who have been
dishonored by the Suspicion of being the Authors of the Plea for the
Non-Conformists, by my concealment of my Name. It has been a greater Honor to
me, than I ever expected or thought of, that it has passed under some very
Reverend Names; but it is a Dishonor to them, to be counted the Fathers of
such a Birth, which represents neither their Strength nor Statures, neither
Feature nor Speech. These worthy Men may vindicate themselves with one
Negative, but I cannot undeceive the Inquirers without running upon
considerable Trouble and Temptations. I perceive the Injury is so common, that
I cannot without a greater, distrust their Pardoning Ingenuity. --

Having said this, I next put in my Apology. That Book was fitly called the
Conformists Plea, because it becomes the Conformist to read and weigh the Case;
and having done so, to be righteous and compassionare, to be a good Instrument
between his Mother and his Brethren at such a time, when ill Agents pass
between them; and because the greatest Authorities he has used, have been
eminent Fathers or Sons of the Church of England. Why should it seem strange to
any Man, in such an Age as this, when many that seem Enemies to Popery, yet
plead for Papists? Why should it seem strange, that one should labor to
prepare the Hearts of Men of the same Faith to meet, or to receive Dissenting
Protestants into Church Communion with them, by opening the hardness of their
Case, the Worthiness of their Persons, and of their Ministerial Abilities,
Soundness of their Faith, Exemplary Morals, peaceable Demeanor, etc. Why
should it offend any Man, that I should open their Case, and testify for them,
when we all, that have any sense, bewail our Divisions, and from thence
foretell our Destruction, and profess a desire of Union, tho upon different
Terms? How many in the Land do declaim against their Principles and Practices,
and are ready to raise a Wind, if it were in their Power, to carry them away,
that know neither the Men, nor their declared Principles! Is it not necessary,
first to remove Prejudices, and next, to beget good Thoughts of them, in all
that through unacquaintance with them, or Disaffection toward them, before
ever we can either desire, or admit an Union with them? It is a good
preparation for an entire, affectionate Closure to show how near they come to
us, what Abatements other great and excellent Men would have made, had they had
the management of Church Affairs in our Days, and what Concessions they
formerly thought fit to make; and more especally in a time when the great
Counselors and Trustees of our Peace and Liberties, have unanimously voted
for a Legal Union, or that which is to some a hateful Word, Comprehension. It
is most unlike a Minister of Christ, and a Member of a Christian Reformed
Church, to kick and spurn at Protestant Brethren, that would gladly come into
the Arms of a Legal Constitution, upon no other terms and by no other ways,
than such as Wisdom shall find out, and the Government resolve upon, for the
Honor of Christ and his Religion, and the safety of the Church. In vain do we
use the names of Unity and Peace, and Uniformity, and yet at the same time, in
the same Discourses, revile and bear false witness against our Brethren. To
commend Peace and dislike fair Proposals, is flatly to hate Peace; to commend
Peace, and with Tongues and Pens to persecute them with whom the Peace is to be
made, is a Method for Peace which I never learned. To invite Men to my House,
and keep the Doors shut, as against Thieves and Contentious Persons that will
never be quiet, or that are not fit to be trusted in it, is such a kind of
Civility and Complement, that can never gain upon any Man of sense. I put off
my Hat to them with a seeming Humility and Love, and say, I pray you come in
out of the Wind and Rain, and in the mean time prepare neither Room nor
Entertainment for them, but think my House a great deal better without than
with them, is as much as to say, Be gone, or come in upon such hard terms, for
which they must give Bond and Oath, which they cannot yield to. Will a Man that
has any Brains in him, receive troublesome Persons into his House? or contract
with perfidious Persons, that will eat him out and betray him? or espouse a
Woman that he takes to be an ill-conditioned, contentious, unprofitable
Brawler? We must ground our Agreements upon some rational Confidences. And
therefore that I might not only pray for Protestant-Christian Peace and Union,
I used such means as were within my narrow Compass; and I could not think of
any better, than briefly to state the Case, and commend the Persons, whose
Establishment I do heartily desire, as they with whom we may safely, and
comfortably communicate in the same Offices, or at least quietly endure to live
with us in the same Nation, or worship God in Christ, as in an outward Court of
the Temple, tho not in the Body of it, or at the Altar. If the Gentiles were
not admitted into the inward Court, they had the allowance of an outward Court,
they were not forbidden to come into Jerusalem, or any Town where the Sanbedrim
was held. But our Nonconformist Brethren may approach with us even to the
Altar, if they be but taken in upon such Terms, as Christ and his Apostles
would have admitted them upon, yea upon Principles declared by our first
glorious Reformers. And shall it be a Crime in a Conformist to say so, to speak
Truth in Love? They earnestly plead with the Keepers of the Keys, For Christ's
sake take us in! They plead with the power of the Sword, For the Lord's sake
smite us not, destroy us not, for we are Friends. To the one they say, We would
live in Peace and Love with you, we would glorify God with one Mouth with you,
we would not be as Strangers and Enemies. To the other they say, We will stand
on your side, we will live and by with you. But some that watch at the door,
and some that stand Sentinel, and are upon the Guard, cry, Who are ye? Whence
come ye? What would you have? Is it not a good Service in me, or any other that
are within, that know the Men, and have heard or read their Offers, to declare
who they are, and what they offer? I look upon it as great an Act of Charity to
many in the Church (of which I am a Member) as to them, to make a true report
of the things I have written, and toward a Reception, to repeat the Heads of
some former Debates and Consultations for Concord, and what has been the
Judgment of, and to what some Worthies of former times have condescended. --

But who has hired you? or feod you for your Plea?

From this and the like false Accusations, I appeal to my Judge in Heaven, and
my Witness within, and desy the World round about me, of being as much as privy
to any such designed work; yet I have my Reward on Earth. The Tearers of the
Church have made at me, as invisible as I am, but mistaking their Hold, have
hurt their Nails and Fingers, whilst I escape. The Admirers of Innovations have
cut me out a new Livery, which shows the Uniformity they affect, dressed one in
a Jesuit's long Robes, and a Scottish blew Bonnet; but from others I have the
Reward of Thanks, Prayers, and Encouragements to proceed, from the good
Acceptance of the former part. And if none of my fellow Servants would
acknowledge my Kindness, I hope my Master will, whose I am, and whom I serve.
And if some of my Mother's Sons look upon me, as having nothing of her, because
I am not like them to an Hair, and wonder who I take after; I would they should
know, I take after the Candor and Ingenuity of Heathens and Papists, overcome
with the Light and Truth toward Christians, and in their. Language, condemned
Heretics; and after the Charity of Conformists toward Puritans and
Non-Conformsts in former times; and so this part of my Apology shall be, 1. The
imitable Examples of Heathens toward Christians. 2. Of Papists toward
miscalled Heretics, our forerunners in the Truth and Faith. 3. Of conforming
Defenders of the Church of England, toward Dissenters of former and latter
times.


And if it be said, That none of these did plead the Cause of their
Adversaries, as I have done. I say, 1. The condition of the Times require it.
2. Their Case will bear it. 3. General inclinations to Peace have opened an
opportunity for it.


1. Shall not a Christian speak as well of a Christian, who is of the same
Father, Faith and Family, as an Heathen of a Christian? Shall not a Christian
Minister do more than a Christian Man, for the honor of Christianity? Who has
taught us to expose ferious Professors of the Christian Faith, to the
condemnation and wrath of the ignorant and angry people? or to the jealousy of
the Potent? What is commendable in them, ought to be commended; and that should
be commended in them, which is commendable in us. And what is excusable in
them, ought not to be exposed as damnable and intolerable. The Christian
Qualities, Graces and Virtues, should be acknowledged, and not disowned,
because they are in a Nonconformist. The Piety, due Obedience, Sobriety,
Usefulness, diligence in Hearing and Preaching the Word, yea and tenderness of
Conscience, which they profess and show, ought to be kindly respected; and the
common infirmities of Men, rather covered, for the sake of those undoubted
Graces, than these Graces to be suspected, because we do not affect the Men.

Tertullian in his Dissuasive to Scapula, the President of Africa, from
Persecution, [ ad Scapul. c. 4.] does move him by the good opinion and
commendation of the Emperor Severus (Father of Antoninus) who did not only show
favor to Torpacion, who had cured him with Oil, and kept him in his Palace
while he lived; but knowing some famous Women and some famous Men to be of this
Sect, (so the Christians were called, a Sect, or, a new Sect, by way of
contempt) he did not only not hurt them, but adorned and honored them with his
Testimony, and did also openly resist (or keep off) the common people raging
against them. But most famous is that full Testimony which Pliny the 2d gave to
Trajan, of the Religion and Manners of the Christians, That he found nothing by
them but their obstinacy in refusing to sacrifice; and that they met before day
to sing to God and Christ, to consent in the exercise of Christian Discipline;
forbidding Murder, Adultery, Deceit, Treachery, and other Wickednesses. Tertul.
ad Scapulam. cap. 4. edit. Pamelii id. Apologetico cap. 2. If an Heathen
Governor, entrusted with the execution of Laws upon the Christians (in Pontus
and Bithynia) gave such a Testimony of them, Vid. Vossii Comment. in Epist.
Plin. de Christior. Persecution^^. p. 5, 6, 7.
which was in effect to be more an Advocate for them, than a Judge upon them;
what may be allowed to a Protestant Minister, pleading for Protestant Ministers
and People? of whose Religion and Manners much more may be said, than Pliny
could say of those Saints of God, had he set himself to plead their Cause with
his charming Rhetoric.

2. I will imitate a Virtue in an Enemy, what is good in an ill Man. Let others
frame their Tongues to defaming Names and Anathema's, after the rigorous and
bitter Papists, I rather choose to undergo the Censures of the Angry, without
cause, than be overcome, or condemned by the ingenuity of Papists toward our
Predecessors in the same Faith. What ample Testimonies have many of the Papists
given of the Waldenses, although condemned of Heresy, by their Canons, may be seen
in Du Plessis Historia Papatus, out of Rainerius, and in Archbishop Usher's de
Sucessione and Statu, Edit. Land. 1613. c. 6.. 11.. 15, 20. etc. fuse per totum
Caput.
out of the same Rainerius, and other Inquisitors, and their spiteful Enemies
the Dominicans, being overcome with the Light of Truth, and Beauty of their
Life and Manners, have not concealed what we ought to esteem a Glory. Aenaeas
Sylvius writes as much to their disgrace as any scornful Enemy could do, who in
his Journey to Prague taking in at Tabor (looking upon it as more safe to lodge
with them than in the open Villages amongst the Papists) was with his Company
gladly received by them, and received the right of Hospitality. He hated them
to that degree, that he chose to neglect Divine Offices on the Lord's Day, lest
he should communicate with Heretics; and in his return, being overcome with
the importunity of his Company, to return thither to bait, he would neither eat
nor drink while he was in the City; yet he gives us the Heads of their Religion
in opposition to the Roman Apostasy, which is such, as every true Protestant
must subscribe to for the most part. And the ill Reports he gives of their
degenerate Manners, he took upon trust from his Host, who secretly kept the
Images of Christ and the Virgin Mary, Vid. Inter Waldensia, etc. opera Balthar.
Lydii; Aenaeus Sylvii Historiam Boheinicam. P. 371, and 373. Roterdam. 1612.
and would have fallen from them, but for the love of his Riches. And shall we
take these Reports for true of them, which he, an incensed Adversary,
afterward a Pope, received from a secret Papist, and an Hypocrite? There are
too many in England, from their Ignorance, Prejudice, or Malignity, will speak
as ill of our worthy Nonconformists; but let us who know them, and should
esteem them as the Servants of God, and our Fellow Servants, write and speak
with Tenderness, Truth, and Modesty.

3. To come nearer home, and the Point in hand. Many learned and peaceable
Conforming Divines, when they wrote of them, or wrote against them, have given
them an honorable Report; especially when the Papists have upbraided the
Church of England with Puritans, as now they do with our Divisions. Mr. Francis
Mason, the learned Defender of the Ministry of the Church of England, speaks so
modestly and kindly of the Nonconformists Churches Power to make Canons.
, that he insinuates a good opinion, or a kindness into the heart of his Reader
in that Book, wherein he labors to satisfy or confute them. With a like temper
did Dr. Sparks handle the Persuasive to Conformity. What ample and fair
Characters does the ingenuous and honest Dr. Fuller give of Mr. Cartwright,
Travers, Vdal, Hildersham, Dod, etc. in his Church History of Britain? And long
before him, we may read (what some of our learned and eminent Conformist
Divines have imitated) the Honor which some great Doctors of Cambridg, and
among them Dr. Fulk, gave to Mr. Cartwright, persuading him to confute the
Rhemists Testament, printed before that worthy Work of his. I will content my
self with one Example more of this temper, a Learned Man beyond all exception,
the great Doctor Crakenthorp, whom I rather cite, first, because he professed
himself, and was acknowledged by the Bishops to be a Moderate Protestant, but
no Puritan. 2. Because he reckons many of the N. C. Puritans, who suffered
either Deprivation or Suspension, or more, for their Nonconformity, and blames
them for that fault: Vtinam errorem suum and cernere voluissent and deponere.
-- For otherwise certainly (said he to Marc. Anton. de Dominis, A. B. of
Spalato) there is hardly none of them to which any of you is to be compared,
for Goodness or Holiness of Life; Defensio Eccles. Anglicanae contra
Archiepisc. Spalatensem. cap. 33. p. 206.
and even for Learning, you your self (who are a Master in your Israel) are not
to be compared with some of them. The greater was the unhappiness of that
Breach, which was made by Injunctions and Scruples. I never thought them good
Painters who draw the Pictures of the Dissenting Brethren with Dirt and Soot:
but I knowing them to be unlike those Pictures, have with a just offense beheld
their Injuries; and would have been pleased to have seen them described by some
impartial and skilful Master, as fit to adorn the Palaces of Princes, who have
been removed up and down, and thrown out of the way, like the lumber out of a
new-surnish'd Church. The Works and Histories of the Lives of many of the old
sound and loyal Puritans, written for the most part by Conforming Divines
commend them, and will commend them to all Godly Generations; and the Memories
of the Orthodox NON -- CONFORMISTS of the present Age, will be transmitted
after them, to the better opinion of future Times, by a truer Tradition, than
any History that is as yet come to the view of the World, by the reviling and
aspersing Writers of this Age. And two ways Aftertimes will be truly informed
concerning them; first, by that Angry Reproachful Art of Jest and Earnest (I do
not mean those venomous halfpenny Volumus that will not hold the binding, and
will be condemned to the fire by their very Authors, if ever they grow wise
enough to repent) but in a greater bulk, and of greater gain to their Authors
and Sellers, than profit to their Readers. Secondly, by the great numbers of
Books written by the Nonconformists, to the real Advancement of Piety. By the
first, serious and inquisitive Posterity will conclude that Tenderness, Piety,
and Truth lodged not in their Bosoms, while their Hands moved their Pens, which
aspersed their made-Adversaries in such a way, as could neither gain nor
convince them. By the latter, they will conclude, when they observe the scope
of their Tracts, soundness of their Matter, affectionate moving way of Writing
in Practicals, and their Asserting the Protestant Doctrine, of former and
latter Times, in their Controversials, that surely these Men were an excellent
part of the Church, inspired by the Spirit of Grace and Truth, and deserved
better usage, and a higher place, than a Barn or a Hall to preach in.

In speaking well of the Nonconformists, I have followed the Example of them
that I reckon among the Chief of the Church of England: and if my Affection to
them, and in them, to Christian and Protestant Name and Religion, has
prevailed upon me to an unusual Undertaking, if it be not pardonable with some,
if it be acceptable to Jesus Christ, and suitable to the Minds of many good Men
in the Church, and do some tolerable service to the suffering part, I doubt not
but I shall be saved, without the Pardon of them that cannot pardon the Virtue
of Moderation, any more than the aggravated offense of Nonconformity.

I have gone no further than to plead a trampled Cause, which they that hold
it, think too good and precious to be trodden on by the proudest Foot, as sit
to be taken into Consideration by the Wisdom and Authority of the Nation. I
have not presumed to make Proposals, or Demands; that is left to wise and great
Men. But if some of our Eminent Dr. Stilling. Preface to the Vnreasonab. of
Separation.
Churchmen have made Proposals of Abatement, and have not violated their
Subscriptions, not to endeavor any alteration of the Government in Church or
State; I hope I have not forfeited my Sonship, or broken Faith, by doing far
less, and keeping within the Bounds of a well-meaning Man. And so much, and
perhaps too much, by way of Apology.

I have opened in the Plea the Hardness of the Case, Greatness of the
Sufferings, Worthiness of the Persons of the Non-Conformists, and the Loss to
the Church by their Exclusion or Suppression. I might infer Conclusions from
every of those Head of the Arguments, and drive the Plea more home; but now
because their Sufferings are like to be more and greater, and they are to be a
Carcass to the Eagles, I will take leave to discuss this seasonable and
necessary Question.

Q. Whether it be not better, that the Penal Laws against the Non-Conformists,
to which they are obnoxious, by their Preaching and Praying, and other
Religious Exercises, should not be executed, but forborne rather than put in
Excution, until such time, as our Gracious King and Parliament in time to come,
shall maturely take the State of divided Protestants into their wise
Consideration, and bring us all into a happier Legal Establishment, than we are
in, or can be in, while our Divisions and their Causes continue? --

It may be thought high Presumption in a private Person, to determine which is
the better; but I conceive, that because the Civil Magistrate is not
Omniscient, but takes his Information from Inferiors, and private Men, coming
to him through Public Persons, it is rather a Duty than an Offense to propose
such a Question, and discuss it, when too many determine perhaps without due
Examination of the Case, that the rigorous Prosecution of Dissenters is best
and needful.

In the handling of this Question, it will be necessary to state it, and show;
1. Who I mean by the Non-Conformists. 2. State the Controversy between them,
and the Church from which they dissent. 3. Open the nature of the Offenses, for
which they are liableto the Laws. 4. Explain what I mean by Forbearance of
them, or the Execution of the Laws. 5. Why I limit the time, until our Gracious
King shall take our divided State into further Consideration. After which done,
I will, 6. Produce my Arguments for the Affirmative, That it is better the Laws
should not be executed, than put in Execution. And, 7. Answer Objections to the
contrary. --


1. By Nonconformists, I mean only such Ministers, Teachers, Pastors, and
People, as are sound in the Fundamentals of the Christian Faith, and
substantial Worship; that are Protestants, or reformed from the Corruptions of
Popery, that peaceably submit to the Civil Government of the Kingdom, and the
Temporal Laws thereof.

Secondly, The Controversy between the Nonconformists and the Church, or the
Conformists, lies not in Matters Political and of Civil Government, for they
agree in that, according to the Laws and Constitution of the Realm. Vid. Dr.
Stilling. Misch. Separat. p. 21. and their own many Books. Cum illis quos tu
Puritanos vocas, non est nobis de fide aut Fidei dogmate lis ulla: de Ritibus
illis, and disciplina Ecclesioe nostrae contendunt, Crakenthorp Eccles. Anglic.
Defensio. c. 33. p. 203.
Nor is the Controversy in the Fundamentals, or Articles of Faith, or between a
Church Government, and Anarchy or no Government; but about Matters of Form and
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and Terms of Church Communion, or of Exercise of
their Public Ministry, consisting in Subscriptions, Oaths, and Declarations,
and some private Doctrines to be assented to.

But this is too general an Account; more particularly it is carefully to be
noted,

1. That the Controversy berween the Nonconformists, and the Church as now
Established by Law, is not the same it was between the Church and
Nonconformists, or Puritans, from the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, to our King's
Reign. The Nonconformists in those days and following time, asserted a
Government and Discipline of Divine Right by Presbyterian Classes, Synods and
Lay Elders, and dissented from the Government by Diocesan Bishops, and
Ceremoines principally; yet these were against the Brownists, who separated
from the Church of England as no true Church, which the mere Nonconformists did
not. But since his Majesty's wonderful Restoration, that part of the
Controversy which relates to Church Discipline, and Government, is altogether
new, and quite different from the old. No single Person, nor Combination of
Men, did ever desire of the King or Parliament, the Establishment, or the
Toleration of the Presbyterian Government or Discipline, See Mr. Baxt. Preface
to Bp Morley, and Bp Gunning, before his True and only way of Concord.
either in the Presbyterian or Independent Way. And therefore the pains of
those Writers, who have revived the Opinions, and raked into the Miscarriages
of the Presbyterians, might have been spared, as not at all to the purpose;
except to that which is unbecoming either peaceble or wise Men: They do only
kindle Wrath by stirring Fire, and cry, Fire, Fire in the Church and State,
when there is not so much as any Smoke ascending from the Embers of
Presbyterian Principles. Those Tragical Stories of Presbyterians, whether true
or not, which some Men bring to remembrance, seem to serve another Design, than
the union or preservation of the Church, and apparently to render the
Nonconformists suspicious and odious, and to hinder a Reconciliation. --

2. There are especially two sorts of Dissenters from the Legal Church; First,
Those who are called Presbyterians, but wrongfully so called, (and by me only
for Distinction sake) the other are the Congregational, or Independents. The
Fanatics and Sectaries fall under this last Division in point of Government;
but the mere Congregational are Men of Learning, Reason, and sound Principles
as to Faith, Worship, and Manners. And so there must be a Distinction between
some, and others, that are commonly so called. --

All these agree in that they cannot conform to Subscriptions, Oaths, and
Declarations; and some in other Matters come nearer, or stand further off than
others; therefore the Difference cannot be more particularly stated, without an
exact knowledge of their Tenets.

3. Those who are commonly called and reputed Presbyterians, declared
themselves for his Majesty's Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs, October
25th, 1660. Petit. for Peace,. 10. To the King's Most Excellent Majesty. The
due Account and humble Petition of the Ministres of the Gospel commissionated
for the review and alteration of the Liturgy. Land. An. 1661. Mr. Baxter's
Preface Treat. of Episcopacy.
as they have done against the Terms required by the Act of Uniformity. And
now, if any Man would know the true State of the Difference between the
Conformists and one part of the Nonconformists, may find it to lie in that
Gracious Declaration, and that Act of Uniformity. The reputed Presbyterian
cannot conform to the Act, but would have been glad if that Declaration had
been made an Act. And they who would have gladly submitted to that rare
Invention of Composure and Settlement, are no longer to be accounted
Presbyterians in a strict and proper sense; much less Enemies to the King and
Subverters of the Government, that would have conformed to what the King
proposed, upon great Reasons and wise Counsels, as appears by the Reasons,
Frame and Language of that Declaration: And they who condemn them that conform
not to the Act, but would have conformed to his Majesty's Declaration, if it
had been turned into a Law, have declared at the same time their dislike of the
King's Declaration. And if their Zeal be so hot against this kind of
Dissenters, their Reverence of the King's Act, which gave them their Measures
and Directions, both as to what they should ask and desire to be ruled and
governed by, should restrain them from being too rigid in their Censures. Had
they drawn up such a Declaration as that is, and presented it to the King and
Parliament, as the only Rule they would submit unto, and the King have rejected
and refused it, then they had been more deservedly reproved for their
Nonconformity. But when it was graciously declared by the Ring, and gratefully
acknowledged by that Parliament, and the Divines that now dissent, did
thankfully acknowledge and receive it, See the foresaid Petition. At their
Meeting in Sion College.
they cannot be condemned but with some Reflection upon that Declaration, and
by consequence the King himself and his wise Counselors, and that first
Parliament who thanked the King for it. And let it be further noted, that there
was once a Parliament most freely chosen, of Loyal Members, that thanked the
King for Terms of Accommodation and Union; and it is much for the Honor of the
Dissenters, who humbly desired an Union upon those Terms, that they had once
the King himself, and as many of his Wise Council as advised, and a Loyal
Parliament freely chosen, of the same Judgment with them. If they are a
Faction, they are such as never was before them; a Faction that would have been
ruled by the King, and that good Parliament which did restore Him. I do notify
the first rank of Dissenters from this, because they have fubmitted to this,
and never offered any other Terms or Proposals by general Consent, but those
declared by the King himself. Or such Alterations as were made in the Liturgy,
by his Majest. Commission.
And those that are said to be for a new Model, are for the King's own Model.
--

4. The other sort of Dissenters fall under the name of Congregational and
Independents. As many of these as are under my present Consideration, are first
Orthodox and sound in Faith, agreeing with the Scriptures, received Doctrine of
this Church, in Articles and Homilies, and of other Reformed Churches, in
opposition to Heresies and Popery.

2. They dissent not from the Civil Government of the Kingdom. Take their own
professed Doctrine, It is the Duty of People to pray for Magistrates, to honor
their Persons, to pay them Tribute and other Duties, to obey their lawful
Commands, and to be subject to their Authority for Conscience sake. Infidelity
or Difference in Religion does not make void the Magistrates just and legal
Authority, nor free the People from their Obedience to him; from which
Ecclesiastical Persons are not exempted; much less has the Pope any Power or
Jurisdiction over them in their Dominions, or over any of their People, and
least of all to deprive them of their Dominions or Lives, if he shall judge them
to be Heretics, or upon any other pretense whatsoever. A Declaration of the
Faith and Order of the Congregation. Churches in England, in their Meeting at
the Savoy October. 12, 1658. c. 24. Of the Civil Magistrate,. 4. Vid. Dr. Owen's
Truth and Innocence vindicated. Survey of Dr. Parker's Eccles Polity p. 164,
etc. Ibid. of the Institut. of Churches.. 9


3. They are for a Church Government, by Pastors, Teachers, Elders and Deacons,
but within particular Congregations, having all Power within themselves,
independent as to Jurisdiction, or Subordination to any other Church, or Synod,
and they are for the Administration of all the Ordinances of Christ.

The most that ever these desired at any time, even when the Presbyterial
Government was most likely to prevail, was a Permission or Toleration to
exercise their Discipline, subjecting themselves, as any other Subjects, to the
Magistrate, not defiring the Preferments of the Church, which they would have
always go to them, that conformed to the Constitution of the Church according
to Law, and with this they would now be thankfully contented.

The third thing to be spoken to, is the Nature of the Offense, for which they
are liable to the Penalties of the Laws. The remote Offense or Transgression,
is their Nonconformity to the Act of Uniformity, for which they have suffered a
Deprivation of their Ecclesiastical Preferments. The next and immediate
Transgression, is against other Statutes, which are these: 1. The Statute of
the 35 of Queen Elizabeth, declared to be in force, 16 of Chapter II. c. 4. 2. The
same Act against Conventicles and unlawful Assemblies, under Pretense of
Exercise of Religion. 3. Act 17 Chapter II. c. 2. Nonconformists that take not the
Oath, or Test therein set down, shall not inhabit in any Corporation, or live
within five Miles of any Town that send Burgesses to Parliament; or five Miles
of the Place where they were Ministers. 4. The Statutes of the 22th of Chapter II.
c. 1. Seditious Conventicles prevented and suppressed.


By the first of these Statutes, viz. 35th of Q. Eliz. the Offenses are two;
the first is not coming to some Church or Chapel, or other place of Divine
Service, to hear Divine Service established by her Laws, etc. The second is to
speak or write, or to persuade any to deny or impugn Her Majesty's Power in
Causes Ecclesiastical, or persuade any against hearing Divine Service, or to be
present at Conventicles, or unlawful Assemblies. The Penalty is, first
Imprisonment until he acknowledge his Offense, and declare his Submission in
some Church or Chapel; which if he refuse to do within three Months, he shall
abjure the Realm if he do not, or if he shall return without her Majesty's
leave, he shall be proceeded against as a Felon.

I shall speak of the second under the fourth, because it was to expire after
the next Session of Parliament, which was after three Years. And pass to the
third Statute; The Offense by that Statute is, If any Person that had enjoyed
any Parsonage, Vicarage, Lecture-stipend, and had not conformed to the Act of
Uniformity, and shall not take and subscribe this Oath;

I A. B. do swear that it is not lawful on any pretense whatsoever, to take up
Arms against the King; and that abhor that Traitorous Position, of taking Arms
by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are commissioned by
Him, in pursuance of such Commissions, and that I will not endeavor any
Alteration of Government either in Church or State. If he shall preach in any
Conventicle, or come within five Miles of any City, Corporation, or place of
his Ministry, except on his Journey, or summoned by a Subpaena, he shall
forfeit 40 l.

The Original Crime is Nonconforming; the next is not taking the Oxf. Oath,
preaching in Conventicles, and coming within five Miles of any such place. --

The fourth Statute, Car. 22. is, etc. And the Crimes are; 1. If any Man shall
be present at any Assembly, etc. under color of any Exercise of Religion, in
any other manner than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of
England; at which there shall be five Persons or more assembled together,
besides those of the same Household. 2. If any Man shall take upon him to preach
or teach in any such Meeting, he shall forfeit 20 l. for the first Offense
after Conviction, and 40 l. after the second Conviction of a second Offense. 3.
If any Person shall willingly suffer such Meeting to be in his House,
Out-house, Barn, Yard, or Backside, and be convicted, shall forfeit 20 l. etc.
And every Hearer, 5 s.

The Faults that are most obvious, and most commonlly prosecuted, are first,
Preaching, Hearing, or entertaining of any Meeting under pretense of Religious
Exercise, after another manner than the Liturgy or Practice of the Church of
England, to five or more besides the Household where such Meeting is kept.

Fourthly, I am to explain what I mean by Forbearance.

1. I do not mean what never came into the Question, an Universal Toleration,
or License of all Irreligion, Atheism, Heresy, or publishing pernicious Errors,
contrary to Godliness and Peace. 2. I do not mean by Forbearance, a Toleration
or Forbearance of Prosecution against any that shall be found guilty of those
Offenses and Crimes, Nor did the N. C. desire but the Toleration of those that
are toterable, and the peaceable Liberties of all that agree on Catholic Terms
of Primitive Simplicity in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline. Petition for
Peace, Anno. 1661.
contained and declared in the Reasons of these Statutes, for the prevention
whereof these Statutes were primarily intended, as the Intention of the Law.

1. I do not mean a Forbearance of any Person whatsoever, that shall by
Printing, Writing, or express Words, purposely practice, or go about to prove
or persuade any of His Majesty's Subjects, or any other within His Realm, to
deny, or withstand, or impugn His Majesty's Power in Ecclesiastical Causes, See
the Statute 35th Q. Elizabeth.
or shall persuade any from coming to Church to Divine Service, or Communion to
that end. There is no Nonconformist that has written or printed, or (that ever
I heard of) spoken, to impugn His Majesty's Power circa sacra, but own it, as
hereafter it will appear.

2. I do not mean a Forbearance of any Person or Persons, whether more or fewer
than five, that shall, have, or do contrive any Insurrections, as Seditious
Sectaries, Vid. Statute of 16 Chapter II. c. 4.
or Disloyal Persons, or any dangerous Practices of Seditious Sectaries, or
other Disloyal Persons, who under Pretense of tender Consciences, have or may
at their Meetings contrive Insurrections; or that make but a pretense of
Religious Exercises, to carry on any such Intentions. The above explained
Nonconformists will heartily subscribe to this. Against these Contrivers the
Law is bent, and not against such as are in earnest for Religious Exercises,
but upon no seditious Design, tho it is otherwise interpreted contrary to the
declared end of the Law.

3. The Persons to be forborne, are such Preachers, and Teachers, as never kept
Conventicles, or Meetings, making those Religious Exercises a pretense only,
when the Design was Rebellion, Sedition, or Insurrection; as never taught any
such pernicious Doctrine to such a wicked end, but that have taught and hold
the contrary, performing Religious Exercises for Religious ends; and both they
that hear them, and they that entertain them, should be forborne.

4. By Forbearance, I mean a total Forbearnce of all the Penalties, which they
have incurred upon their Persons and their Estates. The merciful Indulgence of
the Government, and many over ruling Providence concurring, have given them
Advantages, and Boldness to meet more openly and in greater Numbers, than they
did before, than they could or would have done. If now there shall be a severe
Prosecution against them, the Prisons will fill in many places, their Fines
amount above their Estates; there will be neither Dish nor Spoon, Stooll, nor
Bed left for their Wives and Children, no, nor a Friend of their way left in
the Land, in a Condition to relieve them. It is the ready way to fill many
places in the Land with Tears and Cries, Beggary and Misery, such as no good
Protestant can behold without a Sympathy. This is no better than to forbear a
Creditor till the Interest grows to a great Sum, and then seize upon all he
has, enter upon his Land, and drive his Cattle, etc. this is Mercy, till
Offenses grow big for a huge Severity; Mercy patent, for latent Justice, to
give them time to gather Flesh, and then to devour them. If the Rooks, the
Informers, those Birds of Prey, hope to flesh themselves by picking the bones
of the Nonconformists, it should go against the stomach of every true
Gentleman, not to say Merciful Christian. If they must be suppressed, give them
notice of it; do not kill them in cold Blood, after Quarter given them. To make
the Case familiar; There are a Company of honest, quiet People live about me,
they were once in good Fashion and Reputation, but are now fallen in the
World's danger, and are forced to be beholden to their Friends; they live in my
Manor, and have trespassed upon me, against the orders of it. I thought it
hard to trouble them, or severely to gather my Amerciaments, for they were
honest Men, and of my Religion too for the main, they were good Protestants in
their way. I never heard of any Riots among them, or ill Designs that could be
proved against any of them; when others were at their Pastimes, they were at
their Prayers, and were laborious, while others that had more of the World,
took more Pleasure; and they know that if I had been severe with them for every
Trespass, they had not had a Cow or Cows keeping, not a Sheep or a Pig; and now
they have well about them, and I am resolved, I will make them pay all the
Amerciaments of my Court, for every Trespass; they shall have neither Cow, nor
Sheep, nor House to sleep in in my Manor, I Will make them pay, or ly in Prison,
or fly the Land; for they are a dangerous ungrateful People: for when I stand
for a Parliament Man, or desire their Votes for my Friend, there is not a Man
will appear for me; but they are all for them that are against a Popish
Successor, and for uniting of Protestants, and such things as these: They are
cross to me; what I abhor, they approve; when I address, they refuse to
subscribe. Well, but Sir, I beseech you be merciful to them; and if you will
have all your Town to be in all things of your Mind, give them notice first, or
else it will be said you forbore them their lesser Fines, till they grew to a
great Sum. I beseech you, do not so by them, but be as merciful to them, as you
are to other kind of Sinners.

Fifthly, The Limitation of the Question is, until such time as our Gracious
King and Parliament, in time to come, shall take the State of the divided
Protestants into their Mature Consideration. We may rationally hope we shall
have a Parliament from our King, who has often declared his Resolution to have
frequent Parliaments; we hope it will be a free Parliament; I do not mean free
from force or violence upon Men's Persons, but violence upon their Reasons by
Drunkenness, with its shameful Antecedents and Effects. And if ever we have
such Elections, we shall pitch upon such Men, as long as there are any to be
found, that are Men of Loyalty to the King and Government, of Estates and
Quality, that are freest from Temptation to get by dishonorable Arts, and that
have too much to give away from themselves, and the Freeholders that choose
them. A Protestant People will elect Protestant Representatives, and such as
have a respect to Protestant Dissenters, in things that may be spared without
hurt to Religion, or infringement of Government; much less a change, and that
as they are Natives, Relatives, peaceable, and pious good Men. It cannot be
thought, that they that would exclude Popery, will leave a Breach among our
selves for it to enter in at; our last Parliaments have declared their
Inclinations by their Votes, and from what they have done, we may guess at what
they will do, if God give them time. And there must be a depth in Policy deeper
than Men of a short Line can fathom, or a great mistake, that those Gentlemen
and Magistrates that are bent to suppress our Conventicles, should act with
such a Spirit now, when they have declared who, and what they are for. Is this
the way to gain the Body of the Nation to choose them, or those they affect,
into a next Parliament, when it is visible what Interest they serve, by
disobliging the Protestant Nonconformists, and giving notice to the Church, and
Conforming Protestants, that they cannot be safe from them, that suppress, if
not cut off, as many as they can of the same Faith and Worship for substance,
for those Differences, that need not be, if Condescension and Love might but
come in Fashion?

The Controversy between the Church and them is not yet determined, The Rev.
Dr. Stilling. Preface to Unreasonableness of Separation. Mr. Baxter, Humphrey,
Lobb, etc.
but there is this good of late got by the Heat of Writing; that both sides
have declared their Minds more freely than heretofore; and there are Proposals
made by both sides, which if they cannot be universally admitted, yet from the
rude Draughts of a Building, wise Men may agree upon the Frame, by adding,
taking away, and composing. As the Parliament made the Laws out of Love to the
Church, and they will not do; Magistrates out of Love to the Church, should
abstain from Prosecutions for a time, and be patient for a while except they
saw, what no Man can see, that lives nearer to them than their Informers, any
more cause of Suppression by any contrived dangers, either to Church or State,
than when they are fast asleep in their Beds. If you have just cause to fear
their Principles, disarm them of their Knites; but those that know them better
than their Enemies, or your Informers, do think no more Danger like to arise
from their Principles, than there was against the King and most favorable
Parliament, from their Preparations, for Rebellion. Are all the Nonconforming
Preachers of a sudden turned Jesuits? is their Faith turned into Faction? have
they submitted their Scriptures and their Senses to an Infallible Guide?
acknowledged in him the power of both Swords, and listed themselves under his
consecrated Banners? Are all their Children Males? Are all their Infants in a
few Months grown up to be above sixteen Years of Age, fit for Arms? Are their
Wives and Daughters become Amazons? How many thousands can they make? Where are
their Rendezvous, their Musters, their Lists, their Magazines? Where are their
Generals? Who are their Correspondents, and Confederates abroad? The distressed
persecuted Protestants of France! Are they fortifying their Barns and
Meeting-Places? or ready to march and take the Field? Why are we not all in
Arms for fear of them, if the Danger be so great from their Assemblies! Abstain
from these Men for a little time, and let not their Flight be in Winter, or on
the Sabbath Days. If you will not forbear till such a time, one thing I hope
and look for, that when you drive their Cattle, or offer their Goods to sale,
you will find no Buyers; or if you send them to the Goals, their Keepers and
Fellow Prisoners may become true Converts, and that you that send them thither
may fetch them out.

But I must not forget my Arguments to prove the Affirmative of the Question,
That it is better the Execution of the Laws should be forborne against
Protestant Dissenters, than urged or countenanced.

I have laid the Question in a Comparative, and affirm it is better, etc. The
Comparative does suppose a Positive; if I can prove that it is not good to
execute the Penal Laws upon Dissenting Protestants, then it will follow a
fortiore and majore, that it is better they should be spared, than punished.

The Argument runs thus.

It is not good to execute the Laws upon Dissenting Protestants, therefore it
is better to forbear their Execution, than put them in Execution.

The Proposition is be proved by an Enumeration of the Laws, that Men are
pressing upon them.

1. It is not good to execute the Statute of 35th of Q. Elizab. which they who
are in danger are threatened with. That which the whole Parliament thought
dangerous to the whole Protestant Interest in England, and did, as far as in
them lay, disanul (a Bill being prepared to be signed by His Majesty) should
not be thought good or fit to be executed upon one part of Protestants, by some
particular Justices of the Peace, on the irreligious, covetous Information of a
sorry sort of Men. The loss of that Bill was judged so great a loss to the
Nation of Protestants, that the next Parliament made diligent Inquiry into the
Causes of that dangerous Frustration, of what was thought as much for the
Preservation of Protestants from Banishment by Abjuration, as for the
Preservation of our Bodies from burning by the Act de Heretico comburendo. But
if this Argument be not of force against them, that can handle a Sword better,
or sign a Warrant, than answer an Argument, or that will not be reasoned out of
a Resolution; it may receive some further Strength by this further Enumeration.

1. The impartial Execution of that Statute, will be ill for all the Papists in
the Land, that, owning the Supremacy of the Pope, do impugn the King's in
Causes Ecclesiastical, and have absented from Common Prayer. They must abjure
the Realm: and truly a little respect to Nonconformists, because they are not
Papists, but Protestants, should direct our Magistrates to begin with the
Papists, and try, if by ridding the Land of Papists, the Stifness of the
Dissenters may not bend toward Conformity. But to begin with Protestants, and
leave the Enemies of the King and Church to stay behind them, that have potent
Confederates, is not safe, nor kind, and respective to Protestants.

2. It will be ill for thousands of them that go under the Name of Protestants
of the Church of England, that may be proved not to have been at Common Prayer
in any Church or Chapel, or place where Common Prayer is wont to be made. To
prosecute Protestants that preach, or are present at Religious Duties, tho not
after the manner of the Liturgy, and to spare them that are oftener present at
a Coffee-House or Tavern, than at any Worship of God, is too partial a
Proceeding, and argues little kindness to Religion, by showing more to them
that wear a Name of Religion, and not so much as a Cloak of Religion besides.

3. It is not for the King's Honor, Profit, or Safety, and therefore it is not
good, that a general Riddance should be made of all Dissenters, both Papist and
Protestant, out of the Land by Abjuration, when the Papists have many Friends
that can furnish them with Arms, to make their way back again, with some Armies
and Auxiliary Forces to help them to pull down the Church of England, and set
up what King they please.

4. It cannot be good for the Church of England, I mean the severe and rigorous
tempered Men, who will multiply Enemies against them, when they see that
Severities are used upon good Subjects; and the moderate and sensible part of
the Church will be grieved, to see their Brethren in the Faith drawn out first
for Sacrifice.

5. It cannot be good for those Gentlemen, who have expressed their dislike of
our last Parliaments, and that hope for another, and labor to be in it
themselves, when the whole Nation see and know how friendly they are to the
Popish Party, how hard to believe as much a Popish Plot; and have, as soon as
possibly they can, after their Thanks to the King for his Ruling by Laws,
declared what Laws they are ready to execute. Can they think that any besides a
terrified servile Dependent Part of the Nation, will vote for them, or for
their Friends Interest? That therefore which is good for none, ought not by any
to be executed, and none will, but such as are resolved against all Reason and
the highest Wisdom. --

The other two Laws are directly against Protestant Dissenters.

Secondly, It is not good to execute the five Mile Act upon them.

1. It is not a righteous thing to execute that Law upon them, except they are
guilty of that Crime, for which that Law does principally and 'mainly provide.
The Crimes recited in that Act, are, Whereas they conformed not, etc. nor made
the Delcaration in the Act of Uniformity but settled themselves in Corporations,
taking occasion thereby to instill the Principles of Schism and Rebellion into
the Hearts of His Majesty's Subjects, to the great danger of the Church and
Kingdom. This is the pretended Mischief, against which that Act was made; and
if so, then it cannot with any Justices be executed, but upon such as have
sowed those Principles; If such have been, no Favor is asked for them. But who
comes out to prove, that any Nonconformist Preacher has instilled such
Principles? If some have, why should those that have not, suffer as if they
had? if some have, find them out; if all have, spare none; if none have, why
should any suffer? If they have, those Principles are very weak and
ineffectual, have had many Years to work in, and yet for the honor of the
Religion, which they profess, no Rebellion has been as much as moved. Was
their Nor conformity a Crime? they patiently bore the sentence of the Law?
Their living in Corporations could be no Crime; their preaching Orthodox
Doctrine could do no hurt to Church nor States their not taking that Oath, was
no greater a Crime in them, than in all the Lords and Commons, who then, and
since have argued against it, and opposed it. To instill the Principles of
Schism and Rebellion must be the Crime: Now if none of them have been guilty of
that Instillation, it is not good, because not just, to execute the Laws upon
them.

2. It is not good to execute that Law upon Dissenting Protestants, which at
first making, was promoted by Men Popishly inclined, and since appeared to be
Papists, and was never executed but in Favor of Popery, and was opposed by
Loyal Protestants. I know not in what rank of Protestants to place him, with
whom this Argument is weak, except among those good natured Protestants, that
have served the Popish Designs. Who were the Promoters of it, but Sir Tho.
Clifford, (since Lord Treasurer, and a professed Papist) Sir Solomon Swale,
Growth of Popery, under the Name of Andrew-Marvel, Esquire
and Sir Roger (or Tho.) Strickland, that since appeared to be Papists? Who
more opposed it than the wise and Loyal Earl of Southampton, Lord Treasurer,
Earl of Shaftsbury, who scented the Popish Plot, and pursued it before many
were aware; the Lord Wharton, and others, firm to the Protestant Interest? Take
the good Sense of an Honorable Member of the Parliament at Westminster, in the
Debate of the Bill for uniting Protestants. But suppose we should follow this
Advice, and make new Laws, and require a severe Execution of the old; how can
you imagine that as long as the Popish Interest is so prevalent, the Execution
of such Laws shall be continued longer, than may be subservient to the Interest
of that Party? Have we not had a sad Experience of this? Has the Oxford Act,
or that of 35th of Queen Elizabeth, or any other against Dissenters, been
executed in favor of the Church? (note this, all that think it a Service to
the Church) Are not the Dissenters as many, if not more now than ever? -- And
is there any thing more visible than these Laws have been made use of to serve
the Popish Interest, or, as Engines rather for the Affairs of the State, than
the Church, -- If the Oxford Act, and other Acts against Dissenters, were
projected in favor of the Protestant Religion; it was strange they were so
much promoted (as many Members now here, who did serve in those Parliaments, do
remember) by Sir Tho. Clifford, Sir Solomon Sweale, and Sir Rogen Strickland,
who have since appeared to be Papists. -- Sir, I am afraid the name of the
Church has been strangely made use of to bring in Popery, etc. upon which,
resolved that the said Bill be committed upon the Debate of the House for
uniting Protestants.

The last Act to be executed, is that of 22 Chapter II. c. 1. Seditious
Conventieles prevented and suppressed. The Persons against whom it is levelled,
are described to be Seditious Sectaries, Disloyal Persons, who (Hypocrites)
under pretense of tender Consciences, have or may contrive Insurrections.
Concerning this Act, let us observe the Time when it was enacted; it was Anno
1670. Since which time, we may not pass over, without loss to the Argument, how
the Thoughts of our Governors and Lawmakers have turned to another point, and
that very Parliament, which was observed for a very great part of it to be
young Gentlemen, growing older, grew more cool and moderate toward differing
Protestants, more suspicious of Popery; and the more resolute they grew, in
maintaining Property and the Protestant Religion, and to break the Arms and the
Legs of growing Popery, the more temperate they grew toward the
Nonconformists, not to take any Strength from His Majestirs Declaration of
March 15, 1671/2, because it seemed to tend to the Propagation of Popery, and
was recalled upon the Parliaments Representation, although some wise Protestant
Statesmen, thought that Declaration would be a kindness to Dissenters, and no
greater Injury to the Church and Protestant Religion from Popery, than they
received by Popery, growing apace under the Benignity of a Connivance and
Favor of great Men. Not to take hold of this, to show that the King thought
fit to mitigate the rigor of that Law, the very next Year after it was enacted.
That which gives Strength to my Argument is this, that at the next meeting of
the Parliament, which began February 24, 1672, an Act passed against the
Papists, and a Bill was presented by the House of Commons to the Lords, in
favor of Dissenting, and for uniting Protestants, which (as some that have as
much reason to know as any who write) would have passed, if they had had time
to sit; and from that time, that long Parliament, who had made the Act against
Conventicles, how resolute soever they were against an Indulgence, February 15,
1662; they saw the incompatibility between Execution of their own Law, and the
Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and saw a necessity of uniting
Protestants; at the same time, when they saw our increasing Dangers from the
Increase of Popery. And our several Parliaments since, have reasoned upon the
same Principles and Foundations once again, so far as to commuit a Bill to
unite all Protestants. And now I have prepared my self for this Argument; It is
not well done, and cannot be good for the Church or Kingdom (and if not good to
them, it should not be thought good by Protestants) which that very Parliament
that made the Act, and many other Parliaments, thought not good for the Church
and Kingdom. For some particular Magistrates, upon the Information of some
self-seeking Informers, to execute the Laws against the sense of the
Legislators, who should (and certainly did) best know, what was for our good,
is to oppose a private Opinion to a public Deliberation, and a private Spirit
against a public. That I may draw these Reasonings to a Conclusion; it is not
a due Execution of the Laws, except it be upon the Persons, and to the ends
intended in the Laws. But if you would execute the Laws upon the proper
Objects, you must execute them upon Seditious Sectaries, disloyal Persons, very
Hypocrites, that do under pretense of Religious Exercises, instill Principles of
Schism and Rebellion into the Minds of the King's Subjects. The Law goes upon
such a Supposition, and to prevent such Mischiefs; but if there be no such
Meetings, to such a Tendency, there are no Persons that deserve such
Executions: If there be, let them be tried; if there be not, of all times, is
there no time but this, for Protestant Magistrates to go upon the Information
of Informers, to give Countenance to a Scandal, that Protestant Dissenters, are
as pernicious to the Government, as confederated Papists? And that Protestants
should act contrary to their Principles, contrary to their Interests, to bring
certain Ruin upon Themselves, Families, and Friends, without any the least
hope of Relief, or mending their Condition! A Game indeed! to set Informers to
find a Hare, when they should run down the Fox.

If this be not to sin against Love to Protestants, because of some Omissons,
or against Knowledge, it is sin against Sense, and many Years Experience. If you
do really believe, and can prove by full and honest Evidence, that such Men
have preached such Doctrines, take them as Traitors, and never proceed against
them as Dissenters, for preaching in a manner different from the Liturgy.

These Arguments proceed from consideration of the Laws, and are but my first
Head of Arguments.

The second sort of Arguments is drawn from the Fact, for which the Dissenters
are to suffer.

The Crime, prima facie, is preaching in a manner different from the Church of
England, and not according to the Liturgy, to numbers above Four, besides the
Household. This is the Fact. The Proof of it, is either by Confession of the
Parties, which we will not suppose, or the Notoriousness of the Fact, which
needs further proof; it all depends upon the Oaths of two Witnesses. What do
they depose? They (who perhaps know not what an Oath is, nor what a Sin Perjury
is) depose, that A. B. preached at such a time or times, in such a place or
places, to such numbers, against the Statute. But what if the Preacher preached
true Doctrine? exhorted to Peace and Holiness, Obedience, Justice, Mercy; and
not one word tending to Schism or Rebellion? What if the Person be a loyal
Subject? These things are out of the Question, out of the Deposition. But if
these Witnesses cannot depose, that such a Preacher is a Disloyal Person, his
Preaching to be to instill Schism or Rebellion, or to move to Insurrection; then
if the Execution be according to the Deposition, it is Execution upon Persons
not intended by the Law, and for preaching not forbidden by the Law; for the
Law forbids not Preaching, but to such an end. There is one Catching
Circumstance, it was above the Legal Number: But yet one would think that that
should not be a Crime, except Rebellion and Insurrection be the intention of
the Person, and the effect of the Thing. For many, for five hundred to hear a
good Sermon, in a peaceable manner, is in it self no Crime; the Number, and the
Preaching, must be to an ill Design, in the intention of the Law: For it were
impious to forbid Preaching in it self. The Evil of it must be in the evil of
the Matter, and evil of the Design; and by Consequence, only such Preaching,
and such Numbers, are liable to the Penalty, that is, of a destructive or
offensive Design; unless you punish for Preaching, which is good, separate from
the Design, as evil. This premised, my Argument is this;

It is not good but evil, to punish well doing, as if it were evil doing; and
to punish Preachers and Hearers, that never preached nor heard Rebellion or
Sedition, as if they were the highest Criminals in a Kingdom.

But to issue out Warrants, and execute them upon Persons, when nothing is
proved against them, but what is good and not prohibited by the Law, as evil in
it self, but as evil to an evil end, viz. Preaching is not good, therefore it
is not good to punish them, etc.

To punish a Fact, that in the intention of the Persons, or nature of the
Thing, has no tendency to Mischief, to be prevented by the Law, is not good
but evil; because the Execution is not directed to the end of the Law, and by
Consequence it is no legal Execution.

But to execute the Law for preaching, and hearing, upon Preachers and Hearers,
whose preaching and hearing has no evil tendency to Sedition, Rebellion,
Insurrection, or Schism, is such an Execution. Therefore it is not good, but
evil.

The Minor is proved from the Peaceableness of the Nonconformists, Piety of
their Principles, from the many Years Experience and Effects; and seditious, or
rebellious, or schismatical matter, are not the things sworn against them, or
can be sworn, but preaching to such Numbers, and hearing in such Numbers, and
in a manner different from the Church of England, which may be, and yet not
ill, and may not be so for all the Informers know.

Obj. But the Law forbids such Men to preach, as conform not, swear not, and in
such a manner, and to such numbers of Persons: If the Law be good, it is good
to execute them. --

Answ. The Law forbids such Men, as are seducing Sectaries, disloyal Persons,
to such an end, as was often named. And such Persons, and such Religious Acts,
abused to a wicked end and purpose, and none else. If the Persons are not such,
nor the Religious Exercises so abused to such wicked purposes, then you must
hold that either the Laws can, or do forbid those Men that are good, to do that
which is good, and so forbid absolutely that which is good; which is to
scandalize the Law, and them that made it; or you must yield the Execution to
be ill, and illegal, except those Persons, and Actions be taken relatively to
those unlawful Designs, which if proved, they are Criminals of another nature;
and if it cannot be proved, they ought not so to suffer, as if they were what
they are not.

My third Argument is taken from the Consideration of the Persons, and of the
Facts. 1. They are Protestants, if you believe me not, try them. 2. They meet
for Religious Exercises, and holy Ordinances; not for Sedition or Rebellion, or
to move any Insurrections; if the contrary can be proved, I Will grieve and pray,
but never plead for them. But both the one and the other is evident; that which
is sworn against them is neither Sedition, etc. but Preaching, as was said
before. Hence I form my Argument.

It is not good, but evil, to use Dissenting Protestants worse than ever
Papists have been used.

But to execute those Laws upon Dissenting Protestants neither for Rebellion,
nor moving Insurrections, is to use them worse than ever Papists have been
used. Therefore it is not good to execute the Laws upon them.

It is to be more rigorous toward our Brethren, and such as agree in one and
the same King, same Laws, same Worship as to the substance of Christ's
Ordinances, and are willing to unite, than you are toward Men that own another
Supremacy, King, and Bishops, are idolatrous in their Worship, and are for
rooting us out, and not taking us in, without hazard of the Truth of Christ,
and Hypocrisy, and Eternal Life.

To punish Dissenters for preaching, and other Exercises of Religion, because
to such Numbers, and not in such an uniform manner, is to punish them for
Religion. If Religion be the Cloak, and Rebellion or Sedition be the Mischiefs
to be concealed and conveyed under it, then Religion is but a pretense, and
that cannot excuse them from suffering, which does highly aggravate the Sin.
But if neither be inferred from their Principles, nor infused into their
Exercises, then there is no danger to the King, in his Life, Prerogative, nor
Authority. If neither has been found in any of them, it is not justly
imputable to them; and then, if their Preaching and Prayer be the Fact, for
which they suffer, they suffer for that which no Papist ever suffered for
alone. For the clearing of this, and proving of it, I will distinguish
Punishments, into Capital, and Pecuniary or Real. No Papist, whether Priest or
Layman, ever suffered Death in England for Religion, but for Treason; and
their fore-acted Conspiracies and Treasons, constrained Queen Elizabeth and
King James, to make Laws for their own preservation. This is proved by King
James, Vid. Torturam Torti. per. Ep. Cicestriensem. Bp Andrews, p. 145, 146,
147.
and all our Protestant Writers against the Papists; I need not quote
particulars: This is particularly proved in a peculiar Treatise, penned by the
direction of the Lord Treasurer Burleigh; as the learned Publisher of the
Collection of several Treatises, The Execution of Justice in England, not for
Religion, but for Treason.
tells us in his Epistle, concerning the Reasons and Occasions of the Reprinted
at London, 1675.
Penal Laws. And what is there proved, is acknowledged by the Secular Priests
1601, in their Important Considerations. But if our Nonconformists should be
prosecuted upon the 35th of Eliz. if they will not conform upon their three
months Imprisonment, they must abjure the Realm; and if they go not away, or
return without the King's Leave, it is Felony, and that is Capital. And if it
be for Nonconformity, it goes under the name of Conscience, and for Religion,
without any guilt, or proof of Sedition or Treason; and so they will suffer for
Religion, and for no other but the Protestant Religion, what Papists never did
but for Treason. And the Queen past over many justifiable occasions, of an
earlier severity: The Supremacy of the Pope was a tender point of lealousy, and
a trial of the Queen's Patience; but she was not kindled by it, but suffered
many that were in that point for the Pope, and against Her, to enjoy their
Estates, and Honorable Liberty, with Men of as great Quality as themselves, or
in their own Houses. Dr. Heath, Archbishop of York, and Chancellor to Queen
Mary, enjoyed his Estate, and Liberty in his own House till his Death. Dr.
Poole Bishop of Canterbury, Dr. Tonstal of Duresm, Dr. White of Winchester, Dr.
Oglethorp of Carlisle, Dr. Thirlby of Ely, Dr. Watson of Lincoln, were not
pressed with any Capital Pain, tho they maintained the Pope's Authority against
the Laws of the Realm: and some Abbots, Important Considerations, p. 54.
etc. as you may see it in the aforesaid Collection, 1st Treat. p. 10, 11. and
acknowleded by the Secular Priests -- while her Majesty and the State dealt
with the Catholics, as you have heard (which was full eleven years, no one
Catholic being called in question of his Life, for his Conscience all that
time.) Consider how some of our Profession proceeded with them. Her Highness
had scarcely felt the Crown warm upon her Head, but it was challenged from her
by some of her Neighbors, as Mr. Saunders notes, etc. p. 55.

Let us pass from Capital to Pecuniary Mulcts, and compare them. Of all the
Laws against Popish Recusants, none seems more to punish them for Religion,
than their not coming to Church, and their saying or being present at Mass; and
the Fines imposed for those Acts of theirs, The Forfeiture upon him that says
Mass, is 200 Marks, Anno. 23d Eliz. c. 1.
and a Years Imprisonment; upon him that willingly hears Mass 100 Marks, and
Imprisonment for a Year; for not reparing to Common Prayer, 20 l. every Month,
and forbearing to come within twelve Months, shall be bound in a Bond of 200 l.
to the good Behavior. But besides the Idolatry of the Mass, these Laws do not
proceed against the Mass, as an idolatrous Worship, Nemini potest esse
obscurum, Leges quae feruntur, mulctas quae dicuntur hic apud nos in
Recusantes, ferri and dici non Religionis causa merae, sed mixtae; mixtae cum
mala Mente and Fide in Principem; nec nisi in Recusantes Bullatos. Tor. Tor. p.
132, 133.
and as it is Religion; but as there is Treason against the Government in that
Worship. For the Mass is celebrated by a Priest, and a Priest receives his
Ordination from the Church of Rome, and is a Subject to the Pope's Supremacy,
acknowledges his Jurisdiction, and denies the King's in Ecclesiastical Affairs.
There never was any Treason without a Priest in it, nor Mass with out a Priest,
says Bp Calton. The very Form of Submission enjoined to all them that conform
to our Laws, and come to Common Prayer, does evidence this Truth. And to
acknowledge and testify in my Conscience, that the Bishop or See of Rome has
not, 35th Eliz. c. 2.
nor ought to have any Power or Authority over Her Majesty, or within any of
Her Majesty's Realms and Dominions, etc.

But our Nonconformists, will willingly renonunce the Papal Jurisdiction, and
own the King's Supremacy, and refuse not the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
which the Puritans of former times refused not, but took. Vid. Bp Andr. Tortur.
Tort. p. 110. and 379. -- Profitentur, subscribunt, jurant indies.
Mr. Baxter professes in the name of the Nonconformists; The Article of
Religion for the Power of Kings and Obedience of Subjects: we need not
transcribe, but do consent to it, so we do to the Canons, which require the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and answerable Obedience to all the Homilies
against Rebellion, and for Obedience, and all that ever we found to be for
this, the public Doctrine of the Church. Mr. Baxt. 2d Plea for the N. C. p.
86. s. 10.

Their Worship is pure, but in the sense of Laws defective, as not being with,
or according to the Liturgy. And what manner of Protestants they are, let their
public Confessions, their private Writings, and their Morning-Exercises
against Popery testify. Which of all the 1800 or 2000 Ministers cast out
Barthol. 1662, was ever found, or suspected to be, in any Conspiracy against
the King or Government, how ill soever they have bin used? There are a reviling
sort of Rake-hell Scriblers, that they may find but a Brand, or a Coal to
smutch any of them with, that transgress the Act of Oblivion, which the Royal
Party did need, as well as the other side, for all they did without lawful
Commissions. But since the days of the Flood of Confusions and Miseries, which
of them all is guilty? I write this for the honor of our Common Profession,
and for the Glory of God therein. And yet, bring them to account upon the Five
Mile Act, and how many Forty Pounds? and upon the Act against Conventicles,
then Twenty pounds for every Sermon by the Preacher, and Twenty pounds the
Master of the House for every Sermon the first time, and Forty pounds the
second, and afterward for every such Offense Forty pounds, etc. How highly
will two Sermons a day amount! and five shillings a time to every Hearer! etc.
And it is enacted that the Law be consirued most largely and beneficially for
the suppression of them. Our Justices have need of Mercy! and for encouragement
to the unskilful Justice, no advantage shall be taken for any default in any
Form, or Proceedings. The Law by this security and indempuity has been very
merciful to many Justices, not trained up in the Formalities of the Law; by way
of recompense, let them be the more merciful to the many honest Offenders, that
worship God in Christ with their best Judgment, or upon involuntary Mistakes.

My last positive Argument shall be this, and I appeal to any Man of
discerning, whether upon the first hearing of it, he be not taken with it, if
not overcome.

It is not good (no Man can say it is good) to exeute the Laws with a like
heavy hand upon all, and every Offender, without making a difference between one
Man and another, between one Offense and another.

There may be a considerable difference between one Preacher and another, one
Hearer and another, one place, and one time and another, But the Penalty sweeps
all before it.

Obj. The Law makes them all alike therefore the Executioner must act by the
Law, the Balance is out of, and not in his hand.

Answ. True; but how? still upon supposition of the evil Intention, or what was
the cause or Reason of the Law, and then I confess, the Punishment is but
moderate, upon the least and weakest Infuser of Rebellion, or mover of
Insurrection.

Justice is impartial, but never so impartial, as not to examine Circumstances,
which make an alteration, or difference between Things and Persons. Crimes have
their Mitigations as well as Aggravations; and Judges will weigh them before
they proceed to Sentence, and temper Judgment with Mercy; it moves a
compassionate just Judge to pronounce a deserved Sentence. The Justices are to
require the Execution of these Penal Laws, but with no distinction, and no more
Mercy, than the hungry Informer, who perhaps has wasted his small Fortune in a
sinful way, and acts upon no better Principle than Covetousness, and Anger
against Religion, which he never loved so well, as to practice, nor ever
learned so far as the Church-Catechism.

Must a Loyal, Learned, Laborious Preacher, that preaches the greatest Truths
of the Gospel, and preaches Holiness and Peace with the greatest Fervor, that
never taught any Defection, but from the Prince of Darkness, and the Law in the
Members; that persuades Men to be reconciled to God, to take Christ's Yoke, to
learn of him; which whosoever does; deserves the esteem of the best of Men?
Must such a Preacher pay so dearly for spending his Days, and Strength, and
Pains, to do good to Souls, to mend an evil World? and no Consideration had
either to his Merits, Soundness of Judgment, Holiness of Life, Peaceableness of
Behavior; but he must suffer as if he was a dangerous Novice, a Corrupter of
Manners, and a Sower of Tares? No respect to his Gray Hairs, the chargeableness
of a diseased Body; to the many chargeable Removes he has made, to the
Dependence of a Family, for Subsistence, etc! No Commiseration to the poor and
needy! Is there no allowance for a Man to preach, where multitudes of Souls do
perish for want of Knowledge? and others hunger for the Word, and have none to
guide them, but perhaps one that cannot guide himself! What if a man spends his
Pains in a place where there are many Parishes, that consist of many Hamlets,
and all cannot, that would, come to Church, especially in Wintertime? What if
a good Man preach in a Parish, where are many that cannot hear in one Place?
What if a Man take Pains in a place, where to many Churches there is not
maintenance for one Minister, to live like a studious and a sober Man, such as
no Man will accept, but the young and unexperienced, in hopes of a better in
time? yet shall there be no regard had to these, or many more Circumstances
that make the Labors of good Men necessary and profitable? But it is hard when
that which deserves Thanks and Encouragement, shall be rewarded with ruin to
a Man's Estate, to a Man's Health and Life, and be baited by Reproaches, as he
goes to the Justice, or as he is sent to his Prison! so was good Mr. Joseph
Allen used.

I have staid a great while upon the Positive before I am come to one step of
the Comparative. But if I have laid that groundwork well, my Comparative will
rise apace, and stand firm.

For my clearer Procedure, I will lay the Comparative between two.

1. Compare the Good you aim at by the Execution of the Laws, with the Good of
forbearance of that Execution. 2. The supposed Evil of the forbearance, with
the real Evil of the Execution.
First, The Good you aim at, by the Execution of the Laws, may I think, be
reduced to these Heads expressed in the Acts of Parliament; for you cannot aim
at any Good by the Execution, but that which was aimed at by the Laws which you
execute. I will name them particularly, First, for the preventing and avoiding
of such Inconveniences and Perils, as might happen and grow by the wicked and
dangerous Practices of seditious Sectaries and Disloyal Persons, by settling in
Corporations, thereby taking occasion to distill the poisonous Principles of
Schism and Rebellion, Act XVII Chapter II. Nonconformists restrained from
inhabiting Corporations. An. Car. H. 22. c. 1.
to the danger of the Church and Kingdom. For providing speedy Remedies against
growing and dangerous Practices of Seditious Sectaries, etc. contrive
Insurrections (as was said before) These are the Benefits you aim at, if you
aim according to the Law. Compare the Histories of the times with the Laws, and
you will find that the Nonconformist Divines, who pleaded for the Discipline,
were not so branded, such as Mr. Cartwright, and others of his way. But
(besides the Papists, Vid. Cambden. Annals Eliz. Anno 1591.
which that Law strikes at also) before that Law was made, Hacket, Arthington,
and Copinger, had showed themselves; and what were they but brainsick, mad,
ranting Phanaticks, and Blasphemers? And after the Law was made, who were taken
and punished (as Mr. Cambden observes) but Barrow and Perry? and what did they
suffer for, Annals. An. 1593.
but for Seditious Books? Barrow and his Sectaries did sow monstrous Opinions,
condemned the Church, did derogate from the Queen's Authority in Ecclesiastical
Matters. And what dangers the Queen and State were in, Thankful Remembrance of
God's Mercies. c. 13.
from the Papists at that time, may be seen both in Mr. Cambden and the
Reverend Bp Carleton, both from public Enemies, and secret Conspiracies, Dr.
Lopez, (the Sir George Wakeman of those days) being then Physician to the
Queen's Family) was to poison the Queen. Protestant Princes should beware of
Jewish and Popish Physicians. But Lopez ended his days at Tyburn.

What Poison our Nonconformists did infuse into Corporations, or what
Insurrections they moved; I do not hear, nor read of any Insurrection, but in
the North, by some of the discontented Army, when frustrated of their Hopes,
and of Venner and that desperate Company. Another Plot I have some where read
of, of Green, and other Phanaticks, blown up and incensed by the Jesuits, to
take away the King, and burn the City; when those deluded Men were engaged, The
Story touched by Sir H. C. in his Speech, October 26th, 1680.
the Jesuits gave them the slip, and left them the Halter, April, 1666. But
which of all the Nonconformist Preachers was in any of those Designs? There is
a difference between the time of making and of executing the Laws, suppose that
there was apparent danger (suppose it, which is more than I or others know)
then from Nonconformists; yet if now we have the Experience of almost twenty
Years, of their Loyalty and Peaceableness, why should the Laws made against
them that may be Trangressors, be executed upon them that are not
Transgressors? The Law is to prevent a Fact, but the Execution follows it. The
Law may proceed upon Supposition, and suspect such a thing may be; but the
Execution goes upon proof, that such a thing there was. If such an Evil. cannot
be proved, why should the Penalties be imposed?

Now they who are urgent for the Execution, must hold This, that it is better
for the King, his Kingdoms, and the Church, to punish the Nonconformists
according to Law, than to spare them. How vain and unreasonable a Proposition
and Judgment is this, when we do plainly see the King, and Kingdom, and Church
are safe from any Conspiracies, or ill Designs, or poisonous Infusions from any
of them: Certainly if any City or Corporation be in danger, it is London; but,
to God's Glory be it acknowledged, none of their Preachers have proved
seditious. What a convincing Proof did London give of their Loyalty and Valor,
in that furious and astonishing Insurrection of Venner in the City? Were not
the Dissenters then in Arms? and were not their Numbers great? How easy had it
been for them to attempt, at least, any ill Design? but as their Loyalty took
up Arms; so their Loyalty laid them down. And, let some say what they can, are
there any Men more severe than Dissenters, in point of Ceremony, against
Heretical Blasphemers, and unruly Sects? not only as differing from their
Models and particular Humors, but as contrary to the Fundamental Principles of
Religion and Government? The severity of New- England and other Places, are
Proofs beyond denial of this Observation. There is not a wise Man, but must
maintain Government, and submit to that he lives under, as far as he can
without Sin; and Distraction is an unfit means to a Reformation. Except a Man
could certainly foretell who shall conquer, it is madness in any Man or Men, to
move a War, and by Sedition to get into the Throne, and set up himself and his
own way. When the Nonconformists are fallen mad, let them be used as such; but
while there is any Wisdom in them, or these prevailing Principles of Religion
and Obedience; their Enemies may belly them, and labor to make the malicious
swallow as gross things as Transubstantiation, things against their senses; but
they will confute them by their Patience. But suppose them to be overstored and
set with the Seeds of Rebellion and Sedition; what is Sedition, but the Seditio
est publicae Pacis Perturbatio. Calvin. Lexcion Juridicum.
disturbance of the public Peace, as it is defined by the Lawyers. Now either
they can command and restrain those ill Inclinations; if so, they are wise and
quiet; or they cannot; then they are rash and stomachful. Is it not therefore
better to let them be quiet while they are so, than provoke them by Mulcts and
Ruin to make Insurrections? especially at such a time when we have Enemies in
our very Bowels, that can take the advantage of a Diversion. The State can get
nothing, by the best effect of troubling of them, but Peace, and that is had
without troubling of them: It is better to forbear a needless Trouble, than to
make it.

But secondly, It may be thought better for the Church, to execute the Laws
upon them than forbear them, and therefore it will be better for the State.

For the proof of this, there is one end proposed by the Law, in reference to
the Church, To prevent, or cure the mischief of Schism. It is but vain to talk
of preventing Schism; the Seed of that was scattered before, and took Root; the
thing now to be desired, is the Cure of the Distraction, or Schism: The Method
of curing, is by an effectual Application of Law and Power; of which
Application, there are but two things to be looked for; 1. A gaining of the
Dissenters to the Church, and that is Union. A happy Effect! if it can be
produced. 2. The second Benefit will be, a Reduction of them to their stinted
Numbers of Four besides the Household; you can never suppress them by this
Execution, for the Law has provided against a total Suppression of them, by a
tacit allowance of different Worship to such a Number.


I pass over one Advantage, which may be aimed at; It will drive some out of
Corporations, and further from their former Parishes, or places of Residence,
for this is but inconsiderable. For first, many have taken the Oath, and
explained their sense, they may stay; and for them who have not, they may
exchange with others; and you are but where you were, except the putting of
them to a new, and greater Charge; which is not merciful, except you propose a
public Good: Besides, Corporations can choose Parliament Men without their
Influence or Direction, if that be of any Consideration.

To the first of these two, I observe your Proposition is this, It is better to
gain, and unite the Nonconformist Dissenters to the Church, than to permit them
to meet as they do. That Is granted you in the general, but come to the way and
means, and assume this: But the severe Execution of the Laws upon them, will
bring them in, and unite them; therefore, dictum factum! But do you think so in
earnest? You may as well say, that Informers were ordained to convert Souls, to
reclaim straying Schismatics, and that there is more Power in Law and Justice,
than in Law and Grace.

But first, How many Anabaptists and Quakers have been converted by
Excommunications, Imprisonments, and Fines?

2. You may restrain many from going to Conventicles, that is certain, but
what is the Church the better for that? They go not to Conventicles, but may
they not stay at home, wander abroad, and do as thousands of our miserable
Persons do, that come to the Font by Baptism, but not near the Pulpit and the
Communion Table! But suppose these Conventiclers will be better than thousands,
and come to Church; then either they are convinced, and change their Judgments,
or retain their Judgments, and still hold Schismatical Opinions. How can you
expect to change their Judgments, or gain their Affections, by punishing or
threatening? The greatest Good you can propose to them, is to bring them to
Parish-Preachers. But what if either want of Preaching, or want of good
profitable intelligible Preaching, was the cause of their going to them they
liked better, and got spiritual Good by? Indeed if you could engage to them,
that if they forsake their Preachers, you will provide holy, profitable, and
painful Preachers in all places, which you can never do, then you might gain
them; but if they come to our Churches against their Judgments, then you
convert the Schismatic into a Hypocrite, or Atheist, and to serve God, because
it is the Religion of the Country. And what will the Church be the better for
such? Alas! we have more of such already, than we know what to do with.

3. Is it probable you will ever gain such to an Uniformity, that have been
many Years settled in their Dissatisfactions? and from the first day of their
Ejection reckoned what it would cost them? and since these Additional Acts have
been made, are as resolute as ever; and that are so convinced it is their Duty
to preach, and hear, and worship God in the way they have chosen, that they
look for a Reward in Heaven! Is it likely that they who think their present
Sufferings will be rewarded in future Glory, will for their temporal losses of
Goods, etc. be converted by a Warrant of a Justice? It can never be rationally
expected; you may ruin them, but it is next impossible to bring them over to
the Church, as long as the matters of Offense remain unremoved, or unabated.

4. Was ever a Nonconformist before the Year 1670, or 71, brought to Conformity
by that Severity? You may rather think they will do, as then they did, be more
retired, but as much resolved. And that which is, as you account better, seems
to me either unattainable, or undesirable. If they may not have Liberty to meet
in public, they will take that course which is left them; and that is to meet,
not exceeding four, besides the the Family: And then your Proposition will be
this, It is better to force the Dissenters by severe Penalties to their private
Houses, and their stinted Numbers, than permit them to meet as they do,
contrary to Law.

Well then, you say it is better to confine them to their Houses, and to the
Number four over and above, than to permit them as they do. But for what
Reasons? observe we are upon this Head, as it is better for the Church. And
that to cure or prevent further Schism, I can imagine but these Reasons for it:
1. Because their Nonconformity will not carry such a direct and open Opposition
to the established Worship. 2. Because they cannot corrupt such Numbers. 3.
This will break and weaken them. 4. Because, when it will be so difficult for
them to meet, they may rather, being tired, come to our Parish-Churches.


But will you conclude your Argument upon any, or upon all these Reasons? which
is, That it will cure the Schism, and prevent instilling Schismatical
Principles. Let us come up to the first.

First, I say, that you cannot prove the public preaching of the
Nonconformists to be an Opposition to the Church, any more than the French,
Dutch, and Lutheran Churches, and Preaching. To preach the same Doctrine (as to
the general matter) to the same holy Design, Instruction, Conversion,
Edisication, and Salvation, to pray and praise God by the Spirit in the name of
Christ, is not a way opposite to the Church of England, or contrary to it, but
only privative it is, as to the Omission of the Form or Liturgy. The Agreement
and Consent, and Cooperation, is greater than the Difference or Dissimilitude.
If they preached contrary Doctrine to a contrary End, it were an open
Opposition; and yet let us remember, The Jews the Enemies of Jesus Christ, have
their public Synagogue more intolerable, we may think, than the public
preaching of Orthodox Christians.

2. But because they presume upon the Favor of our Governors, if it be
offensive suppose they will forbear; does the supposed Schism cease, by their
Secrecy? not at all: But here seems to be a greater Schism, or Separation (such
as it is) than the public. 1. Because here is Private in Opposition to Public.
The Church worships God openly in Churches, they privately in a Room. 2.
Because if this meeting in private be schismatical, it is the more legal, and
the more legal, the more safe and secure. 3. The Scismaticks, (I Will call them
so for fashion sake) are multiplied by this means. Break up the public into
twenty or forty private ones, and then for one in public, there will be
twenty or forty Schismatical Meetings. It is true, they are still obnoxious to
other Laws; but they are discharged from the Severity of this, and thus you
count the Multiplication of Schismatical Separate Meetings, a Gain to the
Church: take it! see what you get; your Will, and what more?

Your second Reason is, Because they cannot corrupt such Numbers.

But, 1. I say Orthodox Preaching and Praying, is not corrupting; I have showed
them to be able and sound Men.

2. Multitudes will grow more corrupt, for want of their sound and frequent
Preaching. Vid. Page 60 of the Plea, first Part.


3. If they be heretical and erroneous, they will do more Mischief by this
keeping within the compass of the Law, than by presuming beyond the Law.

4. But corrupt or not, is not the point, the Schism is not healed by it,
therefore it is not better to restrain, etc.

Thirdly, you say, This will break and weaken them. It may do so indeed. But
except the Church gets them into Conformity, which it is not like to do (as was
said before) how is the Schism cured? but indeed sound Christianity will be in
danger of losing, and our Church past hope of getting.

To your fourth Reason I answer.

1. True, it will be difficult, and inconvenient for them to meet; they will
tire and kill their Preachers; but what gets our Church by that? Is the Schism
repaired?

2. They will (I Will say as you would have it) come to Church, but whither, and
to whom? to few some famous Preachers, for they will hear but the best, till
there be no room? and what then? Those famous Preachers shall bear the Reproach
of being popular, and Fautors of the Faction, and inclining to the Party, and
will be no better than the Nonconformists; and how will the Wound be healed
when Emulation and Envy increases, and the Dissenter will be a Temporizer, and
a Church-Schismatick, and the Conformist that tolls him in. Now you having
showed (for now I fancy my self disputing) the Good of Execution, and have not
gained the point; give me leave to show you the Good of Forbearance of the
Execution; and as bad as things now are, they are better than they can be, if
Rigor be used.

It is an unspeakable Mercy, that things are no worse, that things are so well
as they are between Protestants this day in England. I do not remember, when it
was ever better, especially considering the means that have been used to break
us; yet there is nothing in this more to be desired, than either a Christian
Forbearance, or a Composition with our Dissenting Brethren in Christ, next to
Heavenly Communion with Christ. But better, things should remain as they are,
than be made worse, by drawing the Sword, tho in the quarrel of the Church. I
do not now meddle with the Controversies between the Church and Dissenters, to
justify the Separation; although in my own Judgment, I call it a different way of
Worship, of Professors of the same Faith, and not a Schism or a schismatical
sinful Separation. The Church of Jerusalem, might better call the Gentile
Churches Schismatics, than we can call them: and the Romanists may with more
Reason call us Schismatics, than we call one another; for we broke off from
that Church, established by the Laws then in being, and in long Possession; we
separated from them principally for imposed new corrupt Doctrines, and
Conditions of Communion, and justify our Separation, and will not suffer to be
called Schismatics; They have a Creed and a Worship, which was never in the
Word of God; our Brethren agree in the same avowed public Creeds and
Doctrines, and all the parts of Gospel Worship. And it is more brotherly to
denominate them from their Agreement with us, than from their Dissent and
Disagreement from us, -- But I must not digress, and this I humbly submit.

The thing now to be done, is to make the best of our Differences, and what is
best to be done as the Case stands, It is better, as more conducing to the ends
of the Laws by which you proceed to suppress them: Therefore it is better. The
ends of the Laws have been declared above, as respecting the State and the
Church.

1. With respect to the State. When they preach in public, they are known to
be the same Men, that upon Principles of Loyalty, and Conscience prepared the
People, or concurred with the Loyal Nobles, and Gentlemen and Commonalty of
England, to bring back the King. They are known to the Land, which once
accounted them a Blessing to it, their Judgments and Practices are known, and
while these are in the head of the younger Dissenters, they are as Directions
and Examples to them, to keep them from dangerous Excursions. When His Majesty
was moved to grant an Indulgence, the indulged were to give their Names, and
their Places, which they did, and this was cautiously done, for the safety of
the Kingdom, there being less danger from a Person known, than one unknown, and
a great Obligation upon a known Person to keep within tolerable Bounds. Our
greatest Dangers have been from Persons of many Names, many changes of Wiggs
and Habits, and moving up and down the Land in secret, and Disguises.

2. It is better for the State. For when learned and good Men have their
public Liberty, they will by sound Doctrine, teach, persuade, exhort, reprove,
instruct them in their Duties to God, to the King, etc. Charge them to be
subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates. And while they
preach sound Doctrine, one end of the Magistrate's Care to the State is
obtained.

3. They cannot possibly sow Sedition, or move Insurrections in public
Assemblies, if they were so wickedly disposed. The safety of King and Kingdom,
and the Confidence of the King and Kingdom may rest undoubted, as to any ill
Designs of those Preachers, while they preach in public. And I do humbly offer
it to the Consideration of all Loyal, Protestant Magistrates, to forbear to
drive them into private Houses by their Severities, because under color of
private Meetings, our destroying, perfidious Enemies of Rome, may sow Sedition,
and further plot upon Protestants. They may as well proclaim a Rebellion at the
Exchange, Cheapside or in a Parish Church, as preach it in one of their
Meeting-places.

4. It is better they should be spared than prosecuted, because they will be
better enabled and more encouraged to perform other Offices and Duties to the
King and State, than they can possibly, by being ruined in their Estates.

5. They have many Friends and Relations in the Church of England, which must
suffer many ways, in their Poverty and undoing; It will be a Tenderness and
Kindness to them, to have them spared, and not beggared, or forced to leave the
Kingdom.

Lastly, It is certain, that it conduces more to the public Peace (...) for
when Dissenters are connived at, and gratified, they are so far obliged and
owned; and even when their private Dissatisfactions remain, their Liberty being
so far indulged, they have no cause to complain of the Magistrate; and while
they are not disturbed by him, committing nothing that is provoking, they even
from Interest and love of Quietness, if their Conscience of Duty lay dormant in
them, will not disturb him that permits them. The public Peace is best
secured, when Men of private Opinions keep them private, and have no
disturbance given to their Peace. I do not speak this, as if I feared their
Turbulency, but granting for Argument sake, that they have Touchwood in them,
keep Fire from incensing it, and it will do no harm.

Secondly, Forbearnce will be better for the Church, and prevent a greater
Schism, against which the Laws seem to fortify it.

1. By their public preaching, or as they can. We have a great considerable
number of able Men, that influence the People, that are agreed with us, against
the Force and Subtilty of Rome: therefore the more we have against them, the
stronger we are. Indulge the Dissenters, and you secure them, but if not,
they will be afraid of you, and you afraid of them, and by your mutual Fears and
Jealousies, the Papists get what they get, and not by mere Nonconformity.

2. By this public way they walk with you, according to the same Rule, as far
as they have attained, and that this is near enough for Forbearance.

3. The Scandal that is given to foreign reformed Churches is abated, and a
great Example given to them that have long contended, under the name of Luther
and Calvin, and others, of Calmness and Forbearance.

4. The Schism will come hereby to a greater Closure than otherwise it will;
for when the Church is satisfied by their profitable Preaching, and peaceable
Deportment, they cannot but conceive better of them, and desire a Peace and
Union, and abate some things which they stand upon; and when they do taste the
Sweetness of the Bishops Temper, they will love and honor them; and the
Differences that remain, will appear to be only such, as may be between good
Men and Brethren.

5. By this public Preaching, Multitudes of poor Souls that know not whither
else to go, and Multitudes that will go no where else, are kept in the way of
Salvation, and Profession of the Gospel: And this is that, which some Divines
of the Church of England are so sensible of, that they treat the Nonconformists
as Friends and Fellow Laborers; I could if need were instance in some Great
Men, and great Places where this is true.

The second Branch of the Comparison now comes to be handled, and then the
Argument runs thus: It is better that Protestant Dissenters should be spared,
or freed from the Penalties of the Laws, than be prosecuted; for the Evils of
Execution, will be greater than the Evils of Forbearance.

I am to remember my own Question, and therefore I am not concerned in the
Question about Separation, either the Sinfulness or Excusableness of it, which
has been lately largely debated, but what is best to be done at this time, and
in this posture of Affairs.

The Unhappiness and Evils of our divided State, have been considered by
Divines and Statesmen. The Divines have opened them in the Pulpit and in
Print, and have driven different ways, to the same end, the Union and the
Preservation of the Church; some representing the Mischief, have taken the more
moderate way of Persuasion, abhorring Persecution, and have so managed their
Discourse, as to take off the People from their Teachers, Dr. Stilling fl.
Mischief of Separation.
and to bring them to the Church, because there is nothing required of them,
but what many of their Teachers allow to be lawful. This way did tend toward
Union of the People. Others have urged an Execution of the Laws upon the
Brethren, withal persuading them to believe, that they suffer as Evildoers;
Dr. Ashton's Toleration disapproved.
and this is to bring home strayed Sheep through Briars and Thorns.

Our great Statesmen have taken different Measures also. Some have moved for a
severe Execution, and to force them to an entire Obedience, saying it was more
reasonable they should submit to the Church, than the Church to them. Others
being sensible of the Mischiefs, December. 21, 1680.
have stated the Case more exactly, and argued for an Union, and this prevailed
in the Debate. No Man of Sense or Piety can be insensible of the Sickness of
the Family; but whether it be better to kill some outright, or to starve them,
or to suffer them to live, may be easily determined. In a case of Discord and
Contention between Brothers, whether it be best to accommodate, or to determine
some shall have what they would, and others shall have nothing left, comes near
the Case in hand.

The Dangers of a Forbearance, are the same that were foretold would be the
Consequences of an Indulgence, which was opposed by the Parliament in the Year
1662. That House of Commons did argue against an Indulgence, and for keeping up
the Act of Uniformity, by way of Prophecy, and foresight of Consequences; and
their humble Advices presented to the King, contain the strongest Reasons
against an Indulgence, that have been found out, and contain the great
Inconveniences and Evils of a Forbearance. February 15, 1662.
I will give you the Substance of them. 1. An Indulgence will establish Schism
by a Law, make the Government of the Church precarious, and the Censures of it,
of no moment. 2. It will not become the Gravity or Wisdom of a Parliament, to
pass a Law (of Uniformity) at one Session, and pass another to weaken it the
next. 3. It will expose your Majesty to the restless importunity of every Sect,
and every single Dissenter. 4. It will cause the Increase of Sectaries, whose
Numbers will weaken the Protestant Religion; their Numbers being troublesome to
the Government, will, as their Numbers increase, be more troublesome, and from
an Indulgence arrive at a Toleration, at length contend for an Establishment,
and end in Popery. 5. It will take away all means of convicting Recusants. 6.
It is more like to occasion greater Disturbances, than Peace in the Kingdom.

But as Events prove Prophecies to be true or false, so Events have proved
these Arguments to be weak or strong. That very Parliament, the true Protestant
Part of it, that did faithfully serve their King and Country, with the
Additions made to them by a latter Election to fill up vacant Places, saw where
we were, and were sensible of the Necessity of uniting Protestants by Act of
Parliament, and many of the Episcopal Divines, and some Bishops were for it. A
clear Discovery, that the Mischiefs of our Divisions are of that sort, that it
were better an Abatement were made of some things, made necessary to
Uniformity, without which the Dissenters will not unite, than suffer them to
hang over our Heads, and come upon us.

We plainly see that many of the Reasons of the Commons (1662) are of no Force.
I will observe what is of present use to our times, which is the first. And

For the other, It became their Wisdom and their Religion to pass a Bill,
taking from the Act of Uniformity. His Majesty has not been molested with the
Importunities of the Dissenters, who have not so much as opened their
Grievances, or Petitioned the King or Parliament in these many Years.

There is no new Sect appearing, nor increase of any by the Nonconformists, to
weaken the Protestant Religion, who have used Endeavors to increase and
maintain it; it is in no danger from them, they are not troublesome to the
Government, are not for a Toleration of intolerable Sects and Secteries,
contend not for an Establishment, which they would rejoice in; but as becomes
learned Men and rational, and with as great a Temper, at least as theirs that
write against them. The Peace of the Kingdom is not disturbed by them, and if
Popery come in, it is against their Wills, Prayers and Pains to expose and and
baffle it. It is their Trouble, and a considerable part of their Affliction,
that they are thought troublesome to the Government, which may by an ordinary
Exercise of Patience and Love overcome the Trouble in their own Breast, which
is the seat of the Trouble. And for the only remaining Evil, which is the Evil
of Schism, it is clear that their Meetings are not established by Law, and a
Connivance gives no Establishment to it; but if they be driven from public,
into private Families, and keep within their Number, the Schism remains, as
great and greater than otherwise (as I said before) out of the reach, and under
protection from the Law. What the Evils of a Forbearance are, we see, but what
the Evils of an Execution of the Laws may prove we cannot see; but morally and
rationally speaking, they will be greater than now we suffer.

I must premise this, That if you proceed with rigor, you do unspeakable Hurt;
if not, you cannot do the Good you pretend: There must be a Concurrence of all
Magistrates, in all places, to take the same Course; and as you must concur, so
you must be sure that the King will shut up his Royal Bowels and Clemency, or
some particular Men will but become hateful to their Countries; and His
Majesty's Mercy will condemn their Severity. This was so well understood by an
Honorable Member of Parliament, that he moved for ways to compel the
Dissenters to an entire Obedience, and submit to the Church, by severe
Penalties.

This will be the ready way to undo all, if any thing do it; which as to His
Majesty's Person and Government, I do confidently hope, and rationally believe,
is but a great word of Fancy, an Oratorical Scarecrow. Mischief of Separation.
p. 13. and p. 22, 23, 52.
The mischiefs of our Separation are laid open to this purpose. 1. Great
Hazards of unsetling all. 2. Alienation of Hearts. 3. Advantage of our common
Enemies (the Papists.) I borrow the Heads of Mischiefs, and argue, If the
Mischiefs of Separation, while there is a cessation of Prosecutions, be so
great, much more when Prosecution cannot heal the Separation, but increase the
Causes.

1. It will, beyond all recovery, undo all Men, that have been so many Years
the more bold to assemble, because of the Lenity of His Majesty, and the
Propensity of our many Parliaments, from 1673, to accommodate the Difference;
and the inferior Magistrates have found no evil Designs among them, to give
disturbance to the Government, and many of the Judges in their Charges, have
turned the point of the Sword upon our secret Enemies, that would openly do
more against us all, than is yet to be done against our Brethren; and if other
Judges have turned the Edge of the Law against Protestants, our Magistrates
have not been forward to take the Hilt and lay on; how many thousands by their
Presumption upon Lenity, have been more open than they would haven been? But
suppose they spare the Sheep, and take away the Shepherds, the Destruction will
be great; All, the most of them have, will not satisfy this Debt to the Law. Is
it not enough for them to be dispossessed of their Preferments, to be driven
from place to place, but once more they must be undone, without regard to Age,
Sickness, Infirmities, Families, Debts, Poverty? If they have many Friends,
their Friends must suffer in their Sufferings, if they have none, or few, they
are the more undone; their Sufferings will not terminate upon them. Who shall
set them up again? bring up their Children? feed and cloth them? their Ruin
will be an intolerable Oppression upon many parts of the Kingdom.

2. Will not this unsettle the Affections, wherein the strength of Government
does consist (together with Religion and Conscience) of thousands more, than
can be spared, if other Dangers arise? And if Religion and Conscience oblige
them to love their Persecutors and pray for them, they will never dare to trust
them. A mutual Trust and Confidence is a great Strength in time of common
danger; when we are distracted in Affections, we shall be distracted in Reason,
and Counsel, and when we are so, then is the time for a Popish Army to unsettle
all.

It is well known that the Dissenters are a great, and an active Part of the
Kingdom, and if they suffer by Protestants, they will be afraid to unite with
them; and therefore to persecute them is as ill a Service, as to cut off a
great and potent Part of Religious and Industrious Men from our main Strength,
when we most stand in need of increasing Friendship, Confidence and Strength.
The unsettling of Affection, moving of Passion, which Religion cannot subdue in
all, is an effectual way to unsettle all.

3. The Prosecution of Dissenting Protestants, tends to no other end, but to
disunite Affections; it is to use Force without Reason, or Persuasion. The
Reason of the Dissenting Brethren is as far from Satisfaction, as to our
Conformity, as ever; and their Satisfactions in their Dissent, do daily
increase: to use Force without Reasons, is not reasonable; and that Force which
is used to suppress and cut off, must needs be to disunite the Hearts of Men.
To suppress them, signifies plainly, they have no value for them, that they
hate them, as unworthy to dwell in any place but a Goal, or to ly upon any Ped
but Straw. They are first exiled from their good Thoughts and Opinions; next
from their Affections; next they are judged insufferable; and they that would
drive them out of all, would proceed to Banishment, and then he that is not
thought worthy to live with us in the same Land, is reputed next him that is
not worthy to live at all; and is this the way to win their Affections! and if
they should force any to abjure his native Country, they force him against
Nature, and that is to root out Affection.

Now suppose the Dissenters are not wholly yours, yet if you cared for them at
all, you would nourish some Inclinations in them, and not thrust them from you,
but drive in those Inclinations to Peace with you.

4. It is plainly the making of a Breach among Protestants. The more weak and
passionate will be far more out with the Bishops, than they were before. 1.
Because, they at the first refused to condescend, and procured that Act of
Uniformity, by which they must needs know a vast Breach would follow. 2.
Because they can look upon the Suffering of Protestants without Compassion, so
much as not to make Intercession for them. The Brethren, and all that suffer in
them, will be tempted to hate the Bishops, and say, this does proceed from
them, or some of them. And this is another way to unsettle all. Besides, it
tends to divide the Hearts of the ignorant, and rash, censorious Multitude from
their Fellow Christians, as if they were worse than Papists, as Enemies to the
King and Government, as Disturbers of Order by their Preaching and Preciseness.
It will alienate abundance of People, that either actually suffer, or have any
Compassion to them that suffer, from abundance of Conforming Ministers, who
help on the work of pulling down of Conventicles. And this is another means
that will cooperate to our unsettlement of all.

5. This is the way to unsettle all, by undoing what has been done toward an
Accommodation or an Union, both by late Honored, and ever to be Honored
Parliaments, from the Year 1673, to the last at Westminster; and all the
Endeavous of our Reverend Fathers, Protestant Divines, and Gentlemen, toward a
desirable Union. As a Treaty of Peace tends to a Settlement, so the breaking of
a Treaty tends to an unsettlement; this zealous Prosecution, is like a vowing
there shall be no Peace; for it plainly breaks off the Treaty.

6. This tends to unsettle all, as it is an open, violent rushing against the
Reason of our late Protestant Parliaments. As their Reasons and Debates, did
determine in a Resolve for Settlement; so these out of Enmity against them, and
their Proceedings, labor to unsettle all, before they can have time to meet,
to offer any thing toward a happy Settlement; to divide the King from his
Parliament, to undo what many Parliaments have resolved to do, to prosecute
Protestants against the minds of Protestants, to disgrace the Name, and to
break and weaken the Thing, is also the way to unsettle all.

7. Except they deal worse by our Protestant Nonconformists, than they would
deal with Papists, they can but drive them to their private Hou'es and Corners;
and keep them to them (and another Argument from this Head does offer it self)
will be a greater Evil, than what the Church or State can ever suffer from open
Meetings. And that as operating more ways than one.

1. Because our Hearts will be more divided, Men's Passions incensed, Men's
Reasons sharpened, and all ways of Reconciliation stopped; the conquering
Churchmen will not offer Treaties, the broken and oppressed Church will not be
heard, all their Arguments and Books will operate no more, than the Tears of
the afflicted soften the Hearts of them that afflict them.

2. The Schism then will so far be protected, that this Law against
Conventicles cannot touch them; and I do hubbly conceive, that this Act against
Conventicles was never intended for the Good or Growth of the Church of
England, I mean the Oxford Act, and the other.
or the Protestant Cause. 1. Because they that moved in it, were moved by a
Spirit of Popery, is notoriously known, who were Sir Tho. Cl. and the rest
abovenamed. 2. It was as cunning a subterraneous Conveyance for Popery, as
could be thought of, to be made by a Law. It seeming to be to serve the Church,
was helped forward by the Zealots for the Church; but what was more contrary to
the Church, than a secret Schism privileged by the Law, that forbad an open
one? 3. It was most likely to be perpetuated, the closer it was kept and free
from Punishment. 4. They who were then Papists in a Disguise, and when they
thought it time, threw off the Disguise, could so manage the Business, as
procure a Toleration of Papists, but it shall go under the name of Favor to
Protestant Dissenters. For the Merits of the Papists pleaded for them a share
of the Favor, granted to Nonconformists, that deserved so ill. An oppressive
Act, made way for an easing Toleration, which the Parliament well perceived the
Year following, and then crossed the Contrivances for Popery, and saw that
Popery had got by the Toleration and their own Act, and moved for a Revocation
of both. 5. The Protestant Dissenters, without any difference of their
Principles were by this Law rendered suspicious, and thereby odious, as
conveying poisonous Preparations to Rebellion in their Preaching; the lurking
Jesuits, and com-plotting Papists, might carry on their firing and murdering
Projects, and when any Mischief broke out, the suspected Protestant might next
way suffer for it, or be brought in question; so that if State Policy shine out
into a Favor to Dissenters, the Meritorious Loyal Jesuits and Papists shall go
Partners with them. If State-Inquisitors smell a Fire or Gun powder, the
suspected Dissenter shall have the odium of it, and the Papists appear
bold-fac'd, as a trusty Loyalist, and who dare speak Truth of his untainted
Innocence and Greatness? 6. These dissembling Jesuits, might creep into
Couventicles, into any of them, and do their Work according to their Art;
exclaim against the rigor of the Laws, unmercifulness of the Bishops, defame
the King, and a hundred Mischiefs, as many as they could invent; seduce, and
pervert the King's Subjects, and be much pleased to hear the aspiring
Conformist talk at his highest rate against the Nonconformists, and plant his
Great Guns against Geneva, and bring up more Stories out of the Acts of the
Presbyterians, than the Acts and Monuments of the Martyrs, burnt by the
Papists. It must needs delight the Papists, to hear a zealous Ignorant,
be-rogue and damn the House-Preachers, such as creep into Corners, when they
durst not show themselves, as undoubted Protestants in the Pulpits.

And what Advantage the Papists made of our Divisions first; and next of this
Suppression of learned and able Men, they will make a Gain, and if the ill
Effects of their evil Spirits, be not greater than any Evil, which the open
Meetings can be charged with, I Will say no more but this one thing, which shall
conclude this Argument, and I am sure it deserves a reading, and a great deal
more, from every Loyal Protestant Christian.

It is the greatest Mischief that can come to our Government, and true
Religion, to give the Papists the least Advantage and Opportunity of carrying
on either Conspiracies, or false and damnable Doctrines, or to do greater Harm
than ever they have done; and these Advantages and Opporunities they will have
by driving the Nononformists into private Houses.

1. The old sound, pious, and excellent Men of the Nonconformists, grow few and
thin, Death lays them up safe from all Evils to come. This is so far from being
commodious to the Church, as it is Christian, and Protestant, (mark, I do
extend Protestancy beyond Conformity) that it is a great Loss without a great
Supply; for I Will speak my Conscience, in giving them due Honor, they were and
are constant Students and laborious Residents, learned, skilful, successful,
and deservedly had in Honor by discerning and honest Men. These were of Loyal
Principles, and sought Peace, with Truth and Purity, and as little as they were
regarded, they were regarded more than most young Men will be a long time. The
Dissenting Party will walk in their wonted Paths, both from their Education,
Prejudices, Principles and Convictions, they will hear in Private, they must
have Preachers, their Preachers cannot be in many Places, they must have
Supplies, their Supplies will be young Men. Young Men and bred Scholars will be
but comparatively too few; and what then? It will be a temptation to Men of
Confidence, to go beyond their Line; spiritual Pride will puff them up, as Men
of Gifts; yet the pretense of Wants, and conceit of Gifts will endanger many.
Now, now, if ever, here is an Opportunity for the Boys of St. Omers, who can
tell the Tales their Masters teach them, to come into England; here is work for
them! Can they not ly, and say they are the Sons of Nonconformists, tutored
under Nonconformists? cannot they ly to damn the Souls of Heretics, as
confidently as they did to save the Lives of Traitors? cannot they pretend they
were born and bred in New England. To the weaker and credulous Independent,
that know not Men, as their able Ministers do, they may say, they were brought
up by such Independents. To the Quakers, they may pretend Conversion, and come
a great way off, or give them the Honor of bringing them out of Darkness; and
so through all. And why cannot they make use of the Miseries of our persecuted
Brethren in France! and speak a little broken English, and say they are French
Protestants, intended for the Ministry, or bred in some of their Universities,
and who can disprove them! what cannot a lying young Generation do? Preach
against Popery in some points to bring it in. We read what work one Whitebread
did in Meerings of several Persuasions; and why not more take the same seducing
Trade. But when Nonconforming Ministers are known, and appear in the open view
of the Church and Kingdom, they are accountable for what they preach and do;
and if any secret Conspiracies, pernicious Doctrines, Atheism, Blasphemy, are
sowed, or fomented, the Innocent may be known, and the Guilty the sooner
discovered.

And thus I have gone thorough my whole Argument, and I hope said something
aptly to prove my Question, That it is better the Execution of the Penal Laws
be forborne, than urged at this time, if not altogether.

Having stated, and I hope offered some considerable Proof of that part of the
Question which I have chosen, tho furthest out of the Sun of Humane Favor; I
shall draw another Division of Arguments to guard and maintain it, and to turn
back the Force that comes out against it. If there be any Reason in what has
been offered, then I hope, I shall meet with some Inclinations, in wise and
good Men, to be persuaded to take that Course which is proved to be the best: I
am sure wise Men will choose that which is best, and good Men will not exercise
Severity without urgent Cause, and a rational Foresight of Advantage. I humbly
desire these following Arguments may find due Regard.

First, The Wisest, Holiest, and most Catholic Governors of the Church, have
by long Experience found that Reason, Conviction, and Calmness, have been the
winning ways upon scrupulous Persons; or else it cannot in Charity be thought,
that they would come behind others, in accomplishing the work of Peace and
Uniformity. They cannot but know what Destruction, without Reformation, will
follow Excommunications, if they proceed to Writs, and follow the Course of Law
to the uttermost. Many of our Ecclesiastical Courts have taken that way, and
can any of them, show us any one Man converted to Uniformity by it? Many have
removed from one Country and Diocese to another, and wrought themselves out of
Trouble, or abide in them to this day: But can they show any one Man they have
brought over to a sincere and hearty Conformity? Their Molestations go nearer
the Heart to separate them, than to unite them. If the Church should for
Nonconformity proceed to Sentence, and thence to Writs, and thence to
Execution, what way can they take more effectual to disobligle the Nation? The
Gentleman and Landlord suffers in the ruin and loss of his Tenant; the
thousands of poor Families that live by Manufactures, suffer in the Losses or
Removes of their Masters; and as many as actually suffer, of what Condition
soever, and their Families and Posterity that suffer in them, are made the
poorer, but never the better Christians; they are all disobliged and broken
from us. Besides, they know the charge of their Dissent, which is oftentimes
no more than, pay your Fees, and go home. The Officers of Courts get; but what
does the Church get thereby? It is visible, that those parts of the Land have
the most for number, and the most resolute Nonconformists, that have been most
severely used. The more many Men suffer, the more Arguments they gather for the
Goodness of the Cause for which they suffer. The far greater part of our
Church Governors, have abstained from rigorous Courses. Now the Civil
Magistrates are rowzing up, and awake, as out of sleep. But what is the Cause of
this Excitation? The Conservators of the Peace are harnessing themselves for
the Defense of Church and State. But what fear of the King's Life: Is it not
the Acclamation of all Protestants (is there in this, one Dissenter among them)
Long may the King live. Who does hold up a Finger to shake the Throne or
Government? or who is there that has heard of as much as a whisper of any
Conspiracy? If there be, God who sees in secret, reveal it quickly, by the
Guilty themselves; and there is no likelihood of a Concealment, (if there be
such a thing) for none but beggarly mad Men can be in it; the service then must
be done to the Church: The Magistrates rise up in Defense of it. But does not
the Magistrates Vigilance reproach the Severity, and Sleepiness of the
Watchmen? how can any, that at other times and occasions do not talk with any
great Concern, Affection, or Reverence of the Bishops, now be so zealous? If
the Bishops should proceed with one mind, roundly to Excommunications, and
break up Families by it; who would sooner complain than Gentlemen that suffer
by it? who more earnest, or be more complemental in Intercessions! But now, why
should they be so forward to undo great Numbers to the apparent detriment of
the Commonwealth, when the Bishops are so backward to give them, their
Friends, or their Dependents Trouble? What Alterations will the Execution make,
in Rents and Trade? and who will sooner feel the Effects, than he who takes his
Ease, and lives high, and cannot bear the fall of his Revenues? If the
Magistrate appear in his Power, when the Church calls for his help, it will be
duty, and self-denial too, to take part of the Odium of what is counted a
Persecution, but to hazard the breaking of many thousands, who can in some
parts of the Kingdom make a Rise, or fall of Commodities, and the loss and
trouble of abundance more by Participation to their own Dishonor, is a greater
Kindness to the R. R. Bishops than was expected, or can be rewarded with their
Blessing.

Secondly, It is more God-like, Christian, and Humane, to use Clemency, and
follow the Examples of the Indulgent, especially when the hurtful Effects of
Severity are great and apparent, and the Benefit doubtful. God is wise, just,
and holy, but continues to uphold the World by Mercy. Christianity is full of
Mercy, and the Author of it is a Reconciler, and Mediator. Human Nature, so
given to offend, would be destroyed, but for Love, Forbearance, and Mercy.
Mercifulness is like the soft Cement, that binds all the Stones in the Fabric
of Human Society, which else would never hold together, but fall without it.
With ut it Men are like rugged Stones, and Severity does not square, but chop,
and should never be exercised, but when Society cannot be preserved without it.
If this Age will follow Examples of the most exact and strict Governors, it
will find more room for Mercy, than has been shown to them that have been
excluded for want of it. But if it will set it self for an Example, it is a
question whether wise Posterity will follow it. The High Commission Court was a
kind of Inquisition, so the wise Lord Treasurer Burleigh wrote to Arch-Bp
Whitgift, But according tomy simple Judgment, said he, Fuller's Chapter History B.
ix. An. 1583.
this kind of proceeding is too much savouring the Romish Inquisition. And of
all Men, the Puritans felt the weight of it. The Puritans were opposite to the
Bishops and their Government, and Courts, and they made themselves and the
Queen, their Government and Hers all one; what was said or done against them,
was done against Her Majesty. As in Mr. Udal's Examination and Trial, is to be
seen, Pr. Land. 1643. Can. 4, 6, 9, 11.
And the Opposition between the Puritan Discipline, and the Episcopal, was
greater than has been urged ever since the King's Return. If Church History
were silent, we may learn frrom the Canons of 1603, what Language was common in
those times: But now the Controversy is not between the Presbyter and the
Bishop, but between Bishops acting in a narrow Room and a larger Diocese; yet
they are not discontent if the King shall honor some, as he does, with
Lordship, nor continue their Revenues. The Independents (supposed to be
Brownists, but are not) give not the Language of Antichristian, to Bishops, or
our Congregations; but look upon us as parts of the Catholic Church. The
Bishops are Antichurchians (as against their Congregational Power) but not
Antichristian, Dr. Owen of Church-Peace, etc. Dr. Goodwin on the Ephesians.. 35.
which was the Language of the Brownists; but those that were more opposite, or
hung off, were more kindly used. Mr. Fox a N. C. held his Prebend of Salisbury;
Dr. Humphreyes was Dean of Winchester, President of Magdalen College, and
Regius-Professor in Oxford; Mr. Tho. Cartwright, the Head of the N. C. was at
last much favored by his mighty Antagonist, A. B. Whitgift, made Master of the
Hospital in Warwick, and preached there to his Death; Mr. Travers, ordained by
Presbyters in Antwerp, after a sharp Controversy with Mr. Hooker, was made
Provost of Trinity College near Dublin, by A. B. Loftus, See Fuller's Hist. B.
ix.
Chancellor of Ireland; Rob. Brown, that deserved worst, held his Rectory of
A-Church; Mr. Stone continued in his Parsonage of Warkton; A. B. Whitgift,
whose (Stiff) constancy was known and proved, wrote thus to the Lord Treasurer
Burleigh; My Procceedings are neither so vehement, nor so general against
Ministers and Preachers, Ibid. p. 139.
as some pretend, doing me therein great Injury. In another to Sir F.
Walsingham; I have forborne to suspend or deprive any Man, already placed in any
Cure or Charge for not subscribing. Only, Bishop Anthony Rudd, in his Speech in
Convocation, An. 1604, said, See Addenda to the first Plea.
That many Learned Preachers enjoyed their Liberty, conditionally that they did
not by Word or Deed, openly disgrace, or disturb the State established, (would
that do now, we should see a return of many cast out, if not of all.) What need
I say of the Indulgence of Archbishop Abbot? Remarkable is that Discourse
between A. B. Bancroft (who was a sharp Adversary of the Puritans) with a N. C.
An honest able Man protested to him, that it went against his Conscience to
conform, which way (quoth the A. B.) will you live, if put out of your
Benefice? The Minister answered, He had no way but to go a begging, Full. B.
10. p. 57.
or put himself on the Divine Providence: Not that, said the A. B. you shall
not do so, but come to me, and I will take order for your Maintenance. Many had
Lectures, or were connived at by Bishops, or protected by Great Men, as is
proved in Particulars by Mr. Baxter. Second Part of the Defense against Dr.
Stillingfleet, c. 4. Hist. B. ix. p. 135. Sect. 18.
Pertinent is that to my purpose which Dr. Fuller writes, of some in the Time
of Q. Elizab. Reign. The Practices of the Presbyterians, now found so much
Favor, as almost amounted to a connivance at their Discipline. For whilst the
Severity of the State was at this time intended to the height against the
Jesuits; some Lenity of Course (by the very Rules of Opposition) fell to the
share of the Nonconformists, on the score of their notorious Enmity to the
Jesuitical Party. The Earl of Leicester procured great Favor for them, from
the Queen, and snibbed the Bishops for urging Subscriptions. The great and wise
Statesmen, were Intercessors for some of them, witness the Letters of the Lord
Treasurer Burleigh, and Sir F. Walsingham, in that Church History. But now, is
there no Mittigation to be looked for, when our present N. C. approach nearer
to a Closure, and when their Opposition to the Jesuits, does provoke that
Party to strain all their Policies, Power and Malice against them. Consider if
it be not a time to show Mercy to our Brethren, and not to oppress them as
Enemies, when the whole Protestant Interest among us, is saved by mere Mercy!
How contrary will the impoverishing of them be, to that Duty, If thine Enemy
hunger, feed him, if he thurst, give him Drink. Surely if we ought to relieve
an Enemy, so far as to keep him alive, we ought to spare our Brethren, and
preserve them from a Necessity to beg their Bread. But here I seem to some, to
beg a Question; I call them Brethren, when they are not. It is true, I do; and
if they who profess the same Faith, Worship, and live under the same Laws, are
not Brethren, have we any in any part of the World? Is there any Household of
Faith, out of the Household of Conformists? If not, then our extreme Zeal
against Nonconformists, will carry us to Donatism, and confine the Church,
within the Lines of our Uniformity. If to avoid this, we acknowledge a Catholic
Church, out of those Bounds; then why shall not that Right be allowed to them
that dwell among us, as well as to them that live in Foreign Nations, and
differ as much from our Form of Discipline, as they do? If therefore they are
Brethren, let them receive from us some Tokens of Affection, and not be burnt
with the Marking-irons of Anger, as unfit Objects of any thing less than
Exclusion from all Favor: And let not the Mercy, and Mildness of former times,
come into Judgment against this Generation. I do hope there are many that have
Sorrow in their Hearts daily for them, and that have Hearts of Flesh to them.

Arg. 3. Both Churchmen and Magistrates, should forbear this Course of Rigor,
for fear of being guilty of the great Sin of Persecution, or approaching near
it. All good Christians should be tender of falling into degrees of that Sin,
which in the highest degree, is proper to the Enemies of Christ. There are now
none in any place of Power, but such have by Oaths and Tests, avowed themselves
to be sincere and honest Protestants; and if they will hear Reason on their
Brethrens behalf, what Mercy can Protestants expect from Papists, or perjured
Hypocrites? Abstain from punishing, and hurting the Servants of Christ, lest ye
be found fighting against God, and obstructing the Prosperity of Christ's
Kingdom, by quenching any Light of the Gospel, because it is not set up in a
branched Candlestick, or in the Church. They would all burn in the Church, but
for something that keeps them out, in the Church Porch. Now as every Christian,
that hopes for Salvation alone by Christ, should be afraid of hurting Christ in
his Members; so must every Man be tender in affixing the Charge of Persecution
upon any: which that I may not do, I will, 1. Open the nature of Persecution.
2. The kinds of it. 3. Consider what is said to free the Prosecution of the
Laws, from being a Persecution.


First, To persecute, in this place, is taken in an ill sense, for any kind of
Vexation, or Trouble, brought upon others, especially such as is grievous to be
born; Grot. in Math. 5.10. Petr. Ravan.
it is ardenter, pertinaciter, dilgenter insectari ad nocendum; or as others,
To follow as a Hunter does his Game.

In respect of the Sufferer, it must be causeless, and undeserved, and by
Consequence not for doing ill: in respect of the Inflicter, it must be
injurious; and in respect of the Cause, it must not be a civil Cause, but
Religious in Whole or in Part. It is Persecution, if it strike at any part of
Religion, or for any Exercise of Religion.

Secondly, There are many kinds and degrees of Persecution, distinguished by
the Afflicters, Affliction, and Afflicted, and the Reasons, Causes, and Ends.

The menaced Sufferings of the Nonconformists, are not, 1. From an open
professed Enemy of the Faith, but (what is mavelous) from Men professing the
same Faith, as Protestants, the Power being in no other hand. 2. It is not for
Christianity, for the Name of Christ, or being Christians. 3. It is not
directly a suffering of Death, or Banishment, (tho it may come to it) as it is
a proceeding upon the Act of the 17th and 22d of our King; but such has been
the Zeal of some Justices in some parts of this Kingdom, as to threaten
Dissenters with Abjuration, Banishment, and Death.

But ordinarily, the threatened Punishments are of loss of Goods, of Liberty to
do good to Souls, of Imprisonment, for particular Acts and Exercises of the
Christian Religion, only because performed in an undue manner, as to human
particular Laws, by Preachers that have not conformed upon the imposed Terms of
exercising their Ministry, and upon such as hear them, beyond such a Number;
and these Punishments are threatened by Christian, Protestant Magistrates,
against professedly Protestant Preachers and Hearers.

They who suffer, say, They suffer for Conscience and Religion, and therefore
they are persecuted; they who punish them, say, It is not for Religion, but for
doing ill.

Let us impartially examine the Case, as urged by the Nonconformists, and as
defended by some Conformists. The Nonconformists argue thus;

Preaching and Praying are necessary Duties.

But the Nonconformists are punished for Preaching and Praying.

Therefore for necessary Duties; and by Consequence they are persecuted.

A Reverend, (and by his many serious Professions, Toleration disapproved, Ox.
1670, 2d Edi.
which I admit) a good Man, undertakes to take off this Argument.

Indeed the Argument is laid down defectively, because the words of the Laws
are upon pretense of Religious Exercises, there are other Exercises of
Religion, besides Preaching and Praying.

The same Reverend Author does distinguish to the major Proposition, and flatly
denies the minor. Preaching and Praying (says he) are necessary Duties, quoad
Substantiam, but quoad Circumstantias they are not necessary, and he reckons
some Circumstances, in which it is true, they are not necessary; as to two or
three thousands, etc.

2. He utterly denies the minor, as false. They are punished for not observing
those Circumstances (says he) about Preaching and Praying, which Authority
requires; or, for not performing those Duties in such a manner; or more
plainly, for not submitting to those Constitutions established, for the better
ordering of those Duties, which Constitutions he proves to be good, from an
Enumeration of all the Causes. They are good, respectu Efficientis, sufficient
Authority. 2. Materiae, the matter not unlawful, or contrary to a former
Obligation. 3. Formae, a sufficient Promulgation. 4. Finis, the publict Peace
and Safety.

To consider all these things distinctly, Let me say,

1. By necessary Duties, we agree are, meant Duties necessary by the Divine
Precept, or as Means to the Ends of Christian Religion.

2. Ministers and People are first obliged to Christ, as their Governor
absolute, according to his Laws, and to temporal Governors subordinately, in
and for the Lord. Therefore the first and principal Regard of Obedience is to
Jesus Christ, with that strictness he has bound us to.

3. No Action of Religion can be done without Circumstances.

4. Circumstances are subservient to Duties; and we are sure, that God does not
tie up to such Circumstances, as do always tie up from the Duties, tho in some
Circumstances the Duty may be omitted; but they are such, as render the Duty
for that time unnecessary; and if Men would learn from God, they would never
enjoin such Circumstances, as shall hinder any to perform them, from whom God
requires them.

5. Those Circumstances, as you call them, are such as no private Man can take
away, because required by Laws. Being such, it shall never be lawful for any
Nonconformist to preach to more than Four beside the Household, yet they are
bound absolutely to Christ, to preach (without any Restriction, if the Bishops
please) for else they would be only conditionally bound to Christ, and
absolutely bound to the Bishops. If the Bishops allow them, then Christ allows
them; if the Bishops forbids them, then Christ forbids them: for all Power
derived from Christ, is for Christ. If the Nonconformists neglect necessary
Duties out of respect to human Circumstances; who do obey? He that requires the
Duty quoad Substantiam? or them that shut them up or rather out, per
Circumstantias; which is best, to neglect the Duties required by Christ, when
they cannot without Sin observe the Circumstances; or neglect those
Circumstances, and do the Duties in such other Circumstances as they can have?
This were to make the Observation of Human Circumstances more necessary than
Divine Ordinances.

6. It is in some Circumstances as necessary for a Nonconformist to preach
without our Circumstances, as it is for us to preach with them.

7. The Case has been, and may, as it was to Peter Martyr before he lest
Italy, to preach, and administer Sacraments, in a Conventicle of many hundreds,
or some thousands, and necessary to venture Life and all for it. Apology for N.
C. preaching, to the Bishops, p. 15, 16.. 12.
What R. Mr. B. writes, is to the point of Circumstances, If the Magistrate
forbids us to preach the Gospel; either our Preaching is necessary or
unnecessary, and this either notorious or doubtful. If our Preaching be
notoriously unnecessary, we will obey him, and forbear. If it be a doubtful
Case, we will use all means God has appointed us, to know the Truth; and if
yet it be doubtful, and our Minds in suspense, we will stand to the Judgment of
the Magistrate, and forbear. But if our Ministry be notoriously and undoubtedly
necessary to the just Ends, which is the Edisication of Men's Souls, we will
obey God in Preaching, as we are able, and humbly and patiently bear what is
laid upon us by our Rulers; nor do we take our selves bound by Christ to one
Place, or one Time, or manner of Teaching, or to speak always to a great
Assembly; but all these are Circumstances, which we must fit to the end and
success of our Work.

To conclude this Head, Although the Nonconformists cannot preach in those
Circumstances (as you call them) enjoined by Law, for fear of sinning, as they
do confidently and seriously declare, and for no other Reason; they must preach
and pray, and perform other Religious Exercises upon such Circumstances as they
can have, and that (if it cannot otherwise be) upon hazard: for it is a greater
Sin, and deserves a sorer Punishment, to neglect a necessary Duty enjoyend by
Christ, than to neglect the Observation of such Circumstances, as are enjoined
by (a lawful) Authority; except Jesus Christ has given such Power to
Magistrates and Church Governors, as to command Circumstances, which all his
Servants without dispute, or hesitancy, must obey; and that Christ does rather
approve of the neglect of necessary Duties, than for respect to them,
transgress human Circumstances, by which, necessary Duties may be suspended, or
rendered unnecessary. If both cannot be done, the one without the other, which
must give place? the Circumstances to the necessary Duties? or the Duties to
the Circumstances? Especially when we consider that Christian Preachers, and
People, are first and absolutely obliged to Jesus Christ, and but subordinately
and conditionally to Men in Authority. Notwithstanding the Nonconformists
noncompliance with (what some call) Circumstances in Preaching and Praying,
which are necessary Duties, they do well, for they obey the greater.

Now I pass to the Minor: But Nonconformists suffer for Preaching and Praying.

This is utterly denied, and indeed if this be not denied, the Conclusion would
necessarily follow: Therefore they are punished for necessary Duties, and by
Consequence for Religion, or doing well.

Now that which is incumbent upon me, is to show, that indeed they suffer for
Religious Exercises; and to prove that, I must consider what is said to the
contrary, which I shall do, in the first place:

They are punished, says he, for not observing Circumstances required, or for
not performing them in the manner required, or for not submitting to those
Constitutions established, for better Order, etc.

I answer, It is true, they suffer for not submitting to these, but not for
that Cause alone, but for Religious Exercises, ut infra.

You say, the Constitutions are good, by an Enumeration of Causes. To which I
answer; 1. The Nonconformists do not deny, but own the Efficient, the
Legislative-Power. 2. They refuse and question the matter of many of the
Constitutions, and if they scrupled but one, they cannot subscribe to all; and
that because unlawful to them. 3. Many suffer for not subscribing, and
declaring their Assent to the Common Prayer, which came not to them before the
time was expired for so doing. Here is a defect of a Cause, the formal Cause,
the Promulgation of the Constitutions. We that lived nearer London, had but a
little time to peruse the Liturgy; but many had not time at all, in many
places, and they not in the remotest Parts. A Divine of Years and Learning, in
the Diocese of Lincoln, And it was the case of many more in that Diocese. And
Mr. B. of W. in the County of L. was ejected by Sir Edward Lake, although he gave
that Reason, that the Book was not brought him before the 24th of Aug. nor
before he was declared deprived by the Commissary.
gave this for one Reason, in his Farewell Sermon, that he was to be silenced by
Law, for not subscribing and assenting to a Book which he had not seen. It is
likely he had other Reasons; but they that suffer for not submitting to what
they saw not, do not suffer for doing ill, but well. Lastly, The Constitutions
are for public Peace and Safety; but except the matter be of that Tendency,
many Constitutions may be good in respect of the Efficient, Formal, and Final;
but may be ill in respect of the Matter. And the Coutroversy of the
Nonconformists is about the matter of the Constitutions chiefly. And if their
Preaching and Praying give no Disturbance, but to some Minds, easily stirred,
and tend to Godliness and Honesty, then they are so far good, and agree with
the design of the Constitutions. They suffer, as appears, for an Omission, not
obeying the Constitutions, and them chiefly, in one Cause, and but perhaps in
some one part of them: See then what the principal Cause of their many
Sufferings is; they are such things as are, as we say, things indifferent, but
necessary in Practice by human Laws; which compared with the necessary Duties
of Religion, which are enjoined by Christ, and the Laws of the Land, are but
small and unnecessary; yet not obeying these Constitutions which bind not
immediately by a Divine Precept, shall render able Ministers unserviceable; yea
it shall be a sinful Act in them, to do necessary Duties, acknowledged by all
Christians to be such, for not observing them. Having laid these things open, I
proceed to prove that the Nonconformists suffer for Religious, Christian
Exercises.

1. The Lawmakers, in their Laws, never noted them for other, than for
Religious Exercises, and for good Duties; therefore we must take them for good,
not only by the Law of Christ, but by our Temporal Laws. All the Ministers of
England and Wales, that were ejected for not subscribing, etc. were supposed
good, if they had subscribed; and when they were ejected, they were not
degraded from their Ministry, nor was their After-preaching, prejudged to be as
no Preaching and Praying. The same Act might have declared their Religious
Exercises to be null, and them no Ministerss; they were removed from their
Stations, and deprived of Tithes and Profits, but their After-performances lost
not their internal Nature, although they should be performed without
Common Prayer, Rites and Ceremonies.

2. The Subsequent Acts do not absolutely forbid their Religious Exercises, as
Evil, or Evil-doing, but as deficient in the external Form, and as abused by
ill Men and Hypocrites, to move to Rebellion and Insurrection, endanger Church
and State, and to such a Number of People, and if they were such, they would be
materially Evil, and then cease to be Religious Exercises.

3. So then their Fault lies in Deficiency of things concomitant, which does
not so affect them, as to change them from Good to Evil; they may be acceptable
with God, and profitable to Men for all that, so far as they celebrate
Religious Exercises, to pious Ends, they materially and finally do the things
that are pleasing to God, and do well, even Men being Judges.

4. They do not suffer Fines and Imprisonments for not subscribing declraing
according to the Act of Uniformity alone, they suffered for that before: They
do not suffer for moving Seditions, or Insurrections, whereof none has been so
much as charged, much less found guilty. They do therefore suffer for
performing Religious Exercises.

1. So the Witnesses or Informers testify, and not for moving Insurrections.

2. So the Warrants should run against them; therefore for doing well, and for
Religious Exercises.

3. If not for Religious Exercises, how come the Preachers to be fined 20 l. or
others for them, not for beating Drums, or for bearing Arms, I suppose?

Obj. But the Law prohibits all Religious Duties and to above Four and the
Household, which are not legitimated by the Common Prayer.

Answ. It is true, but then let us observe, That the mere absence of the
Common Prayer, and Ceremonies, does not change them; they are Christian,
Religious Duties, notwithstanding that defect; for it could not be supposed
that near 2000 Ministers, dedicated to God, would cast off Religious Exercises,
when cast out of their Places, or that they would use those things, to which
they refused to subscribe; and tho they could not imagine that, they denied not
Preaching and Praying without a Form, and Ceremonies, to be Religious Duties.

2. Some of the Duties which they perform, are after the manner of the Church
of England; such is their reading of the Scriptures, singing of Psalms, and
Preaching, we being at liberty as to Text, Words, Method, and their praying
before, and after Sermon; we are not tied to the very Words and Syllables in
Canon LV, but to those Words, or to that Effect, To move our Congregations to
pray. Now if they read, sing, pray, preach, as we do, they suffer for those
Religious Exercises; therefore for Religion, and Well-doing; but supposing them
imperfect for want of the Common Prayer, yet so far as they are religious, they
are good.

Obj. But they are looked upon as suspicious Persons, because they subscribed
not, etc. to the Act of Uniformity in the Oxford Act.

Answ. True, but two things are considerble.

1. Many took off that Suspicion, by subscribing that Declaration; yet that
will not excuse them, if they preach to above Four.

2. Their not subscribing, and declaring according to the Act of Uniformity,
makes the cause of their Suffering doubtful. The Law calls them to conform upon
such Conditions, of subscribing and declaring. Their Consciences, after the
most diligent search into all things required, command them, upon peril of
sinning against God, to forbear. They may be deceived, and why may not fallible
Imposers be deceived (say they) if they suffer for not sinning against God, and
Conscience? If they suffer for performing Religious Exercises, according to the
general Rules of the Gospel, and their own Consciences, as well informed as
they can inform themselves, they suffer for Religion, although they that exact and
execute Punishments, think they suffer for Omissions, and Obstinaces in those
Omissions. They suffer for Omission of humane Constitutions, which they hold
not Divine, and perform Duties, which they hold to be Divine. The case is as
clear to them to be unlawful, as it is clear to them that command them, to be
lawful, therefore the Case hangs in doubt. If they that refuse to conform,
refuse upon peril of temporal Losses, they who inflict them, do inflict them
upon peril of sinning also. He that suffers, for doing what is confessedly
Religious, and forbears what is dubious, or sinful in appearance, is on the
safer side, than he that punishes for undoubted, religious, necessary Duties,
only for the Omission of unnecessary things.

Obj. But holding their Meetings to above Four, and in public, is seditious in
the eye of the Law, and they suffer for that, and not for their Religion.

Answ. Indeed that seems to be the only criminal Circumstance. But why shall
this alter the Case? which is far better, and more satisfactory to Magistrates
and the Church, than their retiring into allowed private Houses, and the
stinted Number. But this does not make Religious Exercises, to be no Religious
Exercises, except it infuse poisonous Principles into a Multitude, which is not
known, and cannot be proved; it is Religion and not a Riot, that is really
punished. Now granting this to be a forbidden Circumstance; compare it with the
many Circumstances, that make it the more allowable, and then, shall Religious
Exercises, necessary to be observed, profitable to many, be therefore
unpardonable, because of one Circumstance? This I humbly refer to
Consideration, before the Magistrate strike with the heavy hand of the Law.
Make the most that can be of the Fact: Here Is Religious Service, performed
without Ceremony, and Form, (there is the defect) here is a Religious Exercise,
to a supernumerary Company, that is the excess. But to this let us compare the
nature of the Exercises, unquestionably Divine. The Institutor is Christ our
Lord; the Ordinances are necessary, the manner of Performance, according to the
general Rules of Christ, highly beneficial, and tending to public Good, and
eternal Life; yet for the want of a Circumstance or two, (made necessary by a
mutable Law) the Observers of them shall be punished as Evil doers.

Are not Humane Constitutions subject to the Providence of God, the Supreme
Governor, whose Dominion is especially, to be owned in all Christian Kingdoms?
Suppose then, by the over ruling Providence of God, there are Alterations made
in the Affairs of the Kingdom, which make that which is a Divine Ordinance,
become a necessary Duty to Men prohibited by temporal Laws, whether Governors
of Chrstian States should not observe them, and make their Laws stoop to the
Divine Will? The Defenders of the Church argue, It is more reasonable the
Dissenters should yield to the Bishops, than the Bishops to them; so say I, It
is more reasonable and decent, that Humane Laws should yield to the Divine
Pleasure, than the Work of God be stopped by Humane Laws.

The true State of this, as far as I can perceive, lies before us thus: First,
The preaching of the Gospel, is an indispensible good Duty. Secondly, They who
are fitted, called, and devoted to God, are bound to preach it. Thirdly, Some
that are happily fitted for it, become suspicious to some in Power. Fourthly,
By long Experience and Process of time, they cannot be charged with such
Crimes, as are of ill Operation to the State. Fifthly, These Men are ready to
give such security to the State, as the Generality of unquestionable Subjects
give, and to take away all just cause of Jealousy and Mistrust. Sixthly, They
are qualified by Christ, and must give an account to him; they are called and
invited to discharge their Duties as Preachers. 1. Their Conscience puts them
in mind of their Vows, as Persons devoted to Christ to serve him upon his
Conditions. 2. The cry of Souls calls them, that either want, or want such as
can and will do them good; this is the plain case in multitudes of Places. 3.
God unexpectedly opens a door for them by Fire and Plague, and other
providence. 4. Calm Proceedings of Magistrates, and the Inclination of Law
givers give them Encouragement. 5. Their Zeal for God answers this Call. 6. God
gives them his Blessing, follows them with success, which is a sign of his
Approbation, which he never gave to Evil-doing. And shall this be punished by
Christians as Evil-doing! This is to act contrary to God; to punish them, whom
God approves! -- There is a Humane Law, stands in their way, revoked in Voto,
by them that made it; shall the observance of that Law, suspend the
Administration of Ordinances in themselves good, well performed in the general
manner, where there is great need; and to good Ends without dangerous Effects,
or Consequences to them, that once did forbid them?

Preaching and Praying are good Duties; but the Nonconformists Preaching and
Praying, tho good in Substance, is not good because of ill Circumstances, say
some. Now then the Opposition here, is not between their Preaching and Praying,
and ours, but between their Circumstances and ours; we according to Legal
Constitutions, they not according to them. But, as has been argued, there is
but one Circumstance that is faulty, (the want of Common Prayer and Ceremonies,
makes not their Preaching faulty; for the Law that enjoined them, did not brand
their Preaching and Praying without them, as Evil-doing) the Evil attending
their Preaching, are the ill Designs and Ends which they never drove at; it is
good if free from them; it is ill it seems, because to too many Hearers. Here Is
one Circumstance, or want of one Condition! To this one oppose all the
Circumstances (if you call them so) and they are more, and greater for them,
than this one against them.

There is no such Preaching and Praying, and performing good Duties, as is
absolutely perfect, and free from all Faults; and oftentimes in necessary
Ingredients, and Conditions, the best Man fails. This supposed, the Question
arising is, Whether they who observing the Call of God, Answer of their
Conscience, need and benefit of Souls, are blessed of God in their Work (tho
but in some measure) do not do better, to preach and pray at all hazards, if
otherwise it cannot be, than if they did forbear? (because in one point they
offend against a revokable Law) and for that, how many Circumstances do
over-match that one? First, For their Persons, they are else in all points
subject to the Laws. Secondly, For their Doctrine, ready to give an account.
Thirdly, For the manner of doing, it is in a peaceable way, without any kind of
Riot; they meet and part as peaceably, as any of our Church Assemblies do.

There is, I say again, no such performance of Duties, as is absolute
faultless, and perfect in all Circumstances. The Duties they perform are
religious, defective only in outward Form; and is it not comparatively better
to perform them, than forbear them? And can he, that punishes them for such
Religious Exercises (neither materially poisonous, nor effectually poisoning
Subjects) ever be excused from punishing Well-doing, and for Religion, if these
Considerations have any Reason in them?

Obj. It is not Religion, but their Nonconformity to the Laws, that is punished.

Answ. Their Nonconformity was punished once before, by their loss of their
Livings, and temporal undoing; how often must the same Men be punished for the
same Fault, as you, and not they, account it?

Obj. They are Men of ill Designs, etc.

Answ. Why do not you prosecute them, as such, if they are such, and leave out
their Preaching and Praying out of your Informations and Warrants?

Obj. If the Execution of Laws, shall be termed Persecution; then woe to
Magistrates, will any Man dare to call it Persecution? This (...) the case, etc.

Answ. All due Reverence to the Laws, and to the Magistrates premised; the
Administrators of Laws, may be guilty of undue Prosecutions, and persecuting
Men with good Laws. Merciless and uncharitable urging of good Laws beyond their
intention and scope, and with Revenge and Rigor upon the Peccant, is
Persecution in the common Acceptance of Men.

To conclude this Disquisition, It is undeniable that nothing but Preaching and
Praying, and other Religious Exercises, are the Cause of Trouble and Sufferings
to very many, who had not been at all molested, but for those Duties. If there
be a house full of Friends, or Strangers, that come and go in a peaceable
manner; yea although many or all of the Men are armed with ordinary Weapons, if
there be nothing but eating and drinking, and common Discourses, they are not
molested; yea, if a great deal of their Discourse be religious, there is no
Information, nor issuing out of Warrants; but if there be a Preacher among
them, and any Solemnity in the Duties of Religion, this becomes offensive, and
liable to the Laws. It is the Exercise of Religion that gives the Offense, and
makes the Company guilty; and how Punishments fall upon such, when met without
Weapons, or quarrelling, or disturbance of the Peace, to make it a Riot, but
for Religion, is not to be thought. There is no Question to be made, but many
Justices have been guilty of gross Persecution, abusing the Laws to the service
of their Anger and Revenge, and have gone beyond the Law, when they have wanted
sufficient Evidence, either of Preaching, Praying, or Expounding, or of any
Preacher being in Company; but have told the Informers, if they heard but a
Tone like Preaching, it was sufficient. It can be proved of one Justice, that
without any other Proof, sent out his Warrant to levy upon the Goods of them
that were present; and I have seen a Copy of another Warrant, for levying of 20
l. when it was not proved, that there was a Preacher in the House. If these are
true, then such Executioners of Justice, do execute for Religion, and for no
other Offense. Such also as threaten they will not leave a Meeting House
standing, who know bo h the Preachers and their Auditors, to be peaceable
Persons, and cannot pretend any cause of Fear From their Assemblies, do
threaten, as displeased with their Religious Exercises, and for no other Cause;
for, if they can suffer many lazy irreligious Persons to absent from Church,
and not punish them, tho they have no lawful cause of their Absence, and
threaten to punish them that are religious, but in another way it is not
Conscience and Zeal of Duty to the public Worship, that moves them; for then
they would punish the lazy (...) idle, or profane, and say, They will not
suffer any Person to be absent from the Common Prayer, but be zealous against
some, as against others.

But this is not the Temper of all, therefore I will not bring in a charge of
Persecution against all, but I will endeavor to show what is required of a
Man, that cannot be said to persecute, and leave it to the Examination and
sentence of every Man's Conscience.

1. He must be a knowing Man, not in Christian Religion in general only, but in
these controverted points about Religion; he must not be so senceless, as to
call Religion, Sedition, nor to make a different Form to be a different
Religion, or that Religion is subverted by a Difference from some humane
Constitutions. He must be a knowing Man, lest he rush ignorantly upon the
Servants of Christ. Paul was a Persecuter, when he was ignorant; Ignorance did
excuse him from the Malice, but not from the Persecution. He must not only
[think] he does God good Service, for so did others, who for all their thought
did persecute the Disciples, but be [sure] he does God good Service.

2. He must be a sincere Lover of Jesus Christ, of his Holy Ordinances, of all
that believe on him, and that worship him; for if he hate Christ, hate his
Gospel, Preaching, Praying, and Religious Duties, or hate the Disciples of
Christ, he must needs be a Persecutor, and of the grosser sort.

3. He must be sincere in what he does, for the thing which he does, he must be
satisfied that he does well, and he must intend the Glory of God, and the
honor and preservation of Religion in it. If he pretend in his Warrants,
Sedition, or evil Designs, when there is none, he acts falsely, and pretends
that to be the cause of his Commands, which he verily knows is not the cause,
as not being as much as alleged or proved. If he thus proceeds, he strikes at
Religion, under pretense of Sedition and Rebellion.

4. He must consider the Circumstances of the Persons, both Preachers and
Hearers, the time of their Meeting, the need they have in their Places, and
other Circumstances. But if, without Examination, or making any difference for
his Information, he follows the story of the Informer, then proceeds to the
Punishments, and that perhaps for doing the best Duties, and some of the best
Works they can do, then he punishes Men for welldoing.

5. He must be a merciful Man, not stretching the Law, as far as he can in
severity, to oppress or break the Persons; for certainly it is not the end of
the Law to ruin the Subject, but to preserve him, as much as may be. They that
proceed to the rigor of the Law, have a spite at the Persons; and let their
love to Religion be, as they think, sound; yet they persecute the Person. How
such can excuse themselves, is unknown to me, that if the Preacher be gone, or
be so poor, (as it has often been found) then to multiply Sums, 20 l. for the
House, 20 l. for every poor Preacher, 5 s. for hearing, upon the Master of the
House, for hearing, besides the 20 l. for his House, 5 s. for the Wife, 5 s.
for every Child, and so on: or else to lay as heavy a Sum upon a poorer Man, as
upon the richer, is unequal and unmerciful; and if Justices are not merciful,
they have the Countenance of the Law, for Unmercifulness, and Revenge upon whom
they please. Certainly that Man is unmerciful, who would seize upon a Bed of a
poor, aged Widow for a Debt, or Rent; but whether it be merciful to do so, as
it is said, it has been somewhere so done, for being at a Conventicle, let
Christians judge.

6. He must beware, lest by his Justice, he does put a stop to the Gospel, and
hinder the growth and exercise of true Piety; for if he hinder the Gospel, he
does not the part of a Friend and Servant of Christ. If by the suppression of
Conventicles, the serious profession and exercise of Religion be discouraged,
he does evil, by his doing good, if he does good by executing his Office; yet
if the Execution of his Office, be to the hurt and decay of Religion, he does
ill by doing well, and does, as a Friend, the real, if not the intentional part
of an Enemy.

7. He must really be persuaded in his Conscience, that all ways of Worship,
not contrary to, but different in Form and Ceremony from the Church of England,
is meritorious of personal Ruin, and the Ruin of Children in their Parents
(for it will quickly rise to that) that it is Evil-doing, that it deserves
greater punishments, than common Swearing, or riding Journeys on the Lord's
Day; that he must be sure, that he intends no hurt or disadvantage to serious
Piety, that he loves the Persons of the Dissenters, as he does other Men,
wishes no ill to any of them, and that judging their Practices to be
Evil-doing; that he punishes them merely, and only for Evil-doing, without
respect to Anger, private Displeasure, or secret Gain, either by Bribes, or
Rewards, either of Favor, Honor, or Estimation, or saving of himself. He that
punishes rightly, must sincerely bend himself against Evil-doing, as
Evil-doing, for the good of the Person; or if not, for the Benefit of that
Person that suffers for the good of others. If you can chastise the Religious
for Religious Exercises, and save Religion harmless, you have divided the
finest Hair that ever was seen. Nonconformity implies Conscience (or else it is
flat irrational Madness, to suffer for a whimsy or humor) and to punish them
for Religious Duties, and not for Religion and Conscience, is too Metaphysical
a Notion, to be brought to Practice.

I have now opened the Case, let others judge whether it be not Persecution: It
hurts the Sufferer, it molests and vexes him, his Vexation is for Religious
Exercises, materially good, finally good, effectually good to many, without
harm to any, faulty in an outward Form, or Circumstance, which may be born
with, without danger to the Kingdoms Peace, or to true Religion. If this should
prove to be a Persecution in any Magistrate, or other, then it follows,

Fourthly, Be persuaded from this Course of proceeding, and wait for healing
Applications and Remedies; for it is one of the most unkind, unnatural
Prosecutions, that have been ever carried on. The Persons are our peaceable and
loyal Fellow Subjects, useful in the Commonwealth, make up our strength
against our common Enemies; they are related to us in the Flesh, baptized with
the same Baptism, believe in the same God, and Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
with one Faith, and that have offered to unite with us, in the same Form of
Government, and of Prayer, as far as they could, without danger of sinning; we
are not under the Temptation of complying with an Heterodox Prince, against the
Orthodox Christians; our King professes the same Faith. It was an unhappinss
to the Church, when an Arian Emperor, or Empress, drew the Flatterers, and
timorous Bishops, to persecute the Orthodox. This is not our case, the
Controversy now, is not between the Heretic and the Orthodox, we do not in
them prosecute the Arrian, Nestorian, Eutichian, or Donatist. Nor does the
Papist persecute the Protestant, but the Protestant disobeys the Protestant,
and the Protestant does afflict, if not persecute, the Protestant, which is a
doleful Consideration! Oh! how bitter is it! if there can be no difference
found in Religion, there shall be a difference made by some Acts of Policy; if
none in Articles of Faith, there shall be in Conditions of Communion and
Ceremony. Here the professed sincere Protestant takes up a Complaint against
them, who are as sincere as he. The Orthodox did communicate with the
Heterodox, yea with the Heretic; the Heretic broke off first, and begun the
Persecution, and followed it: But the Orthodox, when he had Favor and Power
for him, did not revenge. Let Heresy, which is from the Flesh and the Devil, be
propagated, and enforced by carnal and diabolical Weapons; but let Truth which
is from God, be carried on with Love. Truth goes forth with Evidence and
Conviction like the Sun; but Heresy comes into the World sometimes with
Silence, but is carried about in a Storm, attended with Lightnings. Who but an
Ismael will persecute an Isaac? If the Papists will persecute, who are by
another Mother, a second Hagar, which gendreth to Bondage, and scares us with
Thundrings and Excommunications, as from Mount Sinai, or Ebal; let Peace be in
the Walls of Jerusalem. If Papists persecute Protestants, O let not Protestants
persecute Protestants! To open this that I may move both Reason and Compassion,
I will consider, Who punishes, who are punished, and for what, and see where
we can find the like; and whether Heretics and Papists, and the immoderate
Lutherans are not justified by us, in the Cruelties which they have exercised.

1. The Magistrate is professedly a sincere Protestant, or else he must be an
abominable perfidious Hypocrite, because of his Oaths, and Renuciation of the
Pope and Popery.

2. They who are punished, are as Orthodox holy Christians as any in the World,
out of our own Church. They are profitable and peaceable Subjects,
notwithstanding many discouragements and provocations from fellow subjects, and
hidden Traitors.

More particularly, many of them have deserved well from the Church and State;
which in humane Probability had never been restored, but for their Loyalty,
Religion, and Conscience. This made the most Renowned Sir Matthew Hale, say
(whose sense may be as soon taken as most Men's alive, for his Wisdom, Loyalty,
Integrity, and Impartiality in all Acts of Judgment) Many of the Nonconformists
had merited highly in the business of the King's Restoration, and at least
deserved, Dr. Burnet' s Life of Sir M. Hale, p. 65, 66. large Octavo.
that the Terms of Conformity should not be made stricter than they were before
the War. Yea, to advance as high as I can, in an unquestionable Authority: His
Majesty in his Gracious Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs, said, ( page
5.) That while he was in Holland he was attended by many Grave and Learned
Ministers from hence, who were looked upon as the most able and principal
Assertors of the Presbyterian Opinions -- and to Our great Satisfaction and
Comfort, found them Persons full of Affection to Us, of Zeal for the Peace of
the Church and State, and neither Enemies to Episcopacy or Liturgy, but
modestly to desire such Alterations in either, as without shaking Foundations,
might best allay present Distempers.

And in his Gracious Speech to the Lords, ( July 27. 1660) to hasten the
passing the Act of Oblivion: My Lords, if you do not join with Me in
extinguishing this Fear, which keeps the hearts of Men apprehensive of Safety
and Security, You keep Me from performing My Promise, which if I had not made,
I am persuaded neither You nor I had been now here. I pray let Us not deceive
those who Brought, or Permitted Us to come together.

The greatest Charge against them, is, That they are Separatists and
Schismatics. Besides, that this remains in debate between the Accusers and
Accused. Suppose them to be so, Yet 1. The very Independents, I mean the chief
of them, besides what they have declared in the above quoted Declaration of
their Faith at the Savoy, to be neither Brownists nor Donatists. Besides many
Passages in Dr. Owen's Books, Mr. Nigh has declared himself, Case of great and
present use, Land. 1677. 35th Sermon. on the Ephesians, p. 477 fol.
as to our National and Parochial Ministry, and hearing us preach; and Dr.
Good. lays down the Opinions of Brown and Donatist, and says, And against
these, I for my part, and many of my Brethren, profess that they are in an
Error, etc.

The Turbulency of Brown's own Spirit ran him into many Oppositions and
Troubles; but he, the greatest Schismatic of those days, enjoyed his good
Parsonage while he lived. The first Emperor that made Laws against the
Donatists, was Theodosius, but they were not punished for their Schism (the
greatest in the World) as such; but the occasion of the Penal Laws against
them, Augustine Bonifacio Ep l. 2. Epist. 50.
was their barbarous abuse and beating of Bishop Maximinian, almost to Death,
tearing of his Altar, etc. and other insufferable Violences and Furies. The
Riots and Murders committed by them, and the Circumcellions (the same Faction)
was the cause of Severity against them. But how far are our Nonconformists from
breaking Peace, offering Violence, or any rude Incivilities, by Word or Deed,
is apparent to all that are not given to wrong them, or to take pardonable
things too ill from them.

Lastly, The Causes of their Sufferings have been spoken of before, to be
neither Heresy, Sedition, nor Rebellion. The very Light of Nature seems to
abhor punishing the Religious and Just; therefore the Heathen Persecutors have
falsely imputed horrid Crimes, to holy Christians, from which they are clearly
vindicated in the Apologies of the Fathers. The Arrians were Calumniators of
the Orthodox, and so are the Papists, and unpeaceable Lutherans; But we that
live together, should know one another better, and be both just and modest. The
Papists damn us as Heretics, therefore curse and persecute; the immoderate
Lutherans charge the Calvinists with the denial of Gods Omnipotency,
Communication of Properties, and many other Heresies, and Blasphemies: But what
Heresy can we charge upon the Nonconformists? Had Antiquity left us such
Confessions, and Explications of Faith, such Treatises in Divinity, Expositions
of Scripture, Defenses of Religion, we should have honored them as much as now
many despise them; they are full and firm in their learned and rational
Opposition to Popery, in all the parts of it. And let us observe how we reckon
some, in former Ages, as ours, who came short of them, and yet we must eject
them, and multiply Sufferings upon them, as none of ours; we reckon John
Wicliff, Jerome of Prague, Husse, and those plain and heroic Confessors, the
Waldenses, and Albigenses, Bohemians, etc. ours; they are in our Martyrologies,
and among our Witnesses for the Truth, in the dark times, when nothing was
almost visible but Popery. Shall we account them Martyrs, when the Papists had
more color for their Persecutions, and bloody Usages of them, considering the
Principles of the Papists, and the Opposition of those Martyrs; than we have
for loading our Brethren with Punishment upon Punishment, considering the
Principles of our Religion, and the Quality of the Nonconformists, both as to
Religion, yea and as to the Separation it self. For surely the Separation of
those Worthies from Rome, as Babylon, and the seat of Antichrist, and a
mortally infected Church, was a greater provocation of the Roman Powers against
them, than a peaceable dissent from a Church, acknowledged truly Christian,
only for some scrupled unnecessary things; indifferent we say, therefore may be
spared; sinful say they, therefore cannot be assented to; and some private
Doctrines besides, etc. That which comes nearest our unhappy Case, is the
Interim, that Book that was urged by Charles the V, upon the reformed Churches
in Germany, requiring the Observation of Popish Ceremonies, as indifferent
things, for a time, until a General Council should be called: What Divisions
did it cause among the Princes and their Divines? among the Divines differing
one from another? What woeful Dispersions and Miseries attended the refusal of
it, are at large related by Sleidan, in his Commentaries. Sleidan, p. 20, 21.
This Book contained Popish Doctrines, which the Protestants rejected; but the
things that divided them, were the Adiaphora, or media, Ceremonies, and
indifferent things, which many refused, and suffered to very great Extremities.
But he who terrified them and persecuted them, was a great Emperor, and a
Papist; and the Arguments used against it, were, because it was not consonant
to Scriptures, and went against their Conscience, and Light received. After
this, the Adversary, the Devil, stirred up another Controversy, attended with a
dreadful Division, and Persecution, to the desolation of Churches and Schools.
John Brentius invented the notion of Ubiquity of Christ's Body, and propagated
it, by (the Apostle of Ubiquity) Jacobus Andreas, but they gave it a pompous
Title, of the Majestic Communication of the Divinity, and Divine Properties;
being fond of the Notion, and impatient of Contradiction. Andreas, assisted by
some that were near Augustus Elector of Saxony, irritate Anne his Duchess,
persuade the Elector that his Physician Gasper Peucer, and others were entered
into a Conspiracy against him, upon which they are cast into Prison, and endure
extraordinary hardship, as Gasper Peucer shows at large, Hist. Carcerum.
in the History of his ten Years Imprisonment. Here two things were principally
objected, false Doctrine, (Calvinism) concerning the Sacrament; and
Conspiracies, and Seditions to maintain it. But what color was there for the
last? what Reason for it? These were the common Causes of Persecution; Pride,
impatience of Opposition, false Witness, Jealousy and Wrath. But yet our
Theological Controversies at home, are not of that nature; and the matters in
Debate are Questiones Medicabiles, as some of the Ancients speak; and yet
behold Divsion and Strife! And considering how irreconcilable the rigid
Lutherans are to the moderate Disciples of Melancthon, which are noted with the
odious Name of Calvinistical: And how entirely our Nonconformists agree with
the Articles of the Church; their Sufferings are more to be wondered at, from
Orthodox Protestants, than the other from violent Lutherans. There was a third
Party that made the difference, and the Advantage of the Miseries of them that
suffered; and so there is a third Party among us, not unknown to us. But why,
1. Divisions should be made that need not. 2. Why continued; and, 3. Why the
weaker Part should be severely used, is a greater wonder. It is a clear
Indication, that they who are for a Prosecution, are not for a Reconcliation.
Striking is not the way to heal our Bruises; It was a great fault in the
Corinthians, to go Law, Brother with Brother; nay, you do wrong and defraud,
and that your Brethren, 1 Cor. 6. Are there not those Saints in England, that
shall judge the World, and Judge Angels? And are there not such to be found, as
will judge in this most unhappy Controversy, and bring it to an Accommodation,
if not to an End, that there may be nothing like a Persecution in the Church of
England?

Obj. But say some of us, Why will the Nonconformists divide from us? why will
they not unite and submit?

Answ. You may as well demand, why will they not part with their Reason, and
their Conscience; for these are the things they follow, as they confidently
affirm; and for which they have forsaken great things, and seem ready to
forsake all, that is dear to Men.

Obj. Shall the Church yield to Schismatics, and break her Orders for the sake
of Schismatics!

Answ. My Business is not to dictate to the Church; although it is plain, the
Church may be a glorious and perfect Church, and condescend to much, that is
not so much as an integral part, nor so necessary to it as a shadow to the
Body. 2. But suppose them to be Schismatics, the Question is, What Is to be
done with them? Are they to be dealt with by rational Means or Violent? I am
not satisfied, that this which we call Schism, is so gross and dangerous as
that at Corinth. It was a great one, that came to this; Is Christ divided? or
was Paul crucified for you? or were you baptized in the Name of Paul? But what
course did the Apostle take to heal it? See 1 Cor. 1, 2, 3. chapter
He had a Power which was answerable to the temporal Sword. I find he used
none, but Instruction, Perswation, and Reprehension. Are ye not carnal? If any
shall maintain Schisms, and Contentions, by Violence, as the Donatists did,
then subdue them by Power.

Obj. But does not the Apostle say, I would they were cut off that trouble you?
Gal. 5.12.

Answ. 1. It is clear, that they who troubled the Galatians, were the
Ceremonialists, that preached Circumcision, contrary to the Liberty to which
the Christians were called. 2. This cutting off, was not by the Magistrate's
Sword; nor was it intended it should ever mean him, in the aftertimes, when
Magistrates should be Christians; it was the Apostle's zealous Wish, alluding
to their Circumcision, and amounts to that, Chapter 1.8. Let him be accursed, etc.
They falsely reported that Paul preached Circumcision, which he was so far from
doing, that be looks upon them as Disturbers of the Peace of the Galatians, and
Settlement in the Faith; and wishes them worse than Circumcision, even
Amputation. Musculus speaks the clearest of any Man I know, to the Words. 1.
Says he, These false Apostles did so insinuate and cleave to the Church,
perinde atque pestis Corpori, there was no avoiding of them. 2. They were the
Apostles of Satan, Wolves in the Flock, and a Pestilence in the Body of the
Church, and were not of the number of the Faithful. 3. From what does he wish
them cut off? even from the Body of the Churches of Christ. 4. He wishes they
were cut off. Let us be admonished by this Example, that many things fall out,
or happen in the Church, which are rather to be cut off by the Wishes of the
Minister, than by Fact; he may wish what he cannot actually do. This Text is
not applicable to our Brethren, and yet inconsiderate Zeal does wound them with
it. Indeed the same good Expositor does wish the Magistrate would take away in
his time, those false Teachers and Pastors, which endangered the Salvation of
Believers.

Obj. But who have preached and written more against Toleration than they who
now plead for it? Why should they have what they would not grant, when they
would have got the Power to themselves in their way?

Answ. This Argument carries more Prejudice than Strength in it, and does
rather throw them off like self-contradicting, troublesome Men, than really
convince them. And I might answer for them in this one Sentence, That they who
were against the Toleration of the pernicious and intolerable, were never for
the Suppression of such as themselves, who were both found and tolerable.

2. Neither is there any thing extracted out of the Sermons preached before the
long Parliament, or other Treatises, that does prejudge their Claim to what
they ask.

1. They do assert the Magistrates Power in matters of Religion in particular,
See Mr. Calam. Ser. December. 25th, 1644. Ser. Nov. 5. 1641.
to keep Men from infecting their Subjects with foul destroying Errors;
Blasphemous, Heretical, Idolalatrical Opinions. The complaint of Dr. Burgess,
is against Putredinous Vermin of bold Schismatics, frantic Sectaries, -- to
mount our Pulpits, to offer strange Fire, to expel the ablest Ministers in the
Kingdom out of the Hearts of their People, as Formalists, Time-servers, no
Ministers of Christ, Limbs of Antichrist, having no calling but from the Devil,
that forsake our Assemblies as Babylonish and Antichristian. -- Take heed of
those Spirits of Error, of Indulgence to all sorts of Sects be Schisms, that
plead it is the Peoples Liberty to be of what Religion they will, and their
Opinions never so erroneous and pernicious. -- Mr. John Ward of Ipswich, Id.
Sermon. Apr. 1645.
did exhort the Parliament to take care of the just Liberties of God's People,
not such Licentiousness, a sis abused for a Cloak of Naughtiness, etc. to set
up Unity in Faith, that God's Name be not blasphemed, his Day be sanctified,
his Gospel preached, his Worship kept from Idolatry, and Superstitions
Innovations, his Ministry purged, planted, Sermon. Mar. 26, 1645.
encouraged, Sacraments purely celebrated. It is more than necessary, and would
take up too much time and place to examine all. That which they were against,
was a general Toleration of all Religions of Idolatry, Heresy, Blasphemy, and
for all Men to do what they pleased: They were against Men's publishing by
preaching or printing, dangerous Opinions, such as Poligamy, Arbitrary Divorce,
Mortality of the Soul, no Ministry, no Churches, Mr. Case' s Sermon May 26th,
1647. Sermon. Feb. 8th, 1646.
no Ordinances, no Scriptures denying; the Divinity of Christ, and the Holy
Ghost, and other Opinions destructive of the Souls of Men. Mr. Newcomen is most
full in stating the case of Liberty: Which (says he) is not to be granted in
such things, as are injurious to God, and destructive of the Souls of Men, nor
wherein the difference of Judgment, will necessarily and unavoidably, ex natura
rei, produce a Rent or Schism. If a Liberty of Judgment be lest, it is, first,
in such things as are not positively laid down in Scripture, therefore not in
Fundamentals of Faith and Worship. 2. In things of private Practice. Care is to
be had of keeping those Opinions to our selves, not perplexing the Consciences
of others with them. Private Persons of a differing Judgment if they live
quietly, frequent the public Assemblies of Worship, and are not discerned to
disturb the Peace either of Church or State, by any secret underminings, are to
be tolerated in hope of their Conversion, and for public Peace sake. Much has
been yielded, yea almost any thing but that one thing, that would lay a
Foundation of perpetual Division, and Disunion in Families, Church, and
Kingdom: Thus he. And what is there in all this, that has Conviction, or any
Reason to silence them, that they cannot open their Mouths for a Connivance to
themselves? Yea, I humbly conceive, there is nothing but what commends the
Ministers of the like Persuasion, to public Favor, as being Orthodox, and
sound Men, fit for a greater Favor, than a bare Permission or Toleration.

Obj. The Presbyterians were against the Toleration of Independency, Letter of
Presbyterian Ministers of Land. to the Assemblies of Divines against
Toleration, Dec. 18th, 1645.
therefore it is unreasonable for them to ask, and as unfit for the Church to
grant the same to them; the Consequences of which Concession, if made to them,
will be as prejudicial to the Church and State, as Independency would have been
to them.

Answ. 1. There has been no such thing desired, since the King's Return (that
I know of) as a Toleration of the Presbyterian Government, 2. One great Reason
against the Toleration, was, because the Independents bad not declared what
they held, nor circumscribed the Persons, and the things, which they desired.
3. How far the Assembly and the Presbyterians condescended; and indeed how
amicably both Parties debated the Controversy, is to be seen in the Papers of
Accommodation; there was a Committee apppointed for Accommodation, November
6th, 1645. After the Paper of the Dissenting Brethren, in Answer to the
Committee of Divines, December 23d, 1645, It is resolved upon the Question,
That they which agree in the Substance of the Worship of God in the Directory,
according to the Presace, and agree in the Confession of Faith, and with the
Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, contained in their Confessions and Writings,
as we do, who differ from our Brethren in matters of Discipline, Reasons of the
Dissenting Brethren, etc. London, 1648.
shall have the benefit of this Indulgence. P. 42. This I historically relate,
to show, tho the Presbyterians of Dond. were against a Toleration of they knew
not what, yet the Assembly took pains by way of Accommodation, till they were
diverted from all Proceedings. And now, if they had Power to assign it, the
Congregational should have a Brotherly Indulgence, that are sound in Faith, etc.

Obj. But the Dissenters are under the ill Eye of the Law, and no more innocent
than the Papists in the Eye of the Law, and there is fear of them; so the Fol.
Pamphlet of Rebellion, printed by B. Took

Answ. I say the Protestant-Dissenters are not under the evil Eye of the Law,
although under the ill Opinion of some that wish them executed. If they sowed
Seditious Principles, moved Insurrections, or poisoned the King's Subjects,
they were most deservedly under the angry Brows of just Laws.

2. What if they were, what then? Those over-voting Numbers in that House of
Commons, are under the ill Opinion of the Land, have been noted by that very
Parliament, and since.

3. That very Parliament in 1672, and all our Parliaments since, have
entertained better Thoughts of them.

4. The King has deserved some more Respect and Reverence from them that seem
to exceed in Loyalty, than to have his Desires in his Speech at the passing the
Act of Oblivion, disregarded as it is; and he expressed himself more graciously
of them, in many Passages of his Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs,
offered Dignities, Bishoprics, and gave Degrees to some of those very Men,
that this Gentleman thinks to prejudice by his Paper.

5. Till the Act de Heretico Comburendo, was taken away, this very Writer, if
he be a resolute Protestant, was under the evil eye of the Law, and may be
under the evil eye of the 35th of Elizabeth, if he continue so, and the whole
Protestant Part of the Kingdom; and who were under the Aspect of the Law of the
six Articles? But I say the Protestant Dissenters are not under the evil eye of
the Laws, but the Seditious; and his many Lines are so many Slanders in many
places, and impose upon the Reader things, which are contrary to our senses. I
can as soon believe Popery, as that Protestant Dissenters are Enemies to the
Government: But what can be answered to such a Gentleman, that says, An Angel
from Heaven, might manage (his Argument) with greater Skill, but not produce
more Demonstrative Truth: That is to say, An Angel from Heaven, might write
more like an Orator than he, but not be a better Logician than he. But he seems
to be one of that strange sort of People among our selves, that (as Dr. Burnet
says in his late excellent Sermon before the Lord Mayor of London) are not
ashamed to own a greater Aversion to any sort of Dissenters, than to the Church
of Rome.

Thus I have made my way to the Conclusion, and as I did begin, so I will end,
with humble Application to the Magistrates.

But to all this, the Magistrates will say, they have an Answer ready, viz.
They do the Duty of their places, and perform their Oaths, and they hope God
will not judge them as Sinners, for doing their Duty according to their Oaths;
and that the Kingdom of God may come, tho there were not one Nonconformist left
among us.

Noble Gentlemen! An Oath is sacred, and the wilful Violation of it, a dreadful
Sin, provoking the Divine Displeasure: The case is hard, and really worthy of
serious Thoughts. For, that learned, and able found Men, tho Nonconformists,
ought not to be punished; but on the contrary, protected, permitted, if not
encouraged, should be granted without any Disputation. The Accusation of
Rebellion, beginning the Wars, their Cantings, and Tones, and Fanaticism, are
really the Abuses of ill-tempered Men, and of factious, and narrow Spirits.
Wise, sober, just, and charitable Divines and Christians, that know their own
defects, what weak Instruments God has used in his Church, for greatest
Services, and what Temptations attend their Callings, and how great a
disadvantage to them, and hindrance to their Learning and Proficiency, their
necessities forcing them to sell their Studies; their many Removes, Troubles in
their Families have brought upon them, will think and speak otherwise of them;
and God has born Witness to many of them, and given them Gifts, not inferior
to those that despise and expose them, rather like Poets and Painters, than
wise impartial Judges, or Witnesses, or Men of Charity. Men in Power should
look before they strike, lest they pluck up any one of those Plants, which the
Heavenly Father has planted, and strike the Apple of his Eye. And on the other
hand, it seems hard to censure Magistrates for executing the Laws, which seems
to be a Duty.

For satisfaction of this great Doubt, I do with all just Honor to
Magistrates, and Respect to their Consciences, and Comforts, humbly offer
something:

1. It is clear and certain, That no Justice of the Peace is bound by his Oath,
or Place, to promote the Disturbance or Sufferings of the Nonconformists. If
any say, They cannot see the Laws broken: true, by Routs and riotous Meetings,
that violate the Peace. It is a Fancy and an imaginary Fear, to say, We do not
know what Mischief may be in the Meetings of many hundreds, or fewer. There are
thousands meet at Fairs, and Markets, and too many are drunk and disorderly,
and what fear is there of their Meetings? what disturbance to the Peace? What
need of the Militia to keep them quiet, or to prevent Insurrections? What Peril
is there in the Meetings of Ministers, and Christians of all Sexes and Ages,
unarmed, and innocent! It is hard to think they cannot preach, and pray, and
sing Psalms, but they must then speak Treason, move Rebellion; that in their
civil Conversation, are as peaceable as other Men, and careful of Words and
Actions; much less, is it their Duty to employ or encourage Men of ill Fame,
and broken Fortunes, to be Witnesses against them; even such, as are not fit to
follow their Dogs, or rub their Horses, have been the most forward in informing.

2. When Information is brought before them, this is also certain, that except
it be proved, by better Testimony than what is usually given, that such a
Meeting was only upon pretense of Religion, but there was no such Religious
Exercise; but on the contrary, false, seditious, rebellious Doctrine was
preached, or the People were stirred up to Disobedience; the Testimony does not
reach the end, or matter of the Act, and by Consequence, the Justice is not
bound to take notice of it. If he upon such an Information, that such a Man,
preached to such a Number, in such a place, and such a time, shall issue forth
his Warrants, then he punishes Religious Exercises absolutely, and not
respective to the ill Designs of Rebellion, and the like. I do conceive, except
the Proof be, that such a Minister or Preacher, did move to Sedition, or
Rebellion, or other Ends, forbidden, a Justice is not bound by his Office, to
punish them; if upon the common Information that is given, that such a Man
preached, and such were present, and no such Words tending to Rebellion proved,
or offered to be proved: Then I beseech you consider, whether upon pretense of
preventing or punishing Seditious Meetings, you really exercise your Power to
obstruct, discourage, or punish peaceable and good Subjects, for Religious
Exercises? And so, as it is a horrid Wickedness in any Man, upon pretense of
Religious Duties, to carry ill Designs against the Government, so what is it,
to pretend ill Deligns, where there are no such things, as much as implied in
any Discourses, and to punish Men for Religious Exercises?

3. It is certain, a Justice may enquire and try the fitness of the Witnesses,
whether they be idoneous, boni and legales Homines; they should be Men of
Knowledge and Understanding, of Probity and Truth, and of Estates; Men that know
what they can attest, punctual as to words spoken, and the true sense and scope
of them, and Witnesses that will not lie, that know what it is to swear, and
that fear a Lie, and the common Sin of Perjury. If a Man's word cannot be taken,
his Oath may be refused, especially in a matter wherein his own Gain is the
prime motive to his Testimony, and swearing. In such a Case it is great Charity
in the Magistrate, to dehort the Informer from his swearing ignorantly, rashly,
or falsely; and he cannot without great suspicion of Sin, if not plain Sin,
forwardly take the Testimony upon Oath of ignorant, ungodly, and scandalous
Informers. I never yet knew, or heard of any other sort of Men, that gave
Testimony against the Nonconformists, as may appear in due time.

4. It is certain, no Justice is bound by Oath, to misapply the Laws, either
without respect to the scope of them, or the Persons upon whom they are
executed; I have taken notice of this, in the foregoing Discourse. I am now
more confirmed, that the Act of the 35th of Elizabeth, was a two-edged Act, but
made and pointed more directly against the Papists, than any other. In that
Parliament, Sir Tho. Edgerton Lord Keeper, Sir Rob. Cecil, Secretary of State,
Sir John Woolley, Sir John Fortescue, did all declare or confirm, That the
occasion of that Parliament, was the cause of Religion, the Maintenance
thereof, the Preservation of Her Majesty's Person, and the Good of the Realm.
(Mark I beseech you) The Enemy of these is the King of Spain, -- and the Pope
the Antichrist of Rome, said Sir Rob, Cecil. Mr. Townshend's Historical
Collections of the 4th Parl. of Queen Elizabeth. An. 1593. Eliz. 35th, p. 58,
59.
From the holy League, and the Papists (the holy League of the Guisians, to
root out the Protestants in France) said Sir John Wolley. They that spoke
before me, spoke sufficiently of the Authors of our Troubles, said Sir John
Fortescue. I did look with great Expectation for some full Discoveries of fears
and dangers from the Puritans in those Days, but could not find a word
concerning any, but the Brownists, which were spoken of by Sir Walter Rawleigh,
and deserve to be transcribed. -- In his Conceit, the Brownists were worthy to
be rooted out of a Commonwealth; I have showed in the foregoing Plea, our N.
C. are not Brownists, Collections p. 76.
but what Dangers may grow to our selves, if this Law passes, it were fit to
be considered; for it is to be feared that Men not guilty, will be included in
it. And that Law is hard that takes Life, or sends into Banishment, But now
our N. C. are not as much as tried by a Jury; but upon the Evidence of a
scandalous Informer, and Villains, hired by him, to swear what is for his
coveted Gain.
where Men's Intentions shall be judged by a Jury, and they shall be Judges what
another Man meant. But that Law that is against a Fact that is just, and punish
the Fact, as severely as you will, etc. (as was quoted before, from that great
and famous Man.) -- to turn this Law upon Orthodox, sound Men, and spare the
Papists, is too plain a perversion of the Law, from the sense of the greatest
Statesmen, in that prosperous Reign of Q. Elizabeth; no Justice can pretend
Obligation from his Oath, or Conscience so to do.

5. They are no more obliged by their Office, to execute these Laws against
Dissenters, than they are to execute other Penal Laws. Is there not a Law, that
no Papist shall go above five Miles from his own House, Elizab. 35th, c. 2.
or place of Abode after lawful Conviction? Are all Papists convicted according
to Law, and do they keep their Bounds? Is there not a Law of this Kings, for
Observation of the Sabbath? and who is convicted or punished by it? Is there
not a Law prohibiting Gaming, above one hundred Pound at one meeting? and have
all Gentlemen and Gamesters kept it? The Act for 12 d. a Sunday, for not coming
to Church, was intended against the Negligent, and not the Recusant, it being
against Law to punish Men for the same fault twice: as Mr. R. Owen said upon
the debate upon that Bill. Collect. ib. p. 173.
But the N. C. are and have been punished many times, and ways. Who can tell
how many thousands of negligent Persons live in London, that go neither to
Church, nor Conventicle; and who is so zealous against these, as against
Conventicles? Surely then the Obligation of the Justice's Oath, is not taken to
be so strict in some, as in all Cases, (as indeed they are) or else a Justice
is not bound to enquire after Transgressors, but to keep his own Place, and do
Justice when complained unto.

6. But suppose, That the Informers of Conventicles, are honest and true Men,
idoneous and fit, or the Meeting be notorious: then consider, that the Law
requiring the Justice to proceed against them, is a Penal Law: Any Justice of
the Peace, or Chief Magistrate that shall wilfully omit the performance of his
Duty in the prosecution of this Act, shall forfeit a hundred Pound, one moiety
of it to the Informer; but to whom the other moity shall be forfeited is not
expressed. If the Informer will be so courageous, as to sue the Justice so
omitting his Duty, he loses 50 l.

Now the difficulty lies in this, The Law against Conventicles does require
the Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate, to make Record of such an Assembly;
that makes it his Duty, or in case of Omission, he shall forfeit 100 l. (if the
Informer will be so bold as to sue for it) here is the Penalty; the Law is a
mixed, and not purely Penal Law. If any Magistrate be so strictly
conscientious, as to hold himself bound to execute his Office, he may inquire
into two things; First, The goodness and necessity of the Law, which makes his
Duty necessary. Secondly, His Omission is supposed, and upon that Supposition,
his Penalty is assigned.

For the first, There is no scruple to be made, if any do under pretense of
Religious Exercises, contrive Insurrections, but then it is the Magistrate's
Duty to God, the King, and his Government, to execute the Laws. But,

2. No such Crime being proved, but pretended, to suppress all Religious
Exercises, performed without the Liturgy, and the Penalties being grievous to
the Subject, and the Law, in effect, declared to be grievous by several
Parliaments, although the Law be actually in force, yet it is under the Censure of
Parliaments, and has lost its credit, and reputation of Goodness, and must be
looked on, as one of those Laws that are better nulled than continued; and the
Execution of it must be suspended, as tending to unnecessary vexation of good
Subjects, and a scandal upon the Protestant Dissenting Brethren, to render them
as suspicious as our Enemies, the Papists. And if we may guess at the Law, by
the Penalty upon the Justice that omits his Duty, or rather at the Intention of
the powerful part that carried it; they did not so much provide against
Insurrections, as against the total ruin of the Nonconformists: for can the
forfeiture of a an hundred pounds be a sufficient punishment upon him, that
omits to make a Record of so mischievous a Contrivance as an Insurrection! no,
not the greatest Estate in England, can recompense such an Omission; nor is the
Life of any Justice an equal Punishment. To the second, I propose this, The
Omission being supposed, the Forfeiture is certain (if the Informer will be so
daring) but 50. l. First, Whether it be not better, that a Justice of the
Peace, or Magistrate, should venture the Loss of 50 l. which he does but
venture (for what Informer will dare to sue Gentlemen of Honor, Estates, and
Interest?) than many Families should be utterly undone? Secondly, If the
Execution be better forborne, as I hope I have cleared, then it were better a
Justice of Peace should lay down his Commission, than act against the real
Interest and Union of Protestants, and make spoil of many Men's Estates.
Thirdly, If Forfeitures upon Justices should be recovered, and the payment too
heavy for them to bear; then they may do great Service to their King, to the
Church, to their Country; 1. To the King, as Pliny did to Trajan, concerning
the Christians, sed nihil aliud inveni quam Superstitionem pravam and
immodicam; representing to the King, they find no Seditions, nor Insurrections,
nothing among the Nonconformists, but their Nonconformity. 2. To the Church by
the same Representation, as a means to heal us. 3. To their Country, by
forbearing the ruin of thousands of Familes.

But if you shall for saving 50 or 100 l. or for ambition of a Place of Power,
or to rise into Business and Preferment, or from Prejudice against
Nonconformists, or distaste and enmity at Religion, proceed, you sin
exceedingly against God and Man.

I beseech you, Honored Sirs, despise not the humble Address of a Minister of
Christ in the Church of England, on the behalf of Christ, and his divided
Church, and multitude of precious Souls; and out of Duty to your selves, lest
you be found abusing your power against Religion, in Zeal to those things,
which are but Modes and Forms, which commend no Man to God. Shall I say, it had
been good for many, they had never bin Justices, or Magistrates? or that some
had never been born, than be the occasion of great Shame, and Reproach, great
and many Losses, and Sufferings to Ministers, in their Names, Estates, Health,
etc. of great Trouble and Affliction to many tender Wives, by Frights, and
Separation from their Husbands; yea of Sickness and Death to many of the holy
Servants of Christ: Many oppressed Families groan under their Losses and
Sufferings, and pray for them that have persecuted them from one Country to
another, from one Prison to another; and if God hear their Prayers, then many
of their Afflicters must repent, and should repair their Losses for Conscience
sake. Many very dark and rude Places and People have been enlightened, many
young and dissolute Persons have been converted by Prayers, Preaching, and
Books of the Nonconformists. If you suppress their Teachers, if you give order
to spoil them of their Goods, you starve the Nurse, and kill the Souls of many
thousands that are nursed, and brought up by their Ministry, with the sincere
Milk of the Word of God. That I may not be a lamenting Spectator of a doleful
Tragedy, I have taken this freedom, and used plainness of Speech, and
convincing Reasons to my power. There is a great Chasm and Breach, and see how
God punisherh us for not healing the first Division. General Monk used the word
Fanatic, in the Parliament, when he declared himself, more properly, than it
has been since applied. How did the word take and spread? how was it applied
and misapplied! Others called those Men Fanatics, who were a great, wise,
sober, loyal, considerable part of the Nation. Here a Separation began! A great
number of holy and able Pastors are cast out, to the great grief of more than
themselves. A Breach is made by a standing Law within the Church, and Kingdom;
some have made a Division of Churchmen, and moderate, of Presbyterian Bishops,
and rigid, of Protestant Bishops, etc. -- And since, of Petitioners, and
Abhorrers of Addresses, and Non-Addresses; and now under scandalous and vile
names of Whigg and Tory. Our Church-Divisions eat into the very heart of the
Kingdom. We seem to be disjoined in the National-Interest, by a prevailing,
factious, private Spirit. Friendship and Acquaintance, and Trust, and
Confidence are broken! Oh how menacing is this Judgment! Popery watches its
Opportunity to get up triumphant and regnant. Persidiousness has engaged to
open to it, and Perjury and Persecution are the most conducing means to
introduce it. Cut off the Nonconformists first, beggar, and famish, and lay
them fast; next compose a Test, in the nature of the Sphinx Augustana, or
Cassadran Consultation for the Conformists, to separate the Moderate from the
Genuine, and what next? The fear of which, and compassion to Posterity, and
zeal for true Religion, would make a dumb Man speak, and he that cannot, write.
Noble Sirs, If you will not hearken to Reason, besriend Religion, believe your
Senses, and deny a carnal Interest, for an eternal; imitate the Clemency of our
Gracious King (whom God long preserve) who is over us, as Seneca speaks of the
King of Bees, He has no Sting; Rex ipse sine aculeo est. But if you are
resolved, or engaged in such a Work, Be pleased to do these things.

1. Laying aside Prejudice, study the Case of the Nonconformists, and their
Reasons for it; you shall find it best, and clearest, in the Account of the
Proceedings in the Savoy, London, 1661.
and Petition for Peace; In Mr. Baxter's Pleas for the Nonconformists; Apology
to the Bishops; Defenses against Dr. Stillingfleet, and Dr. Hinkley, and
others: And the Questions in Controversy, clearly stated by Mr. Giles Fermen;
I suppose you have read the other side.

2. Consider what is, and has been preached and written for Accommodation; and
do not account them the worst, but the best Divines, that have been and are for
Accommodation; and see what was done by those Great Men, Lord Keeper Bridgman,
Chief Justice Hale, Bp Wilkins, etc.

3. Oppose not, but consider the Reasons of the Long-Parliament, 1. in making
these Acts; 2. Their, and succeeding Parliaments Debates and Resolves for Union
of Protestants.

4. Is this a time to afflict Protestants at home, when we entertain persecuted
Protestants from abroad?

5. Lay aside all private worldly Interest. Peace was never preserved by
Faction; it is inconsistent with Justices of the Peace to suppress a Faction,
by being factious.

6. Be clear from all sinister Pre-conceits, Passion, and Disaffection to
Practical Holiness and Piety.

7. Be assured you must give account to Jesus Christ of your Administration;
and this is your time to act and show your Faith, Hope and Love to Christ, his
Gospel, his People, your detestation of Impiety and Sin, and to be true to your
Selves, and your eternal Concernments.

8. Receive not ill Reports (act not by them) of them that differ from you.

9. Pre-conceive the Effects of your Proceedings, whether they will be for
God's Glory, the King's Service, the Kingdom's Good, and for your own Peace and
Comfort when you come to dye.

10. Pray for a Blessing upon your Proceedings; see what Approbation he has
given, and whether it be likely to please or displease him. If God has
blessed, or prospered them that did execute the Laws, then it is an
Encouragement to you: if not, forbear.

Consider what is said by Gamaliel, Act. 5.38, 39. Refrain from these Men, and
let them alone: for if this Counsel, or this Work be of Men, it will come to
naught. But if it be of God, you cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found
even to fight against God.

And by our Gracious King in one of his Declarations, viz. -- It being evident
by the sad Experience of twelve years, that there is little fruit of all those
forcible Courses, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 34. read open. P. 4. l. 30. r. Me. P. 6. Marg. r. Persecutione.
ib. Marg. r. Aenaei. P. 27. marg. r. ferri. p. 30. marg. after thankful
remembrance, c. 13. add Historical Collections in the Address. p. 36. l. 2. r.
some few. p. 41. l. 12. r. of the Law. ib. l. 16. r. if you all proceed, etc.
P. 44. l. 27. r. to procure. P. 48. l. 1. f. Severity, r. Security. P. 49. l.
36. r. for not subscribing only. P. 51. l. 13. r. such as have. p. 57. five
last lines must be thus read: -- and why may not fallible Imposers be deceived,
say they. If they suffer for not sinning against God and Conscience, if they
suffer for performing Religious Exercises, they suffer for Religion, according,
etc. p. 60. l. 36. f. case, r. cant.

The Reader is entreated to pardon, or correct the rest; the Author, being
remote from the Press, has not seen all the sheets.


