THE Conformist's fourth Plea FOR THE Nonconformists.

WHEREIN Several Considerations are offered for Christian Forbearance. WITH
Some Relations of some of their SUFFERINGS, humbly submitted to Authority, in
order to move Compassion. Together with Some Account of the Infamous Lives and
Lamentable Deaths of some INFORMERS, etc.

By a Charitable and Compassionate CONFORMIST, Author of the former PLEAS.

K. Charles I. EIKON ASIL. Med. 27. The King's Prerogative is best showed and
exercised in remitting, rather than exacting the Rigor of the Laws, there being
nothing worse than Legal Tyranny.

His Majesty's Gracious Speech, Feb. 5. 1672. -- I put forth my Declaration for
Indulgence to Dissenters, and I have hitherto found the good Effect of it. --

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXX.III.

The Epistle to the Reader.
IT is as much in the Reader's power to read or to forbear with Contempt, as to
buy or not to buy: He knows that I, and the Bookseller cannot impose upon him:
if he overlook, or despise me, he saves both his Money and his Time, and he may
spare his Censures of Affectation or any other Fault, except be certainly know
it, with as much Kindness to himself, as Justice to me. I owe such Men no
account of my self, or of the Multiplication of these Pleas; but they that will
be pleased to read them, will accept the Reason of the Number, as well as the
Thing. When I had written the first, I thought I had done with the Argument,
except called upon to vindicate, or confirm, to explain, or to correct what
requires Correction. But when I had said all I thought fit to say, it was
without any cause at all given by me, reported that I had written a Second
Plea, and the Second Plea was enquired after before it was conceived in my
Mind. Upon notice of this, I considered if this might be an Invitation or Call
to view, and to give my sense of their Sufferings with respect to public
Benefit, by a Cessation of their many Troubles, and Liberty to preach the
Gospel. I was confined to Brevity in that which yet was too large for many. In
it I did state the Case as truly and distinctly as possibly I could, and
labored to inform the Reader, both historically and rationally: I looked upon
the historieal Part as obscure, because short; and upon the rational as too
weak; wanting the Authority of Testimony, and consent of the Eminent Writers of
our Church. And because I saw the Incredulity of the Right Reverend Bishop of
Cork, who drew my Estimation and Affection to him for his peaceable Design, as
if the Sufferings of the Nonconformists were artificially aggravated to an evil
end, I thought three things necessary to be done: 1. To run up to the Spring of
our Divisions in the Savoy-Conference, and gave some Historical Account of
Church Affairs before, and about that time, which I perceived many did not
know. 2. To show and compare the Aspects of some of our most Renowned Writers
of the Church of England, and our Dissenting Protestants toward the same
things, of very great moment and tendency to Peace. 3. To represent some of the
many Sufferings of Divines of known Loyalty, merely for Nonconformity, to this
end, that their Sufferings might affect Authority, and incline Men's Minds to
Mercy and Porbearance. For while their Sufferings are slighted, and their Cause
despised, and odiously exposed as it commonly is, there is no hope of
Reconciliation, nor Abatement of their Sufferings, nor of any Concessions to
make their Admission easy and comfortable. And all this was done together, and
referred to the ingenious and honest Bookseller, who being the proper Judge of
his own Affairs, concluded it best to divide the whole into two Parts; and so
that which was a Supplement to the Second Plea, is called the Third, and that
which was a part of the Third, is called the Fourth Plea. This account I
thought good to give of the Number, to them who are not displeased with the
Argument, but with the Number. But it will be more difficult to satisfy them
who are displeased with the Argument it self. And of this I have here and there
dropped a Reason, besides a kind of Apology, in the Second, which I think took up
too much room; and therefore I shall not run out here. My Design is thoroughly
known to Him, whose Eyes are as a Flame of Fire, to whom I must give my last
Account, and receive my final Judgment, after that Men have talked and done
their Pleasure: I do humbly beg his Forgiveness for all Failings; and of Men,
when any shall convince me of any Injury which I have ignorantly and
unwillingly done, if any be done. I do verily believe the Argument is a needful
Argument: and had the Management of it been answerable to it is Importance, and
by a better hand, I should have more rejoiced to read it, than now I can; but
yet as it is, I do not repent that I have given my Testimony to the Servants of
Christ, nor the Faith and Holiness professed and propagated by them, although
some will make it as dear to me as they can. But they and I are in the hands of
God, and for their sakes I wish they would not be too bold and free of their
Menaces.

There is a noted Person, who affects the Title of Observator (I am sure,
either he is wilfully blind on one side, or he is abused by his Spectacles and
Informers) to whom I am indebted. I cannot pass by his Observator upon the
Third Plea, Numb. 172. Tory speaks of the Plea; No, no, it is not ripe for
violence yet, but he advances very fairly, by way of Preparatory to it, if he
can but persuade the Multitude that the five-Mile Act was framed and passed by
Papists. Here Is the King now, and the Majority of both Houses, exposed to the
Rabble, as a Popish Faction.

Reader, here is Observator now. These Words [fram'd and passed by Papists] are
not mine, but his.

There is a Dose of his Ingenuity and Goodness wrapped up in the Insinuation, as
if I said or meant, as he is bold to report. If I quote my Authors for what I
said, or produce my Testimonies, he will not abide me more than them, because
Parliament Men. One worthy Member of the House in the Debate about uniting
Protestant Dissenters, appealed to many Members then in the House, who were in
that Parliament, as remembering that Act was promoted by Sir Thomas Clifford,
Sir Solomon Swale, and Sir Roger Strickland, who all appeared to be Papists.

And I could name him some who remember the three Corners of the House of
Commons in which these three Popish Agents placed or posted themselves to see
that the Votes of their Friends might not fail their Expectations, if not
Engagements. Three such leading Men as these were in the House, when thinner
than usual because of the Plague, and being then disguised, and afterward open
Papists, was enough to denominate a Popish Faction, and to carry what they
contrived, especially pretending a Service to the Church, and by that pretense
drawing the unwary Protestant to vote the same way. The Act, and the Oath in
the Act was opposed by the eminent Loyal Earl of Southampton Lord Treasurer,
and others of the Nobility, and by the eminent Dr. Earl Bishop of Salisbury;
and when they of the other Party endeavored to lay the same Oath upon the
whole Kingdom, it was not only opposed by the Loyal, but carried in the
Negative by three Votes, which were the now Earl of Lindsey, and the Earl of
Danby, and Mr. Perigrine Bartue, who was that day introduced into the House by
the other two. And this is sufficient to prove the other part of my Sentence,
that it was opposed by the Loyal. It is the first time that I ever read or
heard that the King framed or passed the Act: (the Acts are passed before they
are presented to him) or, which I abhor to think, to be in a Popish Faction, I
leave the Scandal where I found it in Observator, with more of the same Die and
Tincture. Others there are that may be satisfied with the same Answers, who
take it ill that it is remembered the five Mile Act was procured or promoted by
Popish Counsels and Endeavors. Had not great and observing Men, who served in
Parliaments declared it; I should not have laid any part of my Argument upon
it, neither do I think a Quid pro Quo, to be an excuse for me, if I had said
it, without sufficient Testimony, that they who arraign and damn the Pleas,
have given out that the Declaration of Indulgence, was from the same Councels,
and in favor of the Papists. The Kingdom was alarmed with the fears of Popery;
and many Preachers were Lecturers upon the Controversies against Popery, as if
it had been at the Church doors, and all must be armed against it: His Majesty
took notice of it in his Gracious Speech of February 5. 1672. I put forth my
Declaration for Indulgence to Dissenters, and I have hitherto found the good
Effect of it -- There is one part in it which has been subject to
Misconstruction, which is that concerning the Papists, as if more Liberty were
granted them, than to the other Recusants, when it is plain there is less, etc.
I do not intend it shall any ways prejudice the Church, but I will support its
Right, and it in its full Power. Having said this, I shall take it very ill to
receive Contradiction in what I have done; and I will deal plainly with you, I
am resolved to stick to my Declaration.

The Lord Chancellor also spoke the same thing. His Majesty has so fully
vindicated his Declaration from that Calumny concerning the Papists, that no
reasonable Scruple can be made by any good Man: He has sufficiently justified
it by the time it was published in, and the Effects he has had from it; and
might have done it more, from the agreeableness of it to his own natural
Disposition, which no good English Man can wish otherwise than it is: He loves
not Blood, or rigorous Severities; but where mild or gentle ways may be used by
a wise Prince, he is certain to choose them -- and concludes that Head thus:
But his Majesty is not convinced that violent ways are the Interest of
Religion, or the Church. p. 12, 13.

And the same Lord Chancellor, then a great Minister of State, gives his
Reasons to his Friend contrary to the Lord Clifford's, why be should think that
Indulgence was a favor to the Protestant Dissenters, and for the advantage of
the Protestant Religion, which are printed in a Letter from a Person of
Quality, p. 5. However, it is clear, many of our Protestant Brethren declared
their contrariety to Popery in their Learned Morning Exercises against Popery
and otherwise, and do well know that one World cannot hold the Papists and them
both, if Popery have Power; And our Mittimus will be quickly drawn, after that
St. Peter's Successor can come in Jailer, a Place he would purchase at any rate.

But O! how much more happy were it for us to be reconciled, and made one by
Christ, by his Spirit, by his Gospel, than be made Friends by him that opposes
himself, and was known in England by the Name of Antichrist, which he can never
forget, nor digest? Discerning and good Men are under Apprehensions of
Sufferings coming upon us, and write their Preparations; one, a worthy Minister
of our Church, for Martyrdom, others for Sufferings; and the excellent Mr.
Polhill draws the Face and Aspect of the Times with his curious Pen. Charity is
cold, Differences ar hot, Moderation vanishes, Enmity every where appears,
Popery lifts up it self in the World; Protestants help on the Design by
destroying each other. Sin is gone up with a great Cry to Heaven; black Clouds
of Wrath hang over our heads for it; the decays of holy Love threaten a remove
of our Candlesticks; Lukewarmness in Religion shows, that we are fit to be
spewed out of God's Mouth: Every one that has eyes in his head may see the
Tendency of such things as these --. Epistle to the Reader before his Armatura
Dei.

Our Peace is protracted by the Preservation of One Life, upon which it hangs,
which is more worth than ten thousand of us (2 Samuel 18.3.) often wonderfully
preserved from open and latent dangers. But in how many Cities, Corporations
and Counties is a Civil War begun! What Contrivances are studied to divide us,
and provocations to strike? O who can number or express the division of Hearts
amongst us! what Contentions in Parishes! what Inquisitions after Dissenters!
They are once again become the Public Grievance, and great Dangerous Party to
be suppressed. The Tide that rose against Popery a few years ago, is turned
upon them now: as some have observed it several times before to have done. Yea,
they are not only driven out of their Meetings, but cannot in some Places,
worship God in their own private Families without Spies, yea, more, without
Molestation; Suspected evil Designs can not be more narrowly watched, than they
are, who fear and worship the God of Heaven. Hence Impiety takes great Boldness
and Confidence, and Piety is shut up, and must neither be heard nor seen. I am
credibly informed, it is thus for a Time (but how long?) in some Places, since
wicked Man see they may take that Course, which scarce any but they will
undertake. And this Way of Impiety to discountenance, terrify, and confine or
banish true real Piety, is that which I speak against, and direct my Discourse
to.

I make not my self wiser than my Rulers, nor do oppose my self against lawful
Power, lawfully used by the meanest Officer; but being in some measure affected
with the great Piety of many of my Brethren, and their great Sufferings in many
kinds, and the Proceedings of most Men against them. Nonconformity is but the
Pretense; but it is the Gain of something which shall never profit them, nor be
blessed unto them, that is aimed at. Who can say, he was ever the better or the
richer for the many great Losses of the Sufferers? It were happy for the
Informers, if no worse should befall them in this World, (not to speak of the
World to come) than happened to two of them, who went to complain, or demand
(or both) their Moiety of a Justice of Peace, who commanded them both to be set
in the Stock. Some Instances of the temporal State of these kind of Men are
given in the few following Narratives.

Observe the Methods and Manner of the Execution, and the vast Dissimilitude
between their observing the Sabbath Day, and the hunted Dissenters. I do
heartily wish all Things were done decently and in order in the Pbulick
Assemblies, and that thither might be the Way of all God's People with one
consent: But if that cannot be, without Controversy, to worship God in Christ
by one Spirit, to preach one Faith, to join in Praises, to celebrate
Sacraments, are more like the Sanctification of the Name and Sabbaths of the
Lord our God, than riding and running up and down with vain Words, Blastings,
Threatenings and Oaths, in a Morning, to find out a Preacher, and the Afternoon
in Excess and Riot.

I remember that Musculus said, The Papists were unfit Men to correct the
Anabaptists; Correctionis non est opus, nisi verorum Christianorum. As he
says, Papists may burn them, but cannot correct them, except Burning be
Correction: So these Men may inform, distrain, buy and sell the distrained
Goods, and hale Nonconformists to Prison; but is this to convince and reduce
them? And tho others may have better Aims and Intentions than these Inferiors
have, yet is there not a more excellent Way? especially in such a Time as this,
and in such a Matter, wherein so much of the Glory of our Lord Jesus is
concerned. Let us fear, that to prosecute such Men and Differences as
intolerable do not bring upon us that which is really so.

I have used some Means to inform my self, and cannot find that there is one
Sign of God's Approbation of such a Course as this is. I have given a small
Handful of Instances in the following Collection, from which much may be
observed; and it is but a very little, not so much as a Gleaning would be, if
all were written which might be. I have seen it under the Hand of a Reverend
Divine, that it was the Conjecture of several Ministers, that if the History of
the Sufferings of the Nonconformists were written, but in the West of England,
it would make a great Folio. O how much more necessary a Duty lies upon Men, of
turning to the Lord from all their wicked Ways, of working out their own
Salvation, and furthering the Salvation of one another, of following after
Love, Righteousness, and Peace, and Preparation for the black Day of Death, and
the great Day of Judgment! and to be more strict against open Sins, than
controverted and tolerable Distinctions! But if they who are born after the
Flesh, will show their Natures, and grow wanton in Peace and Plenty, and find
none to insult upon in their wanton Raptures, but those that desire to know and
worship God in Fear; Let all those who are born from above, and are Partakers
of the Divine Nature, as the Elect of God, holy and beloved, put on Bowels of
Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering, forbearing one
another: And if any Man have a Quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you,
so also do ye: And above all these things, put on Charity, which is the Bond of
Perfectness.

And if other Places will not afford Rest and Quietness for peaceable and
honest good Men, that differ in a few Things; let not London forget their
Labors, who ventured their Lives (with other good Men) to save, and to make
Intercessions for them, in the dreadful Plague; nor them who lay in the Dust,
pouring out Prayers for them, when Ruins lay instead of stately Piles, who
have been eminently serviceable to reclaim dissolute Youth, and promote Piety
and Goodness. And why may not good Men, of different Notions and Persuasions in
Modes and Forms, live together in Peace and Love, converse with mutual
Confidence and Dearness, as well as trade, and maintain Commerce with Persons
and Nations of a contrary Religion?

But I must conclude. The Lord prosper what I have in much Sincerity
endeavored for the Glory of God, and his Truth, the Honor of the King, and
the Peace and Tranquillity of the Kingdom. Amen.

THE Conformist's fourth Plea FOR THE Nonconformists.
UNION is that which all wise, good and gracious Souls must needs desire, and
endeavor to attain, as they endeavor the attainment of Happiness, which
consists in it. Our Divisions are extreme painful and uncomfortable; a great
Dishonor and Impediment to Religion, and Communion of Saints. Every Motion and
Proposal for it deserves Attention and Thanks, tho it cannot be embraced or
assented to. And whatsoever tends to make, continue, and widen our Divisions,
should conscienciously be avoided. Rigorous execting of abateable Articles and
Terms, Prejudices, Suspicions, straining of Consequences, aggravating Offenses,
odious Representations of Persons, Strangeness; refusing to do Offices of
Kindness, Justice, and Mercy; disingenuous Censures, provoking Speeches, and
Bitterness, are Wedges of Division: besides other wounding and cutting warlike
Instruments, and Proceedings of Ecclesiastical Hostility. As it was from
Hardness of Heart, that the Jews put away their Wives for every cause; so it
proceeds not from Tenderness of Heart, that our Brethren are put away, as
incurable Schismatics, for every Dissent and Disagreement, Peace, Love, and
Forbearance have a greater Place assigned them in Religion, than the Things in
Controversy, which cause our Division. And whether it be meetest for the
greater Things to suffer by the lesser, or the lesser to give place to the
greater, let common Reason judge, and common Experience come in as Evidence;
especially in a time when we see Religion wounded in Head and Heart, and it can
never recover Health, Strength, and Beauty, as long as these Wounds lie open.
Unite we must, or continue in this disjointed broken Condition, and grow worse
and worse by the application of Force and Warrants. The evil Consequences of
this Course are many and great. 1. The Law of Love and Dearness is violated. 2.
The Dissenters, in their Judgment, will never want a sufficient Cause, to
justify both their Dissent, and their Sufferings; and the better the Cause of
their Sufferings appears to be, the more to blame will they be ever thought, by
whom they suffer. 3. The ambitions and factious Politician will serve and
advance his private Design; by siding with either of the discontented Parties;
and the Vices of the Politician shall be laid on the Head of Sacred Religion.
4. Others will sacrifice the Peaceable and Innocent, with their Freedom and
Estates, to their own Avarice, and devouring Lusts, under a pretense of
executing Laws, and serving the Public Good and Tranquillity. In few words,
Who can reckon the many Impieties of several sorts, that break in upon the
Kingdom of Christ at this great Breach? The greatest and Sum of all is, a
Breach in the Communion of Saints, in the Offices of Love. The mischievous
Effects of Divisions, are so many Arguments for Union.

And that which does prejudice sober Minds against the present Course of
Informers, and armed Men, is, That it tends to the extinction of Love, and to
enlarge the Division. And for Union sake, I desire the following Considerations
may have the force of Arguments.

But before I come to propose them, I desire it may be noted, 1. It is, and
must be acknowledged, that the King is Supreme Governor over all Persons and
Causes Ecclesiastical, and it belongs to his Office, to protect and promote the
true Christian Religion, and preserve it from what is contrary and destructive
to it. 2. As the Offices and Duties of the Supreme Power, seated in the Kings
of England, and Bishops and Pastors, have been always distinguished by our most
approved Writers; as may be seen in Bishop Bilson, of Subjection; Bridges, of
the Supremacy; Andrews, Tortura Torti, etc. Dr. Nowel against Dorman, (which
Dr. Reynolds brought to Heart, in the beginning of their Conference, who said,
That if we gave to Princes no more than Dr. Nowel did, he did agree with it);
and King James himself. 3. When the Magistrate exercises his Power by
executing of Laws, it is the Duty of the Pastors of the Church to use the Key
of Doctrine; that spiritual Means may be applied to the Souls of Men, according
to the prescription of our Savior. 4. Distinguish between Laws in their
Intention, and the Application of them, which has often fallen into such
hands, as turn them away from their Intention, and do not observe them as a
Rule to themselves in their Proceedings. 5. No Apology is made, or to be made
for any seditions Practice or Doctrines, for violation of Peace, Subjection,
and Righteousness, etc.


De vobis quidem dixisse Apostolum legimus, quod non sine causa gladium
geratis, and ministri Dei sitis, vindices in eos qui male agunt: sed a^ia est
causa Provinciae, alia est causa Ecclesiae; illius terribiliter gerenda est,
administratio hujus clementer: Commendanda est mansuetudo. St. Aug. Epist. 150
ad Apringium.

We may distinguish between peccata spiritualia and secularia, between
spiritual Sins, and secular. His duplicibus peccatis puniendis, etc. In
punishing these two Sins, God has ordained a twofold Sword or Punishment: a
spiritual Sword for spiritual Sins, which is the Word of God; and for secular
and outward Sins, a secular Sword, namely Caesar's. Joan. Brentius, de Jure
Magistratus in Anabaptistas.

Again, we may distinguish between both kinds of Sins, and Evangelical Duties.
The Dissenters are not prosecuted for Infidelity, Heresy, etc. or for seditious
Doctrines or for secular Crimes and Offenses: but for meeting in such Numbers
for Religious Exercises and Ordinances; and for this, only because in a manner
different from the Church of England, that is, without the Liturgy, as has
been said, and should be kept in mind. And the Prosecution begins by Informers,
(usually false and wicked Persons, that make a Trade of it) and ends in Fines,
Imprisonments, and corporal Sufferings. The manner of doing their Work or
Office, is with profaneness, Impiety, with what Wrath and Terror they can
possibly cast a peaceable unarmed People into. The Informers rush in with
Bellowing and Roaring, with Oaths and Impiousness: Sometimes the Soldier comes
in with his Pistol cocked, and threatens he will pistol any one that stirs, he will
crack the Preacher's Crown, or pistol him.

These Things inserted, to several Uses, and for several Reasons which might be
given, I do present you with the Confiderations.

I. Can an Evangelical Union of Christians and Churches be ever hoped for by
Anti-Evangelical Means and Instruments? Aggravate their Religious Exercises in
a manner different from the Liturgy, as proceeding from Minds tainted with no
less than Heresy, and to be a direct and formal Schism, and tending to corrupt
and not to edify the Souls of Men: What Means and Instruments more proper and
effectual to attain a blessed Unity, and to preserve a Christian Church, than
what are appointed by our Lord and Savior? Certainly he took care to preserve
the Purity of Faith, Doctrine, Worship, and Unity of the Faithful; or else he
did but according to what he blames, in a Man that begins to build what he
cannot finish, sets up a Kingdom in Satan's Kingdom, a Church in the Dominions
of the World, which would run into Confusion and Ruin from within it self,
except he took a course to preserve it. To call and convert, and not to keep,
but to lose, had not been to act answerably to the glorious Name of a Savior.
Since his Manifestation in the exercise of his Mediatory Office, he fulfilled
all Offices in his own Person, as Prophet, Priest, and King: After his
Ascension, he taught and directed his Church by his Spirit, in his Apostles and
Ministers; and since their Decease, by his Holy Spirit, and revealed Will and
Laws. The Christian Church had all Power within it self, before the Conversion
of Emperors, and Civil Potentates; and since they became Nursing-Fathers and
Nursing-Mothers, the Church has lost nothing of her spiritual Power by it; for
the Magistrate's Power is not privative, but accumulative. If Penalties,
Mulcts, Fines, Imprisonments, and forcible Coertion, had been so necessary, it
had been necessary to convert and set up Christian Emperors and Kings, armed
with a Civil Power, as soon as he had given Success to his Ministers, in
calling a Church out of the World: Yet this is not to be wrested to this very
Construction, as if the Church could do as well without a Christian Magistrate,
as with him. It only pretends to show us, that our Lord Jesus has left us
Means and Directions, sufficient for the preservation of his Church in Purity
and Unity; and that those Prescriptions are most likely to produce his Ends.

Three things are pernicious to the Christian Church: (1.) Corruption of
Doctrine and Heresy. (2.) Disunion and Schisms. (3.) Scandal in our Lives and
Manners. Our Savior has taken care to keep his Church from, or to reform and
purge it of all manner of pernicious Acts and Works of Satan and the Flesh: And
it lay upon him so to do, more than upon the most Christian Magistrate or
Pastor, because he redeemed his Flock with his own Blood, and took upon him to
be the Head of it, and all the Honor he receives from the World, is from his
Church in it; and therefore it concerns him so to govern his Church, that he
may be honored in it and by it. To this end the Lord promised to send his
Spirit, who is the Spirit of Revelation and Truth, who leads Christ's Disciples
into all necessary and saving Truth, and the Spirit of Union with Christ our
Head, and with one another, as Fellow Members. We are instructed in the same
Doctrine, governed by the same Laws of Worship and Conversation, and entitled
to the same Promises, and Hope of Eternal Life; we are employed in the same
Service, engaged in the same Interest, and are made all of one Heart, in the
main, in the same Aim and Scope. The Fruits of the Spirit are Love, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, and Meekness. Gal. 5.22, 23. The Kingdom
of God is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Romans 14.17. The
Wisdom of all who are of this Kingdom, is Wisdom from above, which is pure,
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of Mercy, and good Fruits. Jam.
3.17. To call for Fire from Heaven, was from another Spirit. Christianorum
spiritus clemens est, comburit tantum igne charitatis. Urbanus Regius, soc.
Theolog. Cap. de Haeretieis. He has showed a more excellent way to Pastors and
People, and their Civil Governors Besides the personal Qualifications of a
Bishop, which accomplish him for his Work, the Scripture is full of Directions
for his Behavior in the House of God, at all Times, and when those Evils do
compass and invade it, which do endanger it: The Servant of the Lord must not
strive, but be gentle unto all Men, apt to teach, instructing them that oppose
themselves. 2 Timothy 2.24. When perilous Times come, he must continue in the
Things which he has learned, and been assured of. chap. 3. v. 14. When Men
arise to subvert the Hearers, and whose Words will eat as with a Canker or
Gangreen; then, Charge them before the Lord, that they strive not about Words
to no Profit. Study to show thy self approved of God, a Workman. Fly youthful
Lusts; follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace with them that call on the
Name of the Lord out of a pure Heart. 2 Timothy 2.14, 15, 22, 23, 24. When the
Time comes, that People will not endure sound Doctrine, etc. but turn away from
the Truth, then, Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season; reprove,
rebuke, exhort, with all Long-suffering and Doctrine. 2 Timothy 4.2, 3. What shall
they do, if grievous Wolves enter in among the Flock? and Men arise, speaking
perverse Things, to draw away Disciples after them; then, Take heed to your
selves, and to the Flock, etc. Acts 20.29, 30. What, when unruly and vain
Persons and Deceivers, who subvert whole Houses, teaching Things which they
ought not, for filthy Lucre sake? In this Case he is directed, besides the
Graces of his Conversation, he must hold fast the faithful Word, that he may be
able, by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and confute the Gainsayers: Rebuke them
sharply. Tit. 1.9, 13. What must be done, if Ordinances be profaned or
corrupted? They must be restored to their first Institution and Purity. 1 Cor.
11.20, 21, etc. If Gifts be exercised unprofitably? Let all Things be done to
edifying. 1 Cor. 14.26. If Ordinances and Administrations be disorderly, and by
unfit Persons? For it is a shame for Women to speak in the Church, v. 35. Let
all Things be done decently, and in Order, v. 40. What if Christians run into
Schisms? Reprove and reduce them, as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. chap. 1, and 3.
And if Brethren fall into scandalous Sins, which leaven the Lump, the Apostle's
Order to the Corinthians was, to put them away, not to accompany with them, no,
not to eat. And the Covetous, Idolater, Reviler, Drunkard, Extortioner, are
ranked with the Fornicator, 1 Cor. 5.11. Excommunication is the greatest and
last Censure and Judgment of the Church; and when it is past, the excommunicate
Person must be looked after. 2 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8.

Mansuetioribus (Episcopis) inter quos fuit diu Augustious, non placuit
imploratio profanae potestatis ad negotium Ecclesiasticum, existimantibus non
decere Episcopis aliis armis uti quam vebo Dei and pracibus and si malum foret
insanabile, Anathemate, h. e. separatione a Communione: Hoc tum erat ex tremum
Ecclesiae supplicium. Et sicut apud Jurisconsultos, civilis mors dicitur
exilium; ita apud Apostolos, and horum Suocessores, poena capitis erat ab
Ecclesiae consortio submovisse^ etc. Erasmus in Respons. de Inquisitiane.

There are weak Persons in the Church, and the Apostle gives us his own Example
for our Behavior. 1 Cor. 9.22. To the Weak I became as weak, that I might gain
the-Weak. In a word, the Weapons of our Warfare are assimilated or fitted to
the Warfare; they are spiritual. 2 Cor. 10.45. The holy Apostle saw, or
foresaw, the worst of Men and Times, and has by the Spirit of God directed
what is fit and best to be done by the Pastors of the Churches. And the Flock
are not wholly left to the Guidance of their Pastors, but they are taught how
to act and carry themselves. They must know all Things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Try the
Spirits, 1 John 4.1. Contend for the Faith, Jude 3. Stand fast, 1 Cor. 16.13.
Beware of false Prophets, Mat. 7.15. Mark and avoid them that cause Divisions
and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine. Romans 10.17. Phil. 3.2. etc. And against
Corruptions of Manners, they are advised, Col. 3.9. 1 Cor. 5. to v. 8. 1 Cor.
11.20, etc. Ephesians. 5.4.

Lastly; Touching the Magistrate's Power, there is one Law for him: What the
Heathen Magistrates were not, but should be, that the Christian Magistrate must
be, Romans 13.3 4 the Minister of God for Good, a Terror, not to the Good, but to
the Evil.

Estote contenti gladio quem vobis tradidit Deus; punite latrones, punite
proditores, falsos testes, and ejus generis caeteros. Quod ad Religionem
attinet, defendite pios adversus aliorum injurias. Georg. Klembergius.

Upon the whole, we see what care the Lord has taken of his Church, and what
Means are to be used for the Preservation of Purity in Doctrine and Life, and
of Unity among Christians. And it is not to be doubted but if all in their
places, did walk according to the Commands of our Savior, our Divisions would
be near to a Cure, or more tolerable than now they are; and what Spirit or
Power so likely to heal and prevent our feared Destruction, as a Catholic
Christian Spirit, which is holy, gracious, fervent, charitable, laborious,
patient, reconciling, and wise. After that St. Augustine changed his Judgment,
from sparing, to be for fining and coercing the Donatists and Circumellions, he
did not leave the Work in the Fiinds of the Presidents and their Officers, but
did use all spiritual Means to rectify and recover them: Si enim terrerentur
and non docerentur, improba quasi Dominatio videretur. Aug. Vincentio, Ep. 48.
and he was so far from exasperating and exciting the Magistrates, that he often
wrote by way of Intercession. A greedy wicked Informer, and his Disciples,
should never discharge us from all Evangelical Ways of healing our Breaches.
And tho they are Instruments to call for Execution of a Temporal Law, we must
not think our selves excused, till we have done all that is in us to procure
Unity and Peace. And let it be but thought upon; 1. If Discipline were
executed, Whether those impious Agents are not the meetest Objects of it? 2.
Make the Case of the Dissenting Protestants as bad as can be, suppose them
Heretics and Schismatics; yet let us search the Scripture, and see if
Adulterers and Fornicators, and other wiched Doers, are not under a worse Note
than they. We are to avoid Heretic; and the Concision, that make Divisions,
contrary to the Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles, of necessary and
cermonial, and indifferent things. We are to labor to set Dividers in joint;
but where we do find the weak, and doubting Brother, yea more, they who cried,
I am of Paul, and I of Cephas, to be as a Heathen or Publican, or to be put
away, or with such an one, no not to eat? The Offenses of weak Christians, or
such as are taken at different Forms, or indifferent Things, are none of those
Offenses that bring Woe to the World. 3. Not some Godliness in one Form, but all
Godliness, in all Forms within general Rules and Honesty, deserve Protection
and Praise. 4. They impute greatest Fault to the Laws, that give them this
Construction, That the Dissenters suffer for violating a Temporal Law, which
makes any Exercise of Religion to such a number above four to be seditious:
which is as much as to say, the Law makes that to be a Sin, a Sin of Sedition,
which is no Sin, but in it self good and religious, and of great use and
benefit. 5. Certainly it is a Jess Error, to err in a Form of Worship, than in
the Substance of true Faith and Worship. But suppose our Brethren were
Apostates from the Faith, it were greater Mercy to force them to the Faith than
to a Form of Worship: but Compulsion with Penalties is no where prescribed in
the Laws of Christ, not even to the Faith, without which there is no Salvation.
Christo novae Legis auctori oninino hoc placuisse, ut ad Legem suam recipiendam
nemo hujus vitae poenis aut earum metu pertraheretur. Grotius de jure Belli and
Pacis, l. 2. c. xx, 48. which he confirms by several Testimonies of the
Ancients, and he interprets that in the Gospel, Compel them to come in, to
signify instantiam Vocatoris, the importunity of the Caller.


II. It is unnatural, contrary to natural Light and Law, to punish Men for
Religion, and not for Evil-doing. Christians that believe and profess the whole
Christian Faith, that worship God according to the general Rules of the Gospel,
and follow Righteousness and Peace, are put out of their places, when thrust
into the rank of Evildoers. When the Apostle says to the Christian under a
Heathen Magistrate, Do that which is good, and thou shall have Praise of the
same, Rom, 13.3. he speaks of welldoing in the Judgment of Nature, and
according to its Light, that well-doing is to be rewarded with Praise, and only
evil-doing to be avenged; and that such evil-doing as was contrary to the Law
of Nature. He is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that
does Evil; that does Evil in the sight of God, forbidding the Evil in some of
his Laws. Do our Brethren worship a false God, or the true by Images? Do they
set up another Gospel? then let them be accursed. Do they disseminate
Seditions, or act against Peace and Righteousness between Man and Man? let them
suffer as other Men do. And if the Prisons cannot hold them, build more for
them. But they are not accused of such Offenses; they are driven from their
Worship in their Meetings, to bring them to other Assemblies; from one Form to
another; but yet the Crime is for Religious Exercise, and the worst that can be
feared, is some Changes in Religion, or State. I cannot tell how far Grotius
will be allowed to speak, because he was a great Party in a Faction himself,
neither do I use his Name but for his Reason: They who punish Teachers and
Professors of the Christian Religion, Haud dubie faciunt contra ipsam Rationem
--. Neither are their Pretenses to be admitted, who say new Changes are to be
feared, especially Assemblies --. But new Opinions are not to be feared, which
lead only to all things that are honest, and Obedience to Superiors, Nec
suspecti debent coetus probrorum Hominum, neither ought the Assemblies of
honest Men be feared; De Jur. Bell. lib. 2. c. xx.. 49.
Et qui latere non quaerunt nisi cogantur; and that do not desire to be private
or secret, unless they be forced or constrained. And in the 50. of the same
Chapter, he says, they do very wickedly who punish them, who believe the Law
of Christ to be true, but doubt or err in some Points, quae extra Legem sunt,
that are not written in the Law (of Christ) or that are ambiguous, or not
expounded by the Ancients in the same Sense. The Jews who had the Law for them,
did never impose Punishments upon the Sadduces, who erred in the great Point of
the Resurrection. To prove that to punish Religion is preternatural, let it be
considered,

1. As Nature dictates, and consents that God is to be worshipped; and Religion
is honored, where God is honored and owned: so Nature tells us, that Men must
worship God according to the light and freedom of their Minds and Wills. Legate.
pro Christianis prope initium. Teriul. Apol. c. 24.
Upon this Principle Athannagoras pleaded the Christian Cause with the
Emperors, that they permitted several Nations and People to worship their
several Gods, lest Impiety should abound by suppressing the Deity, and for this
Reason, because it was necessary, that every Man should worship that God which
he had chosen. It was from the loss of Light and Truth, that more Gods than one
were worshipped; but it was from right Reason, that every Man should worship
according to his own Mind and Choice. The Mercy of God is great in making
himself known to us by Revelation, that he might rectify our Minds, and
propound himself to us, as infinitely worthy our Choice and Service. Christian
Religion contradicts no Dictate of Nature; it is the most that is asked, that
our Brethren may be allowed to worship the true God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ with the freedom of their Consciences, differing from us only in a few
external Modes. Ad Scapulm. c. 2.
Tertullian goes upon the same Principle, tamen humani juris and naturalis
Potestatis est unicuique quod putatur colere, neque alii obest, aut prodest
alterius Religio --. There can be no sincere, nor consequently no acceptable
Service without a choice and freedom of Mind; and indeed we should be studious
to inquire into the form and manner of Worship, Nemo ab invito coli voller.
Idem Apol. c. 24.
next unto the Knowledge of him who is to be served, that he may be pleased with
his Worship. The Soul of the Worshipper finds no Profit by, nor takes Pleasure
nor Comfort in what he scruples, nor does God take Pleasure in that Service
which is not done in Faith and Sincerity. Inutilis enim Deo est, qui Devotione,
ac Fide caret, nihil enim est tam voluntarium, quam Religio; in qua si animus
sacrificantis aversus est, jam sublata, jam nulla est. Lactanct. de Justitia.
l. 5. c. 19.

2. It is contrary to good Nature to render Evil for Good, and not Good for
Good. Publicans and Sinners will love and do good to those that do good to
them: Religion teaches all its Professors to do Good to all and is attended
with the greatest Blessings to Mankind. The design of the Christian Religion is
to make Men blessed; and where it works and obtains, it turns the Heart to God,
and all manner of Good, and engages all that receive it to do good to all. It
pronounces a Blessing only upon the holy and righteous; the Preachers of it
teach no other way to Blessedness but by Purity of Heart, Mercy, Righteousness,
Peacemaking; it sets before us for our imitation our Heavenly Father, and our
Holy Savior, and holy Men; it enjoins us to mind whatever things are just,
true, pure, honest, lovely, and of good Report.

Preachers of the Gospel that endeavor to restore spiritual Light and Life,
and to convert lost Souls from the Error of their Ways, deserve better
Preferments than Forfeitures and Penalties, and greater Immunities than from
Prisons and Confinements. And Christians should know, that a Willingness to
save them, and Fervency in praying for them, and living so as to promote the
Welfare of a Nation, is doing the greatest Good to them, and deserves a
suitable return.

3. Such is the goodness of Religion, that as soon as Men became acquainted
with it, they ceased to persecute it, and did embrace it. He that has the
visive faculty, does receive the Light; he that has a spark of right Reason,
and Inclination to good, finds his Soul kindled with a desire to it, and
resolution to have and retain it. The Ignorance of the Christian Religion among
the Romans, was the cause of their Persecution of it, and they did ill to
condemn what they knew not. But all who before time hated it, because they knew
not what kind of thing it was which they had hated, simul ut desinunt ignorare,
cessent and odisse, as soon as they ceass to be ignorant of it, they cease to
hate it. Tertull. Apol. c. 1. They who are most, and best acquainted with
Religion, its Power and Nature, the Imperfection of Light, Power and Tenderness
of Conscience; that read the Works, and are acquainted with the Persons of our
Brethren, are most compassionate and moderate, although there are others which
will not know, because they have hated them.

4. It is contrary to Reason and good Nature, to afflict and punish the
Religious, because they who were the worst of Men, in whom Corruption of Nature
bore greatest Rule, and in whom Honesty and goodness of Nature and Conscience
was dethioned, have been its greatest Enemies, even from Herod and Nero, to
Severus, Charles the ixth, and Philip of Spain; and from the Highpriests to
Gardener and Bonner: Or, if those Princes were virtuous and merciful in their
own Natures, those that did provoke, and abuse their Power, were more
degenerate Monsters than Men. Men of good Nature, will be pitiful even to them
that err, or do ill throng Error If I knew that a Man did but pray for me, I
would believe he loved me; and if I believed he loved me, I would not afflict
that Man, but love him, and do him good; much less would I contend and molest
him for the want of a Formality. The Scourges of the Ancient Christians, are
painted out by Lactantius as more inhumane than the most cruel Thieves, most
angry Enemies, most fierce Barbarians, l. 5. de Justitir, c. 19. and that
contaminated and wretched Spirits, who know and hate the Truth, do insinuate
themselves into the Minds, and stir up ignorant Men to Fury, c. 21.

5. On the contrary; the more humane any Men have been, the more easily
inclined to Justice and Clemency to Christians, tho of a different, and an
unallowed Religion. Where natural Light and Conscience is in any considerable
Authority, there it goes best with the peaceable and inoffensive of a different
way; it being contrary to the judgment and sense of humane Nature to deal ill
with them, that do no ill. Famous is the Example of Pliny and Trajan to this
purpose: Pliny in his Letter to Trajan the Emperor for his Direction how to
deal with Christians, gave him this just and true account of them, that he
found nothing in them, but obstinate refusing to sacrifice, etc. forbidding
Manslaughter, Adultery, Fraud, Treachery, and other Wickednesses. To which
Trajan, from a good rectified Nature, sent Answer, and gave this Order: Hoc
genus inquirendos non esse, i. e. You must connive at such: Let not Informers,
or Accusers inquire, or search for them. Upon which merciful Decree or Edict,
Conment. de Christianerum Persecutione, p. 82.
the learned Vossius observes, in this Trajan the Emperor had better thoughts
of Christians, than those Christians have who have thought, that not Mahometans
only, but Christians suspected of Heresy, should be brought into the
Inquisition; Mitior in Christianos Trajanus, quam ejusmodi Christiani. And
truly, as Heresy is some degrees beyond Nonconformity, a Worm more pernicious
to Christianity, than it; so Christianity was more contrary to the Emperor's
Religion, than Nonconformity to ours. From the same Justice and Clemency, and
Law of Nature, Adrian the Emperor gave order to Granianus the President of Asia
(to whom it seemed unjust to destroy the Christians for no Crime, and being
unhear'd, to satify the Clamors of the People) That they should be punished, if
they committed any thing against the Laws: which as the same great Man G. V.
expounds, is meant, not if they did any thing against the Laws of the twelve
Tables, which forbid the bringing in of any new Gods; Ibid. p. 89.
but, non esse animadvertendum in Christianos, nisi sint facinorosi; the
Christians might not be punished, except they were great Offenders, or guilty
of Sedition. And for a Conclusion of this Head, take the Observation of
Grotius, that God did not punish all that were convict of Idolatry (what more
contrary and dishonorable to God than that?) nor appointed the Canaanites to
Destruction, till they had added other great Sins and Iniquities to that; Genesis
15.16. vid. de Jure Belli, l. 2. c. xx.. 47.

6. It is contrary to the sense of the sober and temperate sort of Mankind, yea
it is contrary to that little that is left of Conscience, Judgment and Modesty
in the more corrupt, and declared Enemies of Religion and Virtue, to inflict
Sufferings upon the Religious, for Religion sake, or for Exercises of Piety and
Religion. This may be demonstrated by three Observations.

1. That it has been the business of the most vile and wicked of Men to
persecute Religion; it was too cruel and base a Work for any other.

2. The Persecutors of Religion have been constrained by a Fiction of Calumny,
to oppress he Religious, as impious, and the holy Servants of Christ, a
profane, and seditious, dangerous Porsons; or else they could not draw out
their Anger and Enmity against them, nor exercise it with any Authority and
Approbation: this is true from our Savior's Sufferings, as an Enemy to Caesar,
and a Destroyer of the Temple, throughout the days of the Apostles, and all
Ages to this very time. Jews, Heathens, and Papists have feigned, and imagined
Causes of the unjust Sufferings of the Saints of God. The History of the
New-Testement shows this; the Writings of the Fathers in their Apologies show
it, who clear the Christians from the shameless Slanders of Incest, eating
Infants, and Atheism, and the soulest of Sins. And the bloody Papists have
invented Covers for their Cruelties: First, they brand us for Heretics, and
then they burn us; and to put a Grace upon this foul Work, who are fittest to
make and blow the Fire, and mark out the Branches in Christ for it, than the
Friars, the Religious Orders, who profess a Perfection of Religion. And as if
the Laws of Princes were too soft and gentle, these Clementiae Magistri,
Masters or Teachers of Clemency, (as Erasmus calls them) are fiery to a third
degree, above the hottest of them. I wish I could stop here, but I cannot,
except wilfully heedless, but observe, how some in this Age do temper their
Spirits in the very Fire, whet their Tongues, and draw Protestants, holy Men,
and peaceable, in a color deeper than they do Pope or Cardinals.

3. This will appear by the Relentings, Relaxation of the Severities, Excuses,
and throwing off the guilt of Persecutions from themselves upon others, and
pretending Fears of some great Mutations of State, and some other ways and arts
of Persecutors: it is a Work which few or none are willing to own. Domitian, a
very Limb of Nero, Portio Neronis, began a Persecution, but as much as was in
him of a Man, did repress that beginning, recalling them that were banished.
But of all the Princes that came after, even to this very day, that favored any
thing of God, or Humanity, show us any of them that was an Oppressor of the
Christians; but on the contrary, we will produce a Protector. If the Letters of
Marcus Aurelius, the most grave Emperor, be searched, wherein he testifies,
that by the Prayers of the Christian Soldiers, Rain was sent to quench the
Thirst of his Army going against the Germans: as he openly took off the
Punishment from such kind of Men, so he dispersed it openly another way,
condemning their Accusers in worse Condemnation. Says Tertullian, Apolog. c.5.
We can (says he to Scapula, c. 3.) set before thee the latter ends of some
Presidents that in the end of their Life have remembered that they sinned by
vexing the Christians. Cinc. Severus (one of the Cruel Presidents) himself
taught the Christians how they might answer that they might be discharged, c.
4. Nearer our own Times, we find that Charles the Ninth disowned the
treacherous, barbarous Murder of the Admiral, and the bloody Massacre, and
throws it upon the Duke of Guise in one of his Letters; and in others wrote,
that it was to prevent a Conspiracy of the Admiral and the Hugenots. Printed
after the Commentaries of Chapter the ix, by P. Ramus.
And in the bloody Days of Queen Mary, it appears the Persecution was contrary
to the sense and temper of the Nation; and who of the chief would avow it? The
Queen declared, she would force no Man in those points of Religion: Gardener
and other Bishops, and Privy-Counsellours openly in Court purged themselves of
it, and laid it on the Queen; so now it could fall no where but on the King --.
Philip seeing all cast upon him, and understanding it would make him
unacceptable to the Nation, he was concerned to clear himself of the
Imputation; therefore Alphonsus a Franciscan, his Confessor, in a Sermon before
him preached largely against the taking away of People's Lives for Religion,
Dr. Burnet of the Refornation, B. 2. p. 305.
and in plain terms inveighed against the Bishops for doing it. And to
conclude, even now, if this were the Vote of the Nation of Conforming
Protestants, What Is the reason that so few directly and professedly engage in
it, that are Men of Wisdom, Interest, and Estates? What Is the reason that so
few of the poor and indigent irreligious do not turn Informers, as long as
there is Money to be got by it, as they hope? It is a sign of a general
Disallowance and the Dissent of common Reason and Conscience. And if ever a
search should be made into them that turn the Wheel upon Dissenters, few or
none would stand to it, and say, it as I. It is no other than a spuriors Act,
which none will own as a voluntary deliberate Act; it has a Father, but who
will father it? Nolunt enim suum esse, quia malum agnoscunt.

Consid. III. It is not Loyal, to make a peaceable Government burthensom to
scrupulous, religious, but peaceable, honest, useful Members of Cities, Towns,
and Countries; and to represent Religious Meetings, (suppose them desective in
Form) as Cabals of Conspirators: This is to make a State-Schism, and to keep
the Government in fear, and upon the watch against our Friends.

Consid. IV. It is Schismatical effeciu, if not affectu; for I demand, Are they
Christians? Try their Faith, call them to give a Reason of the Hope that is in
them. 2 Cor. a. verse. 4. ad 12.
If they were justly excommunicated, by what divine Rule do they suffer in
their Bodies, Goods, and Liberties? Great Care and Tenderness should be used to
recover and restore them. But to proceed against Christians, for want of a
mutable Form, and indifferent Things, to Poverty and Bonds, and to take no care
of them, is it not as much as really to say to Members of the Body, I have no
need of you? Is this to take care of them? Do they that prosecute, weep with
them, and mourn with them? Are they kindly affectioned toward them? Do they
love them as Brethren? Have they compassion on them in their Troubles and
Bonds? etc. It is not enough for us to say, they are Schismatics; can that
excuse our Schismatical Disaffections, Revilings, Accusations, and Scorns? I am
sure the Apostle makes these Notes of a Schismatic, by Inference, as the other
of Union to prevent a Schism, 1 Cor. 12. It is a fine Observation of the
memorable Mr. Jo. Hales: The Learned of our Times, who, for our Instruction,
have written de Notis Ecclesiae -- may seem to have ill forgotten this, which
the Heathen Man had so clearly discovered, he meant Ammianus Marcellinus,
taxing Georgius, a factious Bishop of Alexandria, for abusing the Weakness of
Constantius the Emperor, by base Tale-bearing, and privy Informations, notes
precisely that he did it, Oblitus professionis suae, quae nil nisi justum
suadet and lene; quite beside his Profession, whose especial Notes were
Gentleness and Equity. The Christians were called Chrestiani, from a Word
signifying Benignity and Sweetness. What reason is there, why that should not
be one of the chiefest Notes of the Church of Christ, which did so especially
characterize a Christian Man, except there were a decay of it at this day in
the Church? [ Sermon. of Dealing with erring Christians, page 26. of the 2d
Impression.]

Consid. V. It does reflect a Scandal upon the Church; for now, except it be by
writing of some Books, whose Leaves are not like the Leaves of the Tree of
Life, for healing of the Nation, what little Pains are taken, to instruct,
convince, or persuade them, neither with soft Words, nor hard Arguments? Either
are better than neither of them. But now the Officer called Informer, is the
first Mover and Instrument in the Reformation; an Employment that is, which
many that are too bad cannot be hired unto: A sort of Men these are, that are
more perfect than the Prosecutors in Tertullian's Time: Tales semper nobis
Insecutores injusti, impii turpes, quos and ipsi damnare consuestis, and a
quibus damnatos reslituere soliti estis. I Will English the Character, left some
other make it worse than it is: It is no more but this; They are unjust,
ungodly, filthy, such as ye are wont to condemn, (and our Judges have often
condemned) and to restore such s are condemned by them. I should not dare to
write this, but that I would move our professed Friends to take another Course,
more for the Honor of the Church, and our Holy Profession, than this. The
Church that now is can no more turn the Stream, or change the Course of the
Law, than other Men can, and are not able to help them, (as the Reverend Bishop
of Cork speaks, page 121.) But is it not fit our Governors should know how it
reflects upon them?

1. The World is possessed with a Conceit, that this Work of undoing Men is
pleasing to some that do not only look on, but set Men on; not displeasing to
others, tho some say they are sorry for it; as the same foresaid sensible and
moving Bishop of Cork.

2. That such poor and insufficient Ministers are placed in many Churches,
which rather drive Men away, than give them tolerable Encouragement to attend
their Ministry, or Hopes of Improvement. Methinks the Thing it self should be
more offensive than the Mention of it, when there is such notorious Truth in
it. The Bishops cannot hinder their Institution, but some are sensible of the
great easiness of some in their Admission into Orders. If awakened Souls keep
at home, there is danger that sleepy Preaching may cast them into a Lethargy;
if they go abroad, they are in danger of the Laws.

3. When other Means are not used, or do not overcome Dissenters, to set their
Creatures upon them, does alienate the Minds of Multitudes: We are not (say
they) provided for, nor must we provide for our selves; Good Conforming
Preachers dare not encourage us to go to them; and if we are received with
better Welcome there, they are suspected to be as bad or worse than the
Nonconformists.

And that they should be hunted and worried, and the Fleece torn from their
Backs, by such a sort of Animals, of ignorant, infidel, voracious Enemies to
all Religion, is a very great Affliction to the Sufferers, and Peproach upon
our Religion; as if spiritual Means were not used, or spiritual Weapons had no
Power; as if Christians were to be tamed by irrational Methods; as if the
Shepherd's Voice, nor his Rod and Staff could do no Good, but the scattered
Sheep were given up to the Dogs, to bring them to the Fold, that prey for
themselves: As if a self-created Officer, that is below a Commission, and
unworthy of a Livery, had greater Virtue in him to cure Church-Divisions, than
Ordained Ministers. I assure the Reader, this is written not to make him merry;
And I do not know whether it will be pardoned to me, to conclude this Head with
this, That it is no wonder the Success is no better, when no more sanctified
Means and Instruments are employed to act in a Work of this Nature and
Consequence.

Consid. VI. By this way the holy Ordinances of God, many choice Men for
excellent Pastoral Gifts, Qualifications and Parts, and real Holiness, are
brought to contempt, to great contempt; and this way is a very great
Obstruction to the Increase of Saving-Knowledg and true Religion in many. The
malignant Influences of our Divisions upon Religion, is demonstrated by the
affectionate Bishop of Cork, in his second Sermon. I shall limit my Observation
to the same Design of Peace and Unity, and keep to the Thing in hand; That this
proceeding against the Nonconformists, is of ill consequence to Religion in
general. Vsque ad aetatem Augustini, hoc est plus quam quadringentis post
Christum natum annis, nusquam legimus Orthodoxes implorissse Caesaris
praesidium adversus Haereticos quum id frequentissime factum esset ab
Haeretacis: Nunquam tamen hoc exemplum imitari visum est Orthodoxis, donec
Donatistarum and Circumcellionum porpelleret pervicax and insanabilis insania
etc. Erasmus in Respons. de Inquisitione.
If they were an Heretical Sect, except turbulent to the State, where have we a
Rule for such a Process against them? But without disparagement, or making any
offensive Comparisons between their Ministers, and their Hearers, and ours,
there is no Man that can take the measure of Abilities proportioned to the Work
of Christ, but must acknowledge them to come as near to the Standard, as most
Men in the Age: And for their Auditors, generally they are Men of as much
Aptness, Receptivity, of Apprehension, Judgment, and Experience in the Work and
Way of Salvation, as any Men of their several Ranks and Qualities, in the
Places where they live, and are as great Examples of Truth, Sobriety, practical
Holiness; and are as much exercised in reading, praying, conserring, redeeming
Time, walking not as Fools, but as wise, as any Men that profess Christ among
us, and every way as useful Subjects. There are several Degrees of them; some
have their Indiseretions, and their Mistakes, and their Heats, and their
Blemishes; and what Party have not? But if the Grace of God has appeared to
any Men; and if any are taught to deny Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, and to
live soberly, righteonsly, and godly in this present World, as I am sure there
are, there are such among them. And it is no disparagement to them, that they
are scrupulous, considering remaining Ignorance: for if Men have a due sense of
Sin, and have known what it is to be humbled and penitent, they must needs be
fearful and tender; and then what with want of Helps, Studies, and Leisure to
study Things less necessary, many of them may not be so judicious, as to
dissolve the Knot of Scruples; and judging of Things according to their Use and
Benefit to them, they may not be so taken with what others practice. But there
are among them plain Men, of as clear Perceptions as any I ever met with, of
their Education. But now both their Teachers and themselves are under the scorn
and contempt of Fanatics, which signifies with many, what Unacquaintance,
Pride, and Uncharitableness can cast upon them.

1. It is injurious to Religion, as if they that preach, pray, search the
Scriptures, prove giddy, unsettled, odd, and erroneous; an irrational Sect of
Men, sprung up among Men of no solidity or settlement. Hence what an Advantage
does the malignant Spirit take, to make so many ignorant and carnal Fanatics?
mere Babes in Religion, that have nothing in them but what is put into their
Mouths, or infecteth them with undiscerned and senseless Popery, in this Point,
That the Peoples having and reading of the Scriptures, is dangerous, as
disposing to Heresy and Divisions.

2. It renders the Labors of the worthiest of them suspected and despised, and
this is anhindrance to our Union: for who values those Men that are not fit to
preach? or whose Labors teach People to run into Fancies and Delusions? The
most useful, profitable, searching Books, which the World has most need of,
are not as much as looked into by many, but rejected, because they are the
Books of Fanatics, as they are called. Yea, more, if a Conformist have the
Name of a Fanatic, some of our Church-Parrots will not come nigh the
Door-Posts of Wisdom.

3. It is a Temptation, and I fear a prevailing one, that there is no Worship
either necessary or acceptable unto God, or safe for the Soul, but the Legal in
all its parts and accidents. Hence it is manifest, that all the Religion of
many, stays at Church, no Sign or Mark of it brought home to their Houses, and
private Conversation.

4. Is it not manisest, that many are so prejudiced against them, as dangerous
Persons, because they suffer, that they running into an extreme of Opposition,
continue in a clear way of Irreligion and Damnation; so far from praying, and
any thing that looks like Godly, that they live in the Confession of all
Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, and live intemperately, unrighteously, and
ungodly, in swearing, self-damning, and blaspheming.

5. Others seeing that Men, that seem to take the greatest care of their
eternal Interest, are thus branded, pursued, and troubled, lie fast asleep in
carnal Security, or take up in outward Formality. If God awaken them, they lie
down again; and they are easily persuaded to lie down, who are not thoroughly
resolved, when they observe this Way is every where spoken against. If a Man
become truly penitent, of loose become strict, of careless become circumspect,
of lukewarm become zealous, he is strait a Fanatic, or that way inclined: And
who knows not the Power of such Suggestions and Temptations? Which prevails so
far upon abundance of Men, so openly and shamefully, to be ashamed of the Ways
of Christ, and of speaking of his Commandments, except it be in Cavil or
Contention, contrary to the holy Psalmist, I will speak of thy Testimonies
before Kings, and will not be ashamed. Psalm. 119.46.

6. It makes the Wicked rejoice, when they see them who condemn them, as Noah
did the Old World, by being moved with fear, and preparing an Ark, to see them
persecuted; and makes vile profane Sinners run into an Excess of Insolence,
when they have them at their mercy, or in their hands.

7. It is a Temptation to many, to do many things in an hypocritical compliance
with ungodly Men, which in their Hearts they cannot allow, because at other
Times and Places they express a dislike of them, for fear of staining
themselves with the disgrace of being Favorers of Dissenters: I mean this in
one particular of Excess of Drinking, those plausible Arts and Introductions to
it; and of joining in Discourses, or not silencing them, which savor rankly
loathsome of Profaneness and Atheism.

8. It disableth good Men from doing those Works of Piety and Charity, which
otherwise they would do. It is not unobserved, how bountiful the sober
Dissenters are in all Collections, upon public and unsuspected Occasions,
besides many other Charges they are at, of contributing something to their
Teachers, relieving particular Persons in great Wants, living hospitably. They
are much weakened by Fines, Indictments, etc. and are great Losers by the
Seizure of Goods above value, and underselling them, that they cannot do the
Good they would: And who are enriched by it, but they who will never be rich,
nor blessed, till they repent and restore? It is no pleasing Consideration to
any Man of any Indifferency, to see honest Men's Goods carried away, to maintain
some in open Impiety.

9. It is a great Temptation to as many as love this World, to follow Christ no
more openly than Nicodemus; for they are for a Religion that is safe and
saving, if not gainful. Yea, it is a dangerous thing for a Man, a private Man,
a Man and his own House, to sing Psalms, read, pray, catechize, when an
Informer, hearing but a Voice, goes and informs of a Conventicle, and his Oath
must be taken for the King, when really it is for himself, and his Master. There
is sufficient Proof and Testimony of such Things as these, See the Narrative
out of Devon. 1671.
that some have been highly damnified for praying in their own Families.

10. It is a great Temptation to the Children of Godly Parents, to walk in Ways
contrary to God and their Parents, and to beget grudgings against their
Parents, when they are like to be Sufferers by their Parents Practices.

11. It is a great Temptation to Apostasy, I do not mean from a Faction or
Party, but from the undoubted Offices and Duties of true Godliness. How many
have, within these few Years past, fallen from the strictness of keeping the
Lord's Day, of preaching twice, of hearing carefully, of taking Notes,
repeating Sermons, and Family Duties? Yea, that have turned to a contrary way
of Debauchery and Impiety, as wanting strength of Grace and Courage, to own
their Baptismal Vow, the Practice of the truly Pious, and their Savior's Laws?

12. By this the Communion of Saints is much broken, and the Comsort of it
lost. This Mischief is grown now to that degree, that it is criminal to hear
any of them preach, or join with them in Duties in the same Family, be the
Occasion never so great and excusable. Are they Christians? and shall not one
Christian converse with another Christian, as a Christian, in Christian
Offices? If they come to us, it is almost as bad as our going to them. And this
Nonconformity deprives us in a great part of the practical Article of our
Creed; for the Communion of Saints does consist in Practice and Exercise. And
had we not better spare the Things we contend for, than an Article of Faith? Or
why may not a Conformist hold occasional Communion with the Nonconformists, in
indisputable Duties, retaining the Liberty and Reputation of his Conformity,
without suspicion? Is it because we must not offend Authority? Then certainly a
greater Weight is hung upon Conformity, than it can bear, if ever it be weighed
in an even Balance. We are forward to blame the more rigid sort of
Separatists, for not coming to our Worship; and why are we so rigid as to
forbear all Christian Communion with them, as if Christianity were all lost
among them? O that we were as averse from other Company, as we are from them,
in holy Duties! I do declare, for this very reason taken from my Creed, that I
do hold mental Communion with all the holy Brethren, Partakers of the heavenly
Calling, and am prepared for local and external Communion with them in all
Christian Duties and Ordinances.

Consid. VII. To silence, molest and punish sound and able Ministers, and
Protestant Christians, is as much as to render them altogether unserviceable to
the Church and Kingdom in a time of need, and in places that need all their
Labors, and to cut them off, except they be moved by force of Law to come in,
and do as we do. But the Church of God in England and Wales has great need of
more such Men as they are; and some places had sat in Darkness had it not been
for them. This is true, and therefore this course of proceeding with them, is
detrimental to Religion it self, and to the Salvation of precious Souls.
Surely, either we do not know what it is to save Souls, or we must be sensible,
that it is a Work of great Study, Industry and Watchfulness; and how a small
Parish is too great and numerous, without great Diligence for most of us; and
how long it is, before we come to a holy dexterity in the management of our
Calling. Who is sufficient so to preach, as to be a savor of Life? But who is
sufficient for public and private Work? Some make no more of it, but to send a
Man, and a wooden Staff: but the Prophet himself must stretch himself, and
breath upon the dead Child, etc. It is matter of Praise to read diligently the
Prayers, and preach constantly, but we know, that many must be setched in, not
by citing them first to Court, that way is much about, so far about that some
are lost that way and never come in; we must go and setch them in by our
personal Applications, and Addresses to their Consciences. It is better have
too many than too few, says the Reverend Bishop of Cork; We have too few, if
they were all admitted and encouraged. And what an unreasonable loss is it to
be deprived of their Labors, who are devoted to the Work, and have as edifying
a Gift of popular persuasive Argumentation as any Men? Who have been our
Teachers and Examples in this kind more than they? What an Example was the most
faithful and successful Mr. Baxter, whose Practice was copied after his Gildas
Salvianus, and the Ministers of that Association? How diligent was Mr. Stubbs,
Mr. Allen, Mr. Waddesworth, and others? But they were not worthy! This course
we undertake to follow when we are ordained, this was the commendable Practice
of the the ancient Bishops. See Prosper de vita Contemplativa, l. 2. c. 2.
tales Seriptura appellat Speculatores qui speculantur actus omnium, etc. that
watch the Actions of all, how every one lives in his House, how in the City,
among the Citizens, etc. lib. 1. cap. 21. the Chapter answers the Title; a
lamentable Description of a Priest living carnally, -- Cyprian. Epist. 40. It
troubled St. Augustine, that his Health would not serve him to do his Office: It
grieves me more than it does you perhaps, that my Infirmity is not sufficient
for all the Cares which the Members of Christ require of me. Epist. 138. Clero
and Populo Hypponensi, etc. How seldom do many People, especially Women and
young Ones, in Parishes of five or six Miles Dimensions, or more, come to
Church? Have not they Souls? Perhaps they would be careful of them, if they
were told and convinced of their Case and Danger; but O how well do they take
themselves to be! and think themselves excused from saving Ordinances, because
they live so far from their Churches! The Learned Dr. Bright says, somewhere
in his Book of Prayer, that upon computation, there is a Priest for every fifty
Persons in France. But alas! here in England there is not a Minister wholly for
two or three Parishes, in many Counties; and this where I live, I have known a
poor silly Curat travel on foot four or five Miles to read Prayers, in some
very populous Parishes, where Esquires and Gentlemen live very thick. While we
are careless of Souls, we teach poor Souls to be careless of their Salvation.
If the Cry of spiritual Murder, Damnation, of Fire, of Hunger and Thirst, had
any Entrance into our Hearts, we should mind Realities more than Formalities,
and not persecute Preachers for Preaching, but send them forth in Peace, and
commend them to God. But Preachers, yet not Preachers, make an Outcry against
their Preaching; and others, that never knew the Need or Benefit of it, cannot
endure them in their Coasts: But they who are more concerned for the Salvation
of Souls, and Prosperity of the Work of Christ, should be otherwise affected.
-- But to use them as they are used, is not tenderly to consult the eternal
Salvation and Good of many People; and suppose them as disaffected to the
Church, whose Happiness they intensely wish, and would certainly part with
more, if they had it, to come in again into the public Service, than ever it
cost them to forsake it, both against their Wills, and against their Interest,
Ease, Quietness, and Honor. I am consident of what I write, tho I have not
asked any of them the Question, because I do verily believe them to be wise,
rational, and good Men. If some Places can be without them, tho I know not one,
send them to Places which are in danger of being lost for want of such as they;
and send them, as it is fit they should be received. (How beautiful are the
Feet of them that bring good Tidings!) with respect and honor.

Consid. VIII. As many Places have great need of them, so the Lord has been
with them, his Work has prospered in their hands, even when their Disgraces
and Dangers have been a great Obstruction. I never mean such a Conversion (as
ends in Destruction) to Conceitedness, Pride, Faction; but I mean that which is
to Salvation, by Holiness, Righteousness, and Peace. And for all their Hazards,
Reproaches, and Disgraces, an understanding and wise People hear them, which
they would never do, if they did not receive Edification. Is there nothing but
Humor and Affectation in them? Affectation of what? of Fines, Losses, Frowns,
Threatenings, Diminution of Civil Privileges, as far as some can deprive them?
If this be their Hypocrisy, verily they have their Reward. They go to hear them
for Scruples and Fanaticism. Let a Divine repent of such a meditated Calumny
and Aspersion, lest he fall into them. So the Heathen objected; Sed non ideo
bonum, quia multos convertit. -- Quid hoc mati est, cujus reus gaudet? etc.
Tertull. Apol. chap. 1.
Whatever another intends to do, that dares to make the Success of their
Ministry of the Gospel, the Power of God to Salvation upon rational Souls, to
lead Christian Lives, no greater Argument of divine Approbation, than the
spreading of Mahumetanism, and the Success of the Alcoran; if he never found
the Efficacy of Grace, of the Spirit, Word, and Sacraments upon his Heart, let
him turn his Thoughts and his Time, if not his Pen, to make ready for his
Judgment, and to secure his Peace, rather than to rake into Sores and Ulcers,
and keep them open, to get Money, as some Beggars do their Sores.

Consid. IX. A safe and speedy Union of Diffenters, as nearly united as
possibly can be made, is most desirable, that there may be a happy End put to
their many Sufferings. Religion and Humanity can take no pleasure in the
deserved Punishments of Men; the Murmurs and Complaints of Sufferers stir and
move Compassions; and Pity holds the Hand even of Justice, in all Cases in
which Necessity is not urgent and manifest. The Evil of Separation has been
opened, when the Evil of their Sufferings has not been touched upon: They are
urged with the first, but that is but one Side of the Evil; let us search into
the other Sore, to take the whole Weight and Compass of the Mischief that lies
upon the Protestant Religion; and both run down from the same Cause; and he
that would stop the Current of Evil in divided Streams, and dry up the Flood of
Afflictions and Miseries, must stop it at the Well head of the Cause. They are
urged to enter into the Communion of the Church as by Law established, because
of the Mischiefs of their Separations and it would be a special Service to move
our Governors to make their Return as easy as may be, by opening the Scandal of
their Sufferings. If their Consent to our Injunctions were gained, the
Controversy would be at an end, and this Prosecution also: But that being not
like to be attained this way, the Continuance of the Separation is more for the
good and profit of the Church, than their Sufferings; for while they enjoy
their Liberty, the Gospel is preached, and they that are regenerate, and
called, and gathered to Christ, are gathered to the Catholic Church, tho not
united unto a particular Church, in some certain Bonds of external Communion.
But if they were totally suppressed, and where they are most narrowly watched
and kept in, thousands of Souls would lose the Benefit of their Labors, and
their Hearts are like to be more estranged from us, and the Church will still
lose the Content and Comfort of their Communion. The supposed and aggravated
Sin and Evil of the Separation, is doubled by their Sufferings, and made more
incurable by the Exasperation. We see and taste the Fruit of above twenty Years
Proceedings, and better cannot be expected, but much worse may be feared.

To argue for a Release from their Sufferings, because they have suffered
deeply, may seem weak and inconsequent; but take them in a Complex of Causes
and Circumstances, and I do hope the Argument may prove a Matter of
Consideration, to them that are concerned in these great Matters.

If a Man should move for a Suspension of the Laws against Malefactors, thus;
Millions have suffered Imprisonment and Death, and therefore spare them; the
Argument is not only ridiculous and weak, but weak and sinful: because they are
Malefactors, and the Laws of God, both natural and revealed, require it; and
there would be no Safety to the Lives of Innocents, nor of Civil Rights and
Possessions.

But to argue, Our dissenting Brethren have suffered much, therefore forbear to
inflict more Punishments upon them, is not without some Strength, and
convincive Evidence.

1. The performance of Religious Exercises in a different Form, is no such
Offense and Crime, as deserves to be punished, before the Penal Laws decree the
Penalties. The Difference of the Administrations, is made by the diverse using
or disusing of Things indifferent, some extending their Liberty further than
others. To use Christian Liberty (wisely, and as much as may be, inoffensively)
is no punishable Crime, but a Duty; and if there be not a Liberty in
indifferent Things, there is none at all.

2. But if it were a Matter punishable, yet of such Things as are punishable,
before a Penal Law be made: Sed non ideo sequitur eam (paenam) debere exigi,
quia boc pendet ex connexione finium ob ques poena instituta est, cum ipsa
poena; as Grotius writes, De Jure Bell. and Pac. lib. 2. cap 4.. 22.

Now what can be the Ends of these Penal Constitutions?

1. Unity of Mind with our Governors in those Things enjoined; that seems to be
the Reason of the Assent and Consent; which none can be of, but such as were so
minded before it was required, all Reasons and Circumstances perpensed. But
that all should be of the same mind, is impossible in our State: That Is an End
not attainable, and they who propose it, propose only for themselves; and them
of the same Judgment with them, and exclude the rest, whom the Lord has
received. It was a wise, and is a celebrated Saying of the Emperor Maximilian
the Second, to Augustus of Saxe, when he interposed for Peueer, in the
Vbiquitarian Controversies and Persecution. The Duke told him, he would have
all his Ministers agree with him, and among one another: to which the Emperor
answered, Ego in negotiis ad fidem and conscientiam pertinentibus, nec ausim
vel velim cuiquam offerre necessitatem aliquam coactione: Scis irrito conatu,
etc. I know that will be lost Labor, and that it is grievous and dangerous in
it self. -- Id nunquam perficies, inquit Imperator, neque nostrum est imperare
Conscientiis, ant ad fidem quimque vi cogere. Perclius Histor. Carcerum, p.
361. Hoornbeck Summa Controv. cum Lutheranis, p. 657.

2. The Peace of the Church and State may be aimed at. Can there be Peace in
the House of God, whilst one Fellow Servants smites another? Surely that is not
the way to Peace. Which brings to my mind that of the Learned Hornbeck.
(Oratione de Ecclesiarum inter se Communiene): If we shall receive or treat
them otherwise than Brethren, whom Christ does not disdain, or think unworthy
of so great a Name, Place, and Honor. Atque hoe Christianae charitatis
communionisque est fundamentum, This is the Foundation also of all Christian
and Ecclesiastical Love and Charity, among all Christian Churches and
Congregations through the World. Let others despise the common Name of
Breshren, I never call to mind, without a singular Affection of Piety, that
holy and single-hearted Custom among the Ancients, both of the Jewish and
Christian Age, when they saluted one another by no other Name than that of
Brethren: So did the Tongue express the Mind, and testify their Faith and Love,
etc. Communicatio pacis, and appellatio fraternitatis, as Tertullian speaks.
Faith and Love to God, and Reconciliation with his heavenly Majesty, as a
Father, a Participation of the same divine Nature, a mutual Acknowledgment of
the Marks and Lineaments of God's Children, a Consent in the same substantial
Truths, and speaking the Truth in Love, and forbearing one another, are more
sure Ways to Peace, than Menaces and Force. At quanti dignius franes and
dicuntur and habentur, who have acknowledged one Father, God; who have drunk in
the same Spirit of Hollness; who have breathed out of one Womb of the same
Ignorance, to the same Light of Truth. Tertull. ad Gentes. But we have other
kind of Marks and Names of Distinction; we seem to reject all spiritual Kindred
with them, and extinguish Love, to compose Differences, and to make Peace. Will
these Ways ever lead us to Peace?

2. For the Peace of the State, this may be thought of. Through God's great
Mercy we find, that the Controversy of Conformity and Nonconformity has not
dissurbed the Quietness of the State, but as some have made use of it: And
Church-Peace should be most earnestly followed, that the State may know the
Blessedness of being incorporated with the Church in the same Government; and
finding the Blessing of Religion to be so great, may be the more tender of its
Welfare. The Dissenters have not only obeyed Warrants, but have made their
appearance without Warrants, when but called to it by some that had no
Warrants, so far have they been from giving occasion to the Militia to come
armed upon them; but some will have it so. And the Dissenters give, or are
ready to give, the same Security for the Peace, that others do that enjoy it.

3. The Dissenters complain of the Laws, but much more for their Sufferings,
either besides, or contrary to, or above the Laws; and to put an end to their
Sufferings, is to put an end to the Illegalities of many of their Prosecutors.
The many Appeals and Actions, or the forbearing to make Appeals when there has
been apparent Cause, the many Errors found out in Courts of Justice, where it
has been done them in the Proceedings of Informers and others, prove this.

4. To put an End to these Vexations and Sufferings, is the only way to
restrain much Impiety and Unrighteousness in many Men, and to delives them from
provoking and tempting God to plague and punish them that carry on this Work.
The Spirit of Persecution entered not into the Church, till Men walked after the
Flesh; and after that Persecutors have fallen upon the Servants of God, the
Wrath of God pursued the Persecutors. Men should abstain from declaring their
dislike, disaffection, and enmity to Godliness, if they loved themselves.

5. Yea, moreover, I do not see how any of the Instruments in the Sufferings of
our Christian Brethren, can go on, and not sin grievously against God, Men, and
Themselves. It is plain, that they neglect all the solemn and public Worship
of God, the standing Means of their own Salvation, while they lie in wait to
take the Worshippors of God. And what their Practice is in other Duties of
Religion, Truth, and common Honesty, is well known: They come behind none of
their Father's Children, in Lies, False Witnesses, confirmed by impudent and
notorious -- Swearing.

6. If this Way be not pleasing to God, try another; if it be not blessed with
Success, try some other. It was the wise Counsel of Livia to Augustus,
perplexed about the Conspiracy of Cinna, which that wise Emperor took: Fac quod
Medici solent, qui ubi usitata remedia non procedant, tentant contraria;
severitate nihil profecisti. Ser. de Clement. It is known indeed, that the
Advantages of all temporal Penalties to the Catholic Church changed St.
Augustin's Judgment from Lenity to some Severity; but never changed it from a
sweet Moderation, to a Rigor, making no difference between some and others; as
appear in his several Letters of Intercession for the Donatists. And for all
that, some are so strict upon St. Augustine, as to note, that he but narrowly
got to Heaven before Hippo was taken, for that hand which he had in that
Motion. The Severity of the Northern Monarchs, in Sweden and Denmark, is but
ill applied to our Case, who cannot rigorously, establish our Conformity,
without the Extirpation or Banishment of an excellent great Number of
Christians, that have descended from, and whose Predecessors sprung up together
with the Reformation.

Lastly, Considen, Whether it be not better for the Church, and the Christian
Kingdom, to take off these Afflictors from chasing that part of Christ's
divided Flock, than suffer them to go on: For how can that be pleasing to
Christ, wherein the Enemy of Mankind, the Eneiny of Christians above all
Mankind, and the Enemy of Protestants more than of any Christians, because of
their clearer Light and Purity, and the Enemy of the sincerely Pious above all
other Protestants, has so openly appeared and acted, in Lies, Scandals,
False-Witness, Perjuries, Violence, and Unmercifulness. This is a surer way to
lose, than to gain them.

Object. If they are lost, who can help it? How can they be united to us, that
are not united among themselves? They are very far from being of a piece.
Besides Preshyterians and Independents, there are Antinomians, Millenaries,
Anabaptists, Quakers; should we yield to any one of these, we are yet as far
from gaining the rest, as we are now from uniting all. Thus the Reverend
Peacemaker of Cork, page 29.

But this Objection of the Difficulty, is not past some considerable Reply.

1. What if the Bundle of Arrows be broken, yet let us gather up as many as we
can; our Artillery will be the more against our common Enemy, Gain any of them,
and we shall be the more and stronges by that Addition.

2. Except the Presbyterians, the most of the other Dissenters agree in their
Modes of Government; so that what you grant to the Party, is granted to more.

3. Is it Reason and Charily, that those who would unite, shall not, because
all will not, upon some Abutements?

4. Gain some, and they will help to draw in others.

5. The more are united, the sewer remain to be tolerated by whith Toleration I
mean no more, but a forhearing one another in Love, with the use of
Gospel-Means to convince and gain them, if possible and by the Civil Sword to
restrain and suppress them, when it shall be necessary, and dangerous to the
State, but not before.

And I crave leave to make a little Digression upon this Head, respecting the
several Parties named.

1. The Prasbyterian, to called, does not insist upon that Form of Government;
He offers to come in.

2. The chief of the Congregational are Men of great Worth, Learning, Sobriety,
and Holiness; and they are but few, and never like to be many, in the
Countries, and but few in Cities and populous Flaees.

3. The Anabaptist is an Independent in Government, for ought I know: what will
do the one good, will do the other, in that point. And these are either simply
scrupulous in the Point of Baptism, or else compounded of other Notions. The
first sort are reputed peaceable and holy Men, by them that write against them,
as Mr. Baxter, Mr. Obed Wills, and Mr. Joseph Whiston. The second may be kept
in Order and Quiet, as easily as our careless, ignorant, and debauched Sects,
that go under another Name.

4. The Antamenian, as such, is a Doctrinal Dissenter, yet thinks in the point
of Imputation, he is the Antipapist, and the Protestant, and falls in among
others in point of Church Discipline.

5. The Millenarian, is either notionally so, and then his Faith is to himself
(...) anti-magistratically, and so he is to be watched and coerced, and
Presbyterians and Independents will help.

Lastly, The Quaker must have the Right of Humanity. The Honor of all good Men
Sir Matthew Halt, determined their Right in the Point of Marriage. My Soul
grieves for them. Some of them, that I know, are a sort of Christians; they do
not give enough to the Scriptures, which as fat as I know, is their great
Error, from whence the rest proceed. Their spiritual Loss to me soems vast.
They are gone far from us indeed, but I wish it were considered, that some
Magistrates, in their extreme Heats and Violences, did urge them with Oaths
when there was no cause for it, and picking quarrels with their Scruples, they
fell to a hasty and violent Execution of their own violent Passions, more than
the Law. They who scrupled swearing did call God to Witness, and did protest
and promise Loyalty and Obedience, but it was not accepted; they offered the
Security of their Words, and their Bodies to the Law, when found Transgressors
against the Peace; But they were hurried and crowded into Prisons, and ill used
in many Prisons, and so became hardened, and at length modeled into an exact
Policy. Yet they are Men and Natives; and whether Men shall forfeit their Goods
and Liberties, for a Dissent in Religion, by any Gospel-Rule, or Rules of
Christian Equity, is a great Question, and the Negative past doubt as yet. If
they have a natural Right to Marriage, and those ontracts stand, tho not made
after the Liturgy, they have a natural Right to Society among us; and our Rule
is, To walk honestly toward them, as they that are without. There are many
Things commendable in them.

These are the noted Sects looked upon with an evil eye, as dangerous Men, and
yet there are other Sects very pernicions, but what Course is taken with them?
Are there not Hobbists and Atheists? were there ever more of these since the
Reformation than now? Witness the great Numbers of Sermons preached and
printed, the great Numbers of Tracts, the large Volumes of Sir Matthew Hale,
and others, against Atheism. Are these multiplied without cause? if not, there
is a great encease of Atheism. What shall be done with the Sects of Insidels
Blasphemers, God dammens, Drunkards, Gamesters, Who amongers, and their Meeting
Houses? Irregular Men without Callings, Pamphleting Clubs, Paper Indendiaties,
and the Society of Beggars and Vagrants, that are of no Church? What do you
call those Places, where many of our Nobility and Gentry either learned or were
confirmed in their Levity Vanity, and are so tainted with a sort of Wit and
Words, that makes the Word of Christ and of Wisdom, upsavoury and mean, where
many have learned the Gifts of Considence and Immoralities? where Swords have
been drawn, and Blood shed, but never indicted for Riots? Where have Persons
learned to put off God, and Conscience, and Counsels, with wiety Answers, to
excuse their long lying in Bed, till Prayers, and Sermons, and Sacraments are
over or their long dressing till Dinner to make their Afternoon-Visits before
to the Idols or Images like themselves? Who can reckon all the Sects that
dissent from Christ's Gospel, from their Baptismal Vows; that say they are for
the Public, tho they rarely visit them; for the Religion established by Law,
with a secret Reservation, except what requires them to be pure and holy? O the
low Estate of Christian. Religion, even among them that have the general Name
of it. May it never fare worse with Persons and Places for Religious Exercises,
than with most of these, who perhaps never had more than a private Reproof, and
they will be sparing of Complaints!

And now I turn in from this Digression, to give a few Narratives of the
Nonconformists Sufferings, in which it will plainly appear,

1. Perhaps no Law was ever executed with more Violence and Partiality, or
Proceedings with less Success, and more Mistakes and Errors in Proceedings,
more arbitrarily and illegally, than those against Dissenting Protestants.

2. It is no wonder they have been so unsuccessful to bring them in, if you
respect both Persons and Methods unlike to effect that End.

3. How it concerns all Men, according to their Places and Power, to petition a
Cessation of these Proceedings: (1.) To put an end to the gross Wickedness of
many Instruments, who take occasion from the Laws to exercise their Irreligion
and Wickedness. (2.) To prevent further Judgments upon many particular Families
and Persons, and the provoking of Christ to take away his Gospel from us, when
many of his Servants are so ill used, and his Ordinances blasphemed, and
Wickedness committed.

4. The various Appearances of God, both in Judgment and Mercy, in this very
Proceeding.

5. Let it be judged and resolved soberly, whether this way be not a greater
Scandal to the Protestant Religion, than the Separation is, as great as it is.

6. Those who are glad of the Law, have no cause to think the very Law it self
of any great use to their Design, provided, (1.) They proceed against the
Nonconformists strictly according to the Scope of the Law: (2.) According to
the Direction of it, as to Proofs and Conviction: And if Men did not go beyond
it, they could never have done what they have done.

7. It will be manifest, that they are not punished for Sedition, Rebellion, or
any Crime of that Infamy and Note by the various kinds of Prosecutions and
Punishments.

8. Some are punished in several Courts, and several ways.

9. How the Adversaries of the Nonconformists have been defeated of their
Purposes; some brought to Ruin, and miserable Ends; some penitent and
converted, and all or most frustrated of their Designs.

10. How grossly many have acted against all Humanity and Law, against God,
against that Reverence which is due to the King, and his own Act. And many
other Things will occur in the ensuing Narratives.

I am not void of Sense, as not to know what a tender Point I have in hand, and
what Persons are like to be provoked; but I do write to call them to
Repentance, to move others to Compassion, and to give Warning to them that need
it, See the Rev. Bishop of Cork, page 79.
and lastly, to satisfy the Incredulity of some of eminent place, that look
upon the Reports of some of the Nonconformists as next to fabulous, aggravated,
to make their Inflictors odious, and their Sufferings grievous. My Collections
are but few, in comparison of what others may make, who have better Advantages
and Helps than I have. And if any Person shall reproach me, as dishonouting the
Government of the Church, let them know, (1.) The Things I write are not
Fictions and Calumnies. (2.) These Instruments and the Government are not all
one. (3). It is fit these Things should be known, to prevent Divine Wrath and
Vengeance.

I night digest this Account into several Periods. Before the Act of Uniformity
came out, and after before the Act against Conventicles, and Oxford Five-Mile
Act, and after: till the King's Indulgence, and after. And also show by what
Acts the Dissenters have suffered, and to what degrees. And I desire it may be
noted, That there has been no respect showed,

1. To Men of approved Loyalty. 2. Nor to Men in Episcopal Orders. 3. Nor to
their reading of the Common Prayer. 4. Nor to the King's Declaration, before
the Parliament did address to call it in.
By all which it will clearly appear, what kind of Men, and to what Scope they
acted, that have appeared most active in these Proceedings.

I begin with the famous Sufferings of Mr. Andrew Parsans, Rector of Wem in
Shropshire. In December. 1660, he was fetched from his own House to Salop, by six
Soldiers, who pretended to have, but showed no Warrant. The Marshal told him,
he was his Prisoner, and next morning brought him before the
Deputy Lieutenants, who asked him, If he would take the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy? he told them, He had taken them long ago, and would cheerfully take
them again, if they required it; and did so.

They told him, Complaints were made against him, (1.) For not Conforming. (2.)
For seditious Preaching. To the first, he pleaded the King's Declaration.
2edly, He desired the second might be explained, and Particulars proved. They
charged him with saying, There were more Sins committed (then) in one Month,
than in twenty Years before: Inferring thence, besides the Scandal to the
King's Government, that he accounted the King's Murder no Sin, which was
committed within that time. His Accusers were then in Town, but appeared not;
and he was discharged of his Imprisonment without Fees, and appointed to
appear, when his Accusers should be summoned to appear face to face, and was
admonished to conform.

Easter following, one of his worst Enemies, by a Faction, was made
Churchwarden for the Year 1661. And among other things, he encouraged the
Profanation of the Lord's Day, and opposed an ancient Lecture which of course
returned to that Town, and procured a Letter from the Deputy Lieutenants, to a
Justice of Peace in the Parish, to hinder it. The last Tuesday in November,
hearing no Bell ring, he went to know the Reason: He found the Church-Doors
locked against him, and that Churchwarden owned it was his Act, and told him
he should not go in, tho he told him he would preach himself. But by an
Accident he got in, tho with difficulty, and some danger; and two Lectuters
preached to a great Auditory of Neighbour-Ministers, and People. Next day he,
the Preachers, and Ministers that heard, were by the High-Constable summoned
before the Deputy Lieutenants: He and one of the Preathers (Mr. Lawrence) were
committed to Prison, the rest checked and dismissed. After four days Mr.
Lawrence was released, but Mr. Pansons was detained, upon pretense of other
Matter, amounting to Sedition, if not Treason. He could not obtain the Sight of
the Articles, yet obtained leave to return home upon Security, and limited not
to go above five Miles from home, and to appear when sent for. In the mean time
one of the Deputy Lieutenants told him, they could not rest for his Adversaries
Importunity, who with nine more, and some of them in Drink, gave in Depositions
against him.

Jan. 29. The Marshal, with five Troopers, came galloping to his Door, (where
he met them) entered his House, showed a Warrant from Sir E. B. Commander in
chief of the Forces in Salip, to bring him before him; who told him, he had an
Order from the Deputy to commit him close Prisoner, under the Marshal's hand,
for Things of a high Nature. During six Weeks Imprisonment, he used all means
to obtain a Copy of the Depositions; at the end of which six Weeks, the Power
of the Deputies expiting by the Act for the Militia, they resolved to leave him
bound, and commit him, as Justices of the Peace, upon suspicion of Treason, to
the Common-Goal.

March 3. on the same Day, came down a Letter from the Right-Honourable the
Lord Newport, Lord Lieutenant, from London, which one that signed his
Commitment intercepted, and kept from him ten days and was afterward brought
him by a Friend of the Gentleman, which gave Order for his Release, upon
Security to return when sent for: but he was not released.

After eight Weeks abode in the Common-Goal, the Lord N. brought down a
Commission of Oyer and Terminer out of the Crown-Office, with a special Order
under the Seal-Manual, to the same Lord, and one of the Justices in Ludlow, and
eight more Gentlemen, (whereof three only were present) to try the said A. P.
Clerk, late of Wem.

May 28. the Commission was eexcuted, the Justice gave the Charge to this
purpose: A Minister was to be tried, all Presbyterian Ministers reflected upon,
among whom Mr. Baxter was particularly named. In the Afternoon the
Grand-Inquest brought in their Bill. The Court was guarded with Soldiers; Mr.
Parsons was brought to the Bar, commanded to hold up his hand; the Indictment
was read, and he required to plead.

Before he pleaded, he, after much earnestness in desiring, and several
Denials, was allowed to speak to the Court, which he did briefly, and as well
as he could, being abused by word and deed, by a Soldier that stood by to
daunt him. He blessed God, that at length he might know for what he was so long
imprisoned; that it was a Privilege to be tried by a Peer of the Realm, whose
Honor made up the defect of an Oath; hoped the rest of the Gentlemen, being
Persons of great Repute and Abilities, and was confident nothing should be done
but according to Law and Equity: He heard well of the Jury, and presumed, they
had the Conscience and Discretion to judge of his Prosecutors, as they sound
them free from Malice, Partiality, and a bad Life.

He craved a Copy of his Indictment, and Council. He was earnestly commanded to
plead, or they would proceed against him as Mute; which he did, first begging
his Pleading might not be a Prejudice to him, as to his Exceptions against the
Indictment; which was promised. After which he pleaded, Not guilty, and put
himself upon God and his Country.

He was commanded to hold up his hand a second time, and another Indictment was
read; which he did as before.

He was commanded a third time to hold up his hand, and a third Indictment was
read, which was only for Noneonformity, to which he presently pleaded.

His learned Council first moved for Copies of the Indictments. Copies of the
two latter were granted; but the first denied; but being read to them again,
they took such notice of it, that they were enabled to plead to it next
morning, with great satisfaction.

The Matter of the Indictment was: Not having the Fear of God etc. and by the
Instigation of the Devil, and a malicious Mind against the King and Government,
to bring his People into hatred of his Person and Government, did maliciously
preach, October. 13. 1661.

1. There was more Sin committed now in a Month, than in a Year, for twenty
Years past. 2. When there were good Judges and Kings in Israel, the People
feared the Lord; but when there were wicked Judges and Kings, then every one
did what was good in his own Eyes. 3. There was better Preaching now, than was
since the Apostles Times. 4. That God will call us all to account for our Vows
and Protestations, I must not name the Covenant.
These Words were put in the Indictment, and made to come under the Act for the
Preservation of the King's Person.

The Words in the second Indictment were: That a King, who is driven out of his
Kingdom by his Subjects, and afterward by Providence he enters peaceably, and
then setleth his Militia; and then having made himself strong, begins to
play his Pranks, and rules at his pleasure, like a King or Tyrant: So the Devil
comes to a Man's Elbow, and then gets possession of his Heart, and then will
play his Tricks.

But the Words spoken by him were these, and in his Notes, and attested by four
Men who wrote after him, and ready to be testified by twenty more ready in
Court; speaking of the Power and Kingdom of the Devil, which he got by degrees
in wicked Men's Hearts: It is with the Devil, as with a King, who when he is
settled in his Dominion, has disposed of his Milina, and Ministers of State, he
may do what he will; Indeed till this be done, he may do as he may: So Satan,
when he has once put out the Eyes of the Conscience, and seared it, and made
the Will of his Party, and charmed the Affections, he may now do what he will.

It grew late, and his Prosecutors were not called till the next day; therefore
he only asserted his Innocence, and Clearness of Conscience, that he said
nothing to bring his Loyalty into suspicion, or himself under the Law. But Judge
T. aggravated the Words, in the most uncharitable Construction, at large, and
said in his Conscience, he meant it of the King.

He pleaded, the Time limited in the Act was past before indicted, and other
Arguments, which his Counsel did learnedly and rationally manage: But the Judge
told them, the Court would overruled. Next day he was brought to the Bar,
desired his Adversaries might be near him, face to face; but it was not
gransed, but stood where he could seldom hear them.

The Jury being called to pass on the first Indictment, he moved, he might make
peremptory Challenges, the Judge answered, No. Of Sixty eight that were said to
be returned, there were but three or four of them that were called; the rest
were privately sent to: They lived remote from him and so he could not
challenge with cause. The Prosecutors were nine, but most of them were passive,
drawn in by the Subtilty of the Churchwarden, and his Brother, who swear
directly the Words in the first Indictment, but missed the Time when he spoke.
Mr. Parsons denied the Words, and his Counsel pleaded, the Words were not
criminal. The Jury being instructed, were sent forth, and presently returned
him, Guilty, and followed the Instructions more than the Evidence; as one of
themselves told a Friend of Mr. P. And so it proved, as his Prosecutors had
given out.

Such another Jury past upon the second Indictment, of Strangers, not a third
part of them mentioned in the Return.

The Churchwarden and his Brother swore the very Words; and a third, the
Substance, but differing from them.

Mr P. denied the Words, and had four substantial Witnesses, who had taken the
Words exactly from his Mouth, when he preached. These, and twenty more, did
assert the Truth in another place, who were not regarded in the Court.

His Counsel pleaded, The Words were not proved, and if proved, were not within
the Act.

Mr. Parsons did openly affert his Loyalty, by running several Hazards of Life
and Estate, when the King passed with his Army to Worcester, and that he sent a
Horse and Arms to the Chester Business; besides his constant Praying for him on
occasional Preaching, his Adversaries being Judges.

But, as it was foretold, the Jury brought him in, Guilty.

The Sentence was, for the first Indictment he was fined an hundred Pounds.

The like for the second; and to lie in Prison till the Fines were paid.

He was before his Conviction made incapable of any Ecclesiastical Preferment.
After Sentence past, he only said, Blessed be God.

During the Trials many Incivilities past: A grave and reverend Minister of
Shrewsbury was struck by a Soldier in open Court; and other godly and reverend
Ministers of the Country were scornfully thrust out of the Court; and his
Friends in Town durst not be present at his Trial: And Friends and Foes
concluded he should die, or at least be undone.

After his Trial, he continued near three Months in Prison, till the Lord
Newport, unknown to him, procured the King's Pardon for his Fine. His Living
was presently sequestered by the Chancellor of Litchfield. And perhaps the
Greatness of his Parsonage made him the more obnoxious, for he told them in
open Court, that his Benence was condemned long ago, and that 400 l. was bidden
for it by a great Man in the County; the Loss of which amounts by this time to
between five and six thousand Pounds.

A Gentleman was tried with him, for stabbing his own Servant, of which there
was clear Proof, and his Nose felt a bleeding in open Court, but was brought
io, Not guilty.

One of the Jury, when he had considered what was done, came afterward much
dejected to Mr. P. and told him, the Foreman went against the Sense of the
Major Part: He also went to the Judge, and told him so, who replied, he need not
trouble himself about that, with other Words.

And this was the End of this great Malice and Violence of ill Men.

Let us observe: A Minister of approved Loyalty, who ventured Life and Estate
for the King's Restoration, at Worcester, and in Cheshire, becomes often
imprisoned, brought, like a Traitor, to hold up his Hand, which he had often
lifted up to God in Prayer for the King; the Court guarded with Troopers, and
not the Sheriffs Men; his Friends and Comforters were not permitted to stand by
him; the Indictments found, against better Evidence of better Auditors, even
four that wrote Sermon-Notes, against the common Sense of a Jury made: And
after all this (loyal) Traitor (for before the Trial, and in it, his Words were
said to amount to Treason) is only Fined, committed till it be paid, and after
three Months, the Fine remitted. And this formidable Trial was on part of the
high Day. May 29. in which one that had prevailed with God to see it, more than
all his Adversaries, had no matter of Joy lest him upon it, but the rejoicing
of his own Conscience.

This brings to my mind, how touchy and captious many Men were at Preachers and
Sermons in those Days, of which I could give several Instances in but one
eminent Conforming Minister, who suffered very much by quarrelsom and
injudicious Hearers.

About the same time many eminent and good Ministers were brought into Trouble
and Prisons; and it is not unlikely but the Judge might mean the Presbyterians in
Worcestershire, of which an Account is printed and abridged by Mr. Care, 2d
Part of the History of the Popish Plots.

Was it like that any thing of Accommodation, or Union of our woeful Breaches,
could ensue such Proceedings? Is the Suspicion groundless, that there was a
Design to keep out such Men as these? And that Politicians made great use of
these Mock-Plots, to give color to their Designs, which afterward they
formed. And some thought themselves never well in, unless some others might be
ejected. Nonconformity was a Crime in Mr. P. before our Act of Uniformity came
out, and whilst the King's Declaration only commended the Use of the old
Common Prayer Book, as far as Men could go, and declared, no Man should be
punished for Nonconformity.

Mr. John Whitlock, Vicar of St. Mary's in Nottingham, after the King's
Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs came forth, and before the Act of
Uniformity took place, was indicted at the Sessions in Nottingham, for not
reading Common Prayer.

July 2. He was cited into the Ecclesiastical Court; and in case he should
refuse to read Common Prayer in the Surplice, in that Parish Church, he should
be suspended within the Archdeaconry of Nottingham, and his Church to be
sequestered.

Mr. John Barret was suspended the same time; and July 7. the Order of the
Court passed for the publication of their Suspension, for not obeying the
Monition of the Court. Upon the same day there was an Order of the Court for
sequestring the Profits, with this Expression, Gum jam legitime vacat, and
Curato caret. [ Note, This was before the Suspension was published and
denounced, and whilst the King's Declaration promised Indemonity.]

In the same manner was Mr. Jo. Barret indicted, suspended and his Church (St.
Peter's in Nottingham) sequestered, and he forced to leave his Free hold in
which he lived.

July 26, 1662. Mr. William Reynolds, Lecturer. of St. Mary's is Nottingham,
was peremptorily inhibited Preaching, and receiving any Prefits, and to appear
at the Consistory-Court at York, August 8. following; at which time no Articles
were produced against him, yet he was suspended, and referred to the
Visitation, Septem. 9. following, at which he appeared, and received these
Articles: (1.) No Man, by the Laws and Constitutions of this Realm, is to
preach, and administer the Sacraments, unless Episcopally erdained, (2.)
Notwithstanding which, he has so done in the Parish of St. Mary Nottingham.
(3.) About July, he was inhibited Preaching in St. Mary's, and in any other
Place in the Diocese of York, (which was not in the Inhibition) and about
August was suspended. (4.) Yet once or more he had preached there, (which was
not true.) He resused to give his Answer under his Hand, because the Articles
infringed he Act of Indemnity for which he was admonished three times,
immediately one after another, and then excommunicated, by Dr. Burwell
Chancellor of York; and September. 15. issued out his Order for the publication
of it, propter ipsius manifestam contumatiam, in non exhibendo responsa
articulis. Hearing of a purpose to take out the Writ De Excommun. capiend. he
was necessitated to go to London; and upon suggestion in the Court of
Common Pleas, of the Violation of the Act of Indemnity, the Lord Chief Justice
Bridgman, and the other Judges, granted him an Order, Hilar. 14. In Easter Term
following, he was constrained to London, and to stay there the whole Term, to
see if Dr. B. would show Cause, but he never appeared, and so Mr. R. heard no
more of it, tho it was not taken off till the last Act of Indemnity. All which
was a great Charge to Mr. Reynolds.

It is well known, what Endeavors were used, to remove the Reverend and
Learned Dr. Tuckney, from his Professorship of Divinity, and Mastership of St.
John's in Cambridg, betimes, Anno 1660, before he came to the Trial of
Nonconformity by Articles; which could not affect him. But a gracious Letter
from the King was procured, and submitted to by the said Reverend Doctor; a
Copy of which is as follows.

C. R.
WHereas we are credibly informed, that Dr. Anthony Tuckney, Master of St.
John's College and one of the Professors of Divinity in our University of
Cambridg, is well stricken in Years, and by reason of his Age, and some
Infirmities of Body, may not hereafter be so well able to undergo the Burden
of those two Places, We, out of Our Princely Care, both of that Our University;
and the said Dr. Tuckney, do judge it meet, that he the said Dr. T. before the
end of this instant June, do recede from the aforesaid Mastership, and
Professors Place, with the Rectory of Summersham, annexed thereunto by the
Grace and Favor of Our Royal Grandfather: Which Signification of Our said
Pleasure, if the said Dr. T. shall submit unto, We shall be so well-pleased
with that his Submission, that We shall graciously accept thereof, and will be
ready to remember it for his Good, upon any just occasion. And further, taking
into Our Princely Consideration, the great Pains and Diligence of the said
Doctor, in the discharge of the said Professors Place, without that Benefit
which should have been received by him from the said Rectory of Summersham,
(which, during the late unhappy and rapacious Times, was unjustly detained from
him) upon that his Submission, Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby
order, That whatsoever Persons, during the natural Life of the said Dr. T.
shall after his Cession, be elected or promoted to the said Professors Place,
shall, before their respective Admissions thereunto, give sufficient Assurance
in Law to the said Dr. T. for the Yearly Payment of 100 l. out of the Rectory
of Summersham, to the said Dr. T. (for the Reward of his former Pains) by even
and equal Portions, at four usual Feasts of the Year; i.e. at the Nativity of
our Lord and Savior, at the Annunciation of the B. Virgin, the Birth of St.
John Baptist, and the Feast of Michael the Archangel; during the Continuance of
the said Professors, and the natural Life of the said Dr. T. any Grant or
Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, June 1. 1661. By his Majesty's Command, EDW.
NICHOLAS.


The Doctor received the 100 l. per an. many Years, from his Successor in both
his Places, Dr. Gunning, the now Lord Bishop of Ely.

Some went another way to work against some eminent and peaceable Men in
Oxford, as is to be seen in a forged Letter sent to Mr. Martin, the Town Clerk,
upon which some of the Militia-Troops came to suppress or prevent a Plot, made
and laid by some more skilful in that Art, than the Reverend Persons named to
be in it. [ See Care 's 2d Part of the History of the Popish Plot.]

Before the Act of Uniformity came out, twenty of the Auditors of two sober
Ministers, who preached at Beaston-Church in Nottingham shire, were indicted
for a Conventicle.

Mr. Oliver Heywood, Minister of Coley, near Hallifax, was prosecuted in the
Consistory at York, for not reading Common Prayer, a whole Year before the Act
of Uniformity commenced, and whilst his Majesty's Declaration granted an
Indulgence; was suspended, June 29. 1662. and excommunicated, and could not by
any Intercession be absolved by Dr. B. unless he would take an Oath, parendo
juri, and stando mandatis Ecclesia. And going to hear Sermons at Hallifax, Dr.
H. desired him to forbear, being an Excommunicate; and at Coley one made an
Attempt to thrust him out of Church, for the same reason; and Twelve-pence a
Sunday was demanded of him, for not coming to Church, during this Exclusion.
And at length a Writ came out; but the Bailiff who was to serve it, favored
him so much as to smother it, and so he escaped the Prison.

Many that were strongly inclined to Unity and Peace, and forbore to conform as
far as they could, in hopes of reforming some Things, and leaving Things most
scrupled, at least indifferent, were urged by violent Persons with Conformity,
before the new Law was made; and strange Informations and Reports were raised
against worthy Men, and occasion taken from their scrupling some Things, to
represent them as unpeaceable, and unfit for Union; and as if they were
hatching new Mischiefs, which their Souls abhorred, stricter Laws must be made
on purpose, not (as it proved) for the Public Good, but private Turns.

We may not forget who were very forward in suppressing Lectures, and
dissolving those Combinations which had for many Years preserved the Truths of
God fresh in the Minds of Multitudes of People, which otherwise had been lost,
or in danger; in unsettled Times, kept Ministers to their Studies, Love, and
Acquaintance among them, and were managed without offense, or hindrance to our
National Settlement. Some of the Suppressors were Gentlemen in Power, and mere
Tools in other Men's hands, and these listened to false Reports of Whisperers and
Tale-bearers; or else they were Persons of ungodly Lives, such as prosecuted
Mr. Parsons, ignorant and debauched Persons, that served their Lusts.

Two such were Enemies to the Reverend Mr. Barret at Nottingham. One presented
the Book of Common Prayer to him, a Whoremonger, cast out or the Town-Council,
leaving his own Wife to work for her Living, or shift as she could for her
self, he took another Man's Wife away with him a great way off, and kept her
several Years. Another Person, who was to testify that the Book was tendered to
him, was an Attorney, who afterward stirred an Adversary of the said Mr.
Barret to put a forged Bond of 400 l. for Non-payment of 200 l. in Suit against
him. And that Mr. Barret might not have Remedy in Chancery, he was presented in
the spiritual Court, where it had soon come to an Excommunication, had he not
removed out of the Diocese, into Litchfield Diocese. And that Attorney, when
the Commissioners sat upon the matter of the Bond, feared to come out of
Doors, being then in Debt, (tho a landed Man, and likely to have flourished in
the World.)

These, and such as these, were the forward Men to bring good Men into Trouble,
and were sooner heard than better Men, till they became discovered.

It is clear, that Nonconformity was not the only Cause of our Breaches and
Miseries, but a Spirit of Division from God, and Disaffection to his Servants,
and Peace with Godliness.

Mr. Bennet, of Whitweek, in Leicestershire, gives this Account under his hand,
among many other Troubles: There came Letters from the Duke of N. C. relating a
Plot in Yorkshire, to the Deputy Lieutenants in Leicestershire, whereupon the
Lord -- and other Deputies, sent the Constable to fetch Mr. B. before them, and
told him, they conceived it necessary to secure him, as suspected of the Plot.
He told them, His Lordship was the first Man he heard speak of the Plot, and
being Treason, I must, said he, and I will reveal it; I know nothing but what I
have from you, and I must make it known. His Lordship drew out Letters and
Papers, which he said were from the D. of N. and other Lords, to show him; but
he said, he would see no Papers which did concern any Plot. The next day he
went to the Earl of Stamford, and discovered what he heard from the Lord --,
who discovered it to other Deputy Lieutenants; and so Mr. Bennet escaped that
Snare.

Upon such Informations (against the Ejected Party) it is like, the King and
Council sent down Letters, to demand Security of the Peace from such Persons as
they suspected: Upon which pretense, Mr. Bennet was, with other Ministers
taken, and clapped in Prison at Leicester; but they were after a Time released.
Among whom was Dr. Hen. Wilkinson, of Magdalen-Hall in Oxen, a Person of that
great Openness and (...) of Heart, that no Man can believe him a Party in any
ill Designs (...) when the rest were released, he was detained a while, upon
pretense of keeping a Conventicle with his Fellow Prisoners, to whom he
preached one Lord's Day in the Prison.

After the Act of Uniformity took place, it is impossible to relate the Number
of their Sufferings, and great Trials, with Hardships upon their Persons,
Estates, and Families, by uncomfortable Separations, Dispersions, Unsettlement
and Removes, Disgraces, Reproaches, Imprisonments, chargeable Journeys,
Expenses in Law, tedious Sicknesses, and uncurable Diseases, ending in Death;
great Disquietments and Frights to their Wives and Families, and their doleful
Effects upon them; and in all Conditions, various Appearances of Divine
Providence, great Supports, various Deliverances, and strong Resolutions, with
a clear satisfaction of Conscience, as to the Cause of their Sufferings, are
impartially to be observed.

How various are the degreees of Light, and the Dictates of Conscience, even in
good, wise, and self-searching Men, and that even in a division of Judgment and
Practice! The first Cause is different degrees of Light, and means of attaining
Knowledge. Some are more deep and quick, searching and industrious, have better
means and opportunities of knowing: some can take in a greater Latitude of
Circumstances, and can compare Circumstances, and the Things themselves, and
judge of the Good and Evil. I do not now take notice of the Blasses of
Education, Prejudices, Prepossessions, and Passions of Men, nor the Influence
of the World upon Men's Alterations. And the true Reason of Resolution and
Peace, which Men have in these different ways, is their Sincerity and strict
Observance of their own Light and Judgment, and the Purity of their Motives.

And from hence arises a Necessity of performing several Duties; such as, Let
us not judge one another, but forbear one another in Love. Let us humbly
acknowledge the Imperfection of our own Understandings. We have not all
Knowledge; we know not other Men's Reasons, Thoughts, and Hearts: We should
amicably confer when we meet, and hold our Candle to show them the Way, when we
think theirs is out; (this is to be understood of doubtful Things, and not
clear Scripture Matters of Faith and Worship.) It should teach us
Long-suffering, and to mortify our Passions, and tie up our Tongues and Hands
from Persecution: Better my Hand be cut off, than that I stretch it out to
strike any Man that is approved of God, for such Things wherein he approves
himself unto him.

Let us take our Divisions to Heart, and think the Sufferings of our Brethren
in this Life sufficient, and too much, and spare to condemn them so Hell, as
Hypocrites, and evil Workers. There are some Conformists within my knowledge,
that I am confident would never have conformed, unless they had thought it had
been their Duty; and they have Peace therein: They were not drawn in by
Preferments, nor driven in by Necessity.

There are and have been Nonconformists, that are as clear in their
Nonconformity.

I was well acquainted with one, and I never was acquainted with a more loyal,
sincere, holy Man. After many Disgraces and sharp Trials, especially to a
generous genteel Spirit, in England, he went beyond Sea, and in a terrible
Storm at Sea, which broke into the Ship, he asked his own Soul, If he could die
in and for that Cause of his Sufferings, and leaving his Native Country, to
preach in a strange Land? His Conscience gave him a plain and full Answer, when
ready, as he thought, to leave his Body and dear Relations in a deep Sea. After
his Return, he told me this and other Passages, with a most sincere Profession,
That he had nothing told in this World but to serve Christ, nor any thing to
seek but Christ; with whom I believe he is, and with him will appear, as one
that shall judge the World.

Did that eminently learned and excellent Mr. Joseph Allen, in or after his
many Imprisonments, terrible Convulsions, and daily Self-examinations, recoil
from his Reasons for Nonconformity? He was certainly so clear and resolved in
this, that in his last Conflict with the Devil, three hours before his Death,
Satan did not attempt him there: but this is remembered of him, -- I care not to
be longer in this (dirty) World, than either my Master has doing or
suffering-Work for me; were that done, forewel to Earth. Page 90. of his Life.

It was thought he would conform, till he saw what Assent and Consent was
required. Another worthy Person, Mr. Joseph Baker of Worcester, did read the
Service, but went out, and on his Deathbed said, He could have done any thing
but sin.

Take a fourth Testimony, that able Scholar and Minister, Mr. John Thompson, on
his Deathbed, in a Chamber over a nasty Privy, (which was conceived to annoy
him, into a Fever) in the Common-Goal at Bristol, told his Friends that were
about him; As for my Bonds, I bless God for them; and if I had known when I
came in, that I should die here, I would have done no otherwise than I have
done.

Many more such Professions of Satisfaction might be gathered, but I must not
be tedious. Neither were these the confident Sayings of fancyful Men, but
rational. The first of these four debated the Case with one of the greatest
Bishops in this Age; and was more satisfied in his Dissent, since he discoursed
the Points. And the last offered to dispute the whole Case with the Bishop, and
others that stood by, with this Caution, Toll Legem, and fiat Certamen; which
was most disingenuously construed by some of them thus, That he would have the
Laws removed, and fight it over again; as it is in the Reply to the Bristol
Narrative, printed, Anno 1675.

And no less preparation of Mind could carry them through all kinds of
Afflictions and Sufferings, except Exile, and the Ax, or a more ignominious
Death.

The Right Reverend Bishop of Cork can hardly believe the Brethren to be so
poor as they are said to be. But can they choose but be poor? If you consider
their Number, their Charge, their small Time of enjoying their Livings, the
small Number of the rich and wealthy that do own them, so far as to be their
Patrons or Benefactors; the great Losses of their best Friends by the Fire of
London, Decay of Trade; and, besides the long Taxes that lay upon them in
common with others, many of them have been great Sufferers in their own
Estates: Some Congregations having enough to do to afford a small Maintenance
to their own Ministers; and having many occasions to exhaust them, to help them
out of Prisons, to maintain them in Prisons, and many other ways constant
Expense and Charge. Besides these Considerations, a few Arguments are
convincing. I read in the Life of that Gentlewoman, of a great Mind and
Contrivance, Mrs. Baxter, what his present Circumstances were, and what reduced
him into them. How frugal and parsimonious that wise and good Man, Mr. Jo.
Corbet, was, that he might have to communicate to them that were in want! And
the good Sums of Money which that great Example and Trustee of Charity, Mr.
Tho. Gouge, has given out of his own Purse, to some good Men in exigence;
besides some private Collections, which have been made for some good Men, of
deserved Note. Twenty or forty Pound is a good Collection; but alas! how little
a way will it go! how soon spent in a Family! and such Collections must not
come often about. The Reverend Mr. B. tells us, his Wife engaged to procure a
Man of Note 20 l. but it fell so short, that she, to make good her charitable
Undertaking, paid 12 l. out of her own Purse. These are next to Demonstrations.
And I doubt not, but Mr Baxter can name the Men, that live upon little more
than brown Bread and Water. I have heard of some in Cumberland, that have but
eight or ten Pounds per an. to keep a Family; so that a piece of Flesh has not
come to one of their Tables in six Weeks time; their Allowance could scarce
afford them Bread and Cheese. One of them went to Plow six days, and preached
the Lord's Day: And Mr. O. W. in the West Country, was forced to cut Tobacco
for his Livelihood. Those Justices of Peace, that have for many Years been
zealous in that part of their Office, know the Poverty of the Preachers, by
their issuing out Warrants upon some of the Hearers, because of the Poverty of
the Preachers. Out of respect to the Worth and Modesty of some of them, I
forbear their Names.

Those two worthy Brethren, and Fellow Laborers, Mr. Reynolds, and Mr.
Whitlock, of Nottingham, in October. 1662. removed out of the Vicarage-House,
where they and their Families lived together, as they have always done, and
went to Colwick-Hall, which proved very unhealthful to most in both their
Families; were ( September. 1663.) both seized at their Meeting, and brought to
Nottingham by Soldiers, and with others indicted at the Assizes, where they
came off, paying a small Fine. August 20. 1665. at seven of the Clock in the
Morning, being Lord's Day, one of the Deputy Lieutenants sent three Soldiers
to seize them, who brought them to Nottingham, where, by an Order, (nothing
being said to them) they were sent to the Marshal's, where they were detained
Prisoners, no Charge given against them, nor ever called to appear, till October.
13. following, at which time they were by the D. Lieutenants set at Liberty,
giving Bond to appear at six days warning, at any time before next Assizes; but
they never heard more of them.

It was thought that Imprisonment (on the Five-Mile Act) was the Cause of a
fifteen Weeks Sickness to Mr. Reynolds: Before he was recovered out of it, they
were constrained to remove their Dwellings, March 25. 1666. and for three
months were constrained to live from their Families, before they could meet
with a convenient Dwelling, which was fifteen or sixteen Miles distant from
Nottingham. They preached in the Night, and early in the Morning, out of
public Time, and yet were indicted twice for Conventicles, were often
disturbed; and once Mr. Reynolds was seized, the Officers breaking open the
Door by force, who brought him before the Mayor, and would have indicted him
upon the Five-Mile Act: But he was dismissed, making it to appear, he was upon
his Journey to Cambridg.

Mr. Joseph Truman, (well known by several well-studied Treatises in Divinity)
was often indicted, and once sued to an Outlawry, which was very chargeable to
him.

A brief Narrative of the Sufferings and Imprisonment of Mr. Francis Bampfield,
Minister of Sherburn in Dorsetshire.

The Town of Sherburn, by long and earnest Solicitations, obtained Mr.
Bamfield to succeed that loyal and reverend, very pious Divine, Mr. Will.
Leyford, moved thereunto by the experience and knowledge of his Loyalty, (in a
constant asserting the Royal Cause in all Changes, and suffering for it) as of
his eminent Abilities. Being utterly unsatisfied in his Conscience with the
Conditions of Conformity, he took his leave of his sorrowful and weeping
Congregation, the Lord's Day before St. Bartholomew, 1662. In a short time
after he removed to another House in Town September. 19. following. As he was,
after his wonted manner, before he came to Sherburn, in Family-Duty, and
Exercise upon 1 Thessalonians. 5.6, 7. (whence he observed, That way which the Devil
and his Instruments hinder Grace, God will wisely overruled to further it,) and
diverse of his Neighbors with him, intent upon the Duty, one S. with other
Soldiers, required him in the King's Name to be silent, and with the rest to
depart the Room. This S. was neither of a sober nor bashful Temper, but squared
for such a Service, yet could not utter his Command without much consternation,
speaking a Word in a Breath.

Before this, two Deputy Lieutenants had been consulted, to know if such an
Exeroise as Mr. Bamfield used were contrary to Law, but without any Answer from
them, one T. an Apothecary, came with S. and said, he had a Warrant from the
Deputy Lieutenants, to serve upon Mr. Bamfield, and Mr. Philips, his Assistant,
(a very worthy Preacher) and ten more of the chiefest of his Auditors then
present, and thereupon took these two worthy Ministers, and above twenty five
more, to Prison, in the House of the Provost Marshal, where they all continued
Prisoners till Wednesday Night following, separating the Preachers from the
People.

In this Prison, about twenty two of this Company, whereof one was very old,
had but one Room to them all, and but one Bed in it, for five Days and Nights.
But the Prisoners turned their Prison Chamber into a Chapel, and spent their
Time like an holy Priesthood, in praying, repeating Sermons, and singing
Psalms. Saturday, about seven or eight of the Clock, Leave being obtained, the
Prisoners came together, (I suppose by that time they had more Rooms allowed
them) and while one of them was in Prayer, the Soldiers brake into the Room,
and spoke aloud, calling him Rogue, and bidding him make an end; laid hands
upon him, and forced the rest of the Prisoners away.

On the Lord's Day, after one denial, Mr. Bamfield had leave to preach to the
Prisoners. Many of the Town desired to be present, and some obtained leave of
the Soldiers, (paying a Fee of Entrance) to go in, but were thrust out again
after they had paid their Money. Some got into a Backside, and heard, and were
threatened with Writs for the Trespass, by the Owner of it, whose Wife gave them
leave; and Satisfaction of ten times the value was offered him for the Trespass.

One Evening the Soldiers would needs show some Devotion, and when he that
read the Service, came to Lighten our Darkness, one of them, thinking it had
been a Psalm set up a Tune to sing: So unskilful were these Men in the Form of
their own Devotion, being better at hindering others, than performing themselves
the Worship of God.

The Lord's Day at Night, the Ministers and Prisoners had leave to come
together, and Mr. Philips to preach; but whilst he was in Prayer before Sermon,
the Soldiers came violently in, and took away his Chair, and disturbed the
Exercise; and so they had no Sermon.

Upon Wednesday following four or five of the Deputy Lieutenants met, and
called Mr. Bamfield before them first, then Mr. Philips, and afterward the
rest of the Prisoners. Sir J. S. of Par. was in the Chair, (who could come into
Contest with Mr. Bamfield in point of Loyalty, in trying Times, it seems.) Mr.
Bamfield owned he was worshipping God in his Family, his Doors open, and that
diverse of his Neighbors came in, Many were the Mischiefs imputed to their
hearing and withdrawing, tho not one thing was charged to be in the Prayer or
Preaching, tending to Sedition, or otherwise peccant; however, cause or no
cause, the Chairman declared the Exercise did tend to Sedition, and required
Sureties for the Good-Behaviour, and Appearance at the next Assizes, which he
did: And the same was required, and given by Mr. Philips, and the rest of the
Prisoners.

While they were in Prison, diverse that brought Provisions for their Friends,
were not permitted: Some who came to visit their Friends in Prison, were
imprisoned with them: Some had the Provisions taken from them, and the
Soldiers made merry with it. Some were ^ain to carry Meat in their Hat-Crowns,
that it might not be seen. Some were violently handled, and kicked down Stairs.

Some of the Prisoners had been Soldiers for the King in the Wars. A Thousand
Pounds Security was offered for one of them, who had been a Soldier for the
King, that he might go home to his Wife, who lay in at his House, a little way
from the Marshal's House. The Sister of another, (a Soldier for the King in
the Wars) was violently used; and the Victuals carried for her Brother, was
taken from her.

The Prisoners paid double Fees, to the Justices Clerks for Recognizances, and
to the Provost-Marshal, the same Gentlemen being both Deputy Lieutenants and
Justices: They paid for the Soldiers Attendance to guard them; that is, to
disturb them, and abuse their Friends, as you heard before.

Mr. Joshua Kirby, Preacher of the Lecture at Wakefield, founded by the Lady
Cambden, (90 l. per an.) settled there by the Company of Mercers, London, was
ejected, 1662. but continued preaching in his own House, on the Lecture-Day,
till a Lecturer was settled in public. After the Lecture was supplied, he was
wont to preach in his own House on the Lord's Day Evening, after his hearing in
the Parish Church, except when he was hindered, to avoid Warrants, and Writs, De
Excommun. cap. or Imprisonment. In the latter end of 1665, he was forced by the
Five-Mile Act to leave his House and Family, and travel abroad, to his great
Inconvenience and Trouble, and of his Family, till he took a License from his
Majesty to preach, 1672.

He was once committed for Neglect, Contempts, rebellious and insolent
Disobedience to the Laws, (in preaching in his own House, which is not contrary
to that Act of Uniformity, upon which they proceeded with him,) for three
Months, November. 21. 1662, by five Justices of the Peace. But to avoid this, he
traveled abroad, till the Mittimus was out of date. Feb. 20. following, 1662,
another Mittimus is made, to carry him to the Common-Goal at York, during three
Months. He was taken, and sent accordingly, and remained a close Prisoner,
never going out of the said Goal, paying 10 s. a Week for Chamber and Diet, as
the Jailer testified.

August 26. 1664, after the Conventicle-Act came out, being the Lord's Day, as
he was coming from Church, he was taken by the Bailiff of Wakefield, and was
not permitted to go to Church in the Afternoon; and after two or three Nights
stay at his House, was again sent to the Goal in York-Castle, for three Months.

After his coming home from York, other Warrants were prepared for him, in
which are these Words:

Whereas, etc. diverse Sectaries, and disloyal Persons, as we are informed, to
the Terror of the King's Liege People, do notoriously, impudently, and
seditiously meet in the House of the said J. K. a Schismatical Nonconformist,
under color and pretense of Religious Exercise, in other manner than is
allowed by the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England. -- The said J. K.
does traduce and revile the King, and the Church, -- disturb the Peace, and
turmoil the Nation in new Combustions and Confusions, etc. --

This Mr. Jos. Kirby did constantly frequent the Church, whilst he was
permitted, preached with least Offense, and avoided all appearance of
Opposition; and, in the Time of the Usurpation, was a constant and loyal
Affertor of the Royal Interest, insomuch that he suffered for his Forwardness
therein: But Preaching in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy and
Practice, (what are those kinds of Religious Exercise, that are disallowed by
the Liturgy?) is a Crime, that has Blackness enough in it to deface his
Loyalty.

It is remarkable, he was sent by another Mittimus to Goal to York-Castle; but
they who made it, were so exact and careful as to mis-date it, and to make the
Time of going in, to be the Time of his coming out; and the Jailer observing
it, refused to receive him, and so he escaped that time. But the Constable that
went with him, with that wise Mittimus, was so civil and courteous to him, that
he desired him, that he would be pleased to take his Lodging there, till he
should go back to Wakefield for another Mittimus. What an officious Officer was
this, to be willing to take the pains to fetch another Mittimus, asking nothing
of Mr. Kirby, but to bear his Charges! I am much taken with the Kindness of
this honest Constable, that would save Mr. Kirby a Journey himself, to fetch a
better Mittimus.

To send Ministers to the Common-Goal, is not much to their Honor; but to send
any to the House of Correction, is to send them whither Gentlemen are seldom
sent, I think. But to show how Nonconformists have been honored, I shall
produce a Piece of a Copy of a Mittimus made to send a Minister to the House of
Correction, I will conceal his Name, except I had his Leave, in honor to him.

Burgus de Leeds.
To the Master of the House of Correction.
WE herewithall send you the Body of -- who stands accused before us, for that
he and others, above the Number of five Persons, and above the Age of sixteen
Years, did depart from the Places of their several Habitations, and upon Jan.
21. instant, in the Nightime Assemble, under pretense of joining in Religious
Worship. -- And refusing to give their Recognizances, with Sureties, to answer
the Premises, and to be of Good-Behaviour. -- These are therefore to will and
command you, That the Body of -- you receive, and him in your safe Custody
keep, until he shall enter into Recognizance, etc. till the next General
Sessions, etc.

Here was indeed a Warrant (such as it was.) But another Minister, (whose Name
I conceal, to avoid Offense, and for Shame) was at Noonday, by oral Command of
a L. put in the Town-Stocks, in his own Parish, to the great Grief and Trouble
of his People, (whose Minister he had been thirteen Years, elected by them, and
presented by the lawful Patron to his Living) where he continued for the space
of two Hours.

Anno 1669. Mr. O. Heywood, Minister of Coley, near Hallifax, was desired to
preach near Leeds, on those Words, Walk worthy of God. But the Mayor of Leeds,
(whose Name I will not publish, because he repented of his Rashness and
Incivility) hearing of it, sent Officers to disturb the Meeting, who did it
effectually, with rudeness, who brought him to the Mayor, who treated him like
a Fury, holding up his hand as tho he would strike him, and speaking Language
unfit from a Magistrate to a Minister, and threatening to prosecute him to the
uttermost, saying, Have not you been once in our Hands already? No, Sir, (said
Mr. H.) I never was in Prison, but once for the King, in Sir George Booth's
Rising. The more shame for you now, quoth Mr. Mayor, cannot you read, Fear
God, and honor the King? In short, he was carried away with Lanthorns to the
Common-Goal, called Capon-Hall, and there put into a Room like a Swine-Sty,
having nothing in it but Heaps of Straw. But the Jailer was so civil, as to
have his Lodging cleansed, and fresh Straw brought for him, and to suffer a Bed
to be brought in for him by his Friends; and leaving him some Conveniences, but
disarming him of his Knife, he courteously left him to his Rest, which was
disturbed by Dogs and Cats fighting in the Room below him, etc. Next day Mr.
Mayor sent for him, would have had him given Bond for the Behavior, and fell
into another perplexity, distracted between his own Spirit, and the Spirit of
them that made him their Instrument, saying, What shall I do? I am put in this
place; I would do for the best, and would willingly dismiss Mr. H. but I fear I
shall be called into question for it, and brought into danger for it. But some
wise Men and Friends promised to interpose between him and Danger, and so he
became exceeding courteous to Mr. H. freely dismissed him, telling him, it was
pity the Church should lose his Gifts, and other kind Discourse. -- But he and
thirty six were fined at the next Sessions, and himself put into the
Ecclesiastical Court for the same Fault.

Mr. R. Smith, Minister of Wh. S. in Somerset, to which he had a legal Title,
was forced out by the Violence and Power of a Popish Family, in April, 1662,
(before the Act of Uniformity came out: Thence he removed to Dynnington, where
he had some Estate of his own: whence he was constrained, for Peace and
Quietness, to remove to Chard, to be out of the way of one who had informed,
that he had been inciting the People to Rebellion, when in truth he was two
days abroad, as a Physician to diverse Families, and the Forger of the
Information let it fall. When the Oxford Act came out, in his Circumstances he
could remove no whither but to his Estate at Dynnington, where he had not been
many Months, but his former Enemy, and some Confederates, wrought him great
Troubles, of which one was a Prosecution in the Ecclesiastical Court at Wells.
He was a fourth time constrained to remove, and not only to leave, but to sell
his Estate, and to avoid Troubles, to remove into the remote Parts of Devon.

Mr. Fox, Rector of D. B. in Staffordshire, after August 24. was put upon a
new Way to maintain his Wife, and five small Children; and upon the Advice of
Friends, he was encouraged to settle in a Corporation near to him, where by his
Pen, and help of Relations, he had a comfortable Livelihood, until the Oxford
Act, which forced him to remove, and to rent a Farm in Derby-shire.

Mr. Chantry, Minister of VVeeford in the same County, was necessitated, by the
same Act of Corporations, to remove with his Wife and four Children into
another Country, to take a Farm upon a Rack-Rent. His Family increasing, he
could not afford to keep either Man or Maid, but was forced to labor hard, and
fare hard, and with Labor and Thrift could not pay his Rent, but ran in Debt,
to his great Trouble and Affliction, yet lives upon it still, having eight
Children.

Mr. Maynard, an aged Minister, of North-Taunton in Devon, was carried before
one Justice G. (without any respect to Age or Episcopal Ordination.) Mr.
Maynard was threatened to be sent to the Workhouse, where (said the Justice)
you shall hear better Preaching; and further, You, Maynard, who made you a
Preacher? He replied, he was of old, Episcopally ordained: To whom the Justice
answeren, I hear you teach Children to suck in Rebellion; you ought to be
banished the Realm, and if you return, to he cut asunder.

This same Justice is suspected to be Popish, by his Words at Cholmleigh, at a
Privy-Sessions, declaring, The Nonconformists deserved to be executed, as well,
if not better, than the Traitorous Jesuits that were executed at Tyourn.

Two Ministers licensed by the King, were informed against for preaching in
Licensed Places, and were brought before the Justice at the Bell in Cholmleigh,
who adjourned to the Churchyard, where he charged them with the Breach of the
Statute of 22 of Car. 2. The Ministers pleaded, there was no Proof, that the
Religious Exercises were in other manner than according to the Liturgy: It is
no matter, said he, for the Law forbids the assembling of more than the Family.
They pleaded their Licenses from the Secretary of State. After about two hours
pleading in the open Air, to the hazard of their Healths, (bare-headed, it is
supposed) he fined the Preachers 20 l. apiece, the House 40 l. for two
Meetings; and said to one of the Preachers, pleading the King's Declaration,
What do you tell me of a whimsical Declaration? And the other Preacher tendering
him his License, he refused to look upon it, and said, It may be an old
Almanac for any thing I know.

Mr. Henry Root, Minister at Sowerby, near Hallifax, was forcibly taken out of
his own House, 1663, by virtue of a Mittimus, upon a Significavit by three
Bailiffs, who broke the inner Door of a Room where he was, hurrying him faster
than his Old Age could bear, not suffering him to take as much as a Coat, nor a
Staff nor Money in his Purse, nor to receive the Salutations of his Daughter
in-Law, who ran into the way to meet him, nor to ride upon a Horse, which
another Reverend Minister that rode, and overtook him on foot, lent him to ride
upon, without leading the Horse by the Bridle; So he alighted, and went on foot
to Hallifax, and thence to York-Castle, Prisoner for three Months. After a
time, he was again sent Prisoner to the same Place for six Months; but the
Justices understanding that the Commitment was contrary to Law, he was at three
Months end discharged. Yet a third time he was sent to York Castle, by Sir J.
A. showing no Cause, till further Order, where he continued Prisoner, close
shut up in a little Room, and not so much as his Wife permitted to come to him,
no, not so near him as into the Castle, to know if he were sick or well, alive
or dead, till his Son by some means procured Liberty for his Mother to see his
Father, but was not permitted to take part of his Lodging with him: And at
length a Favor was procured for him, to be removed out of the Castle into the
City. Between both Places he continued near a whole Year. Here Is a long
Imprisonment; but you shall hear of more Troubles upon his Son.

Mr. Timothy Root, Minister of Sowerby-Bridg Chapel, in Yorkshire, for
preaching after August 24. 1662, till he was satisfied to conform, or the
Congregation provided for, was by Sir J. A. and Mr. C. sent to York-Castle,
(his Wife lying in of her first Child) for three Months. In 1666, he was sent
to Goal again, for no matter of Fact, till further Order. At which time the D.
of Y. came to York, and it was said, he would discharge him, and many others;
but he did not. Shortly after the Duke of Buckingham came to York, and finding
no matter of Fact against any of them, discharged them, upon Bond for the
Good-Behaviour.

When the Five-Mile Act came forth, Mr. Root was forced to leave his Habitation
and Family, and Farm which he had taken, to his great Loss, and his Wife ready
to lie in, and to abide at his Father-in-Law's, whither also his Wife and
Family came, when she could go abroad, and there continued, till going to
Lancashire, to visit some Relations, he was indicted by a Doctor, who disturbed
him as he was preaching in a Chapel, upon the desire of his Friends: But the
Doctor mistook his Name, and so he escaped. And the Persons indicted with him
did traverse the Indictment, and coming before Judge Littleton at Lancaster, the
Judge worthily declared, If we made public Places, where the Bell was tolled,
to be riotous Assemblies, they would presently cause all People to turn
Papists. Some rive Months after Mr. R. was invited to preach at the same
Chapel, being vacant, for which he was indicted again for a Riot, which proved
chargeable to him. August 1670. he was desired by some Friends at Leeds, to
preach at Shadwell Chapel one Lord's Day, the Place being destitute. Whilst
the Corgregation was singing a Psalm, came the Lord S. of H. Mr. C. etc. and
twenty four Troopers, with some Bailiffs; he was drawn out of the Pulpit, into
the Chappel-Yard, where he was afraid of his Life, because of the trampling of
their Horses, (and now also his Wife lay in of a fourth Child.) He cried to
them to keep off their Horses; he was in their hands, and they in God's: In
God's hands, said the Lord, no, thou art in the Devil's hands. His Pockets were
searched, and a Reccit was found, which had his Name in it; which he
confessing, they make a Mittimus, to carry him to York Goal, where he was kept
up close Prisoner in a Chamber, whither the Under-Goaler came, and told him,
Except he would give them 20 l. he should be laden with double Irons, and cast
into the Low Goal, among the Thieves. He put them off as well as he could
without Money; but after fourteen Days Confinement to his Chamber, he was
brought forth, and double Irons were laid upon him, heavier than any of the
Thieves, whose Co-prisoner he was like to be. The Jailer locked the inner Door
in the Daytime, and would not permit him the Liberty of the Thieves, to walk
in the Castle-Yard, to take the Air; nor a Bed-stead to be set up, but he laid
a Bed, which he got, upon Straw. On the Lord's Day following he would have
preached to the Thieves, and other Prisoners, standing only at the Holes where
the Prisoners begged: But whilst he was at Prayer, the Under-Goaler came with a
Command from the Head-Goaler, for him to desist. But when he had thus lain
about four or five Days and Nights, two Justices in the West, Capt. B. and Mr.
T. sent a Certificite for him to Mr. C. upon which he was released, yet not
without being bound to appear at the next Assizes at York; where waiting all
the Time of the Assizes, and nothing coming in against him, he was finally
discharged from that Trouble, which was very chargeable to his Purse, hazardous
to his Wife, vexatious to his Friends, and ignominious in a high degree. He was
four times indicted in several Places, and put to very great Charges of
Journeys, Traverses, Certiorari's, Fees, and Removes: He was thrice thrown into
the Common-Goal at York, and once laid in double Irons, close shut up; not
favored to lie like a Man upon a borrowed Bed; not permitted on a Lord's Day
to preach to the Prisoners: And all this for preaching, neither Sedition nor
Heresy, upon Invitation, and where there was great need.

Mr. Nathan Heywood, of Ormskirk in the County of Lancaster, was wont to go
frequently to hear the Service on the Weekdays; and for all that, a strict
Command was sent to him, (by Warrant sent to the Churchwarden) and to two
Gentlewomen, both Protestants, and to them alone, to come to Church Service, or
else they should be proceeded against upon the Acts of Q. Eliz. and K. James.
He pleaded, that he had the King's License to preach at Chapels. The Justice
not satisfied with this, sent out his Warrants for Twelve-pence a Sunday, although
he saw Mr. Heywood present at Common Prayer, upon occasion of a Funeral. The
next day after he recalled his Warrants, turning it into Jest, as if he
intended only the Quakers, but blotted out the Names of two notable Papists,
presented to him.

Jan. 4. 1673, the Justice himself intended to break up the Assembly at
Scarsbrick Chapel, but was discovered, being crossed and hindered in his
coming, by notable Providence, and being discovered, Mr. H. sorbore Preaching.
When the Justice came, finding himself disappointed, he was in a great Rage,
and drove the People out of the Chapel Yard and Chapel, and bad them depart;
and in his way home again, he called upon a Constable (a Papist) charging him
to go to the Chapel, and keep possession of it till four of the Clock; which
the Constable did, taking other Papists to his Help, who all made merry in the
Chapel, and smoaked Tobacco, and kept out Protestants from the Worship of God.

Jan. 27. The Justice, in a Letter to a great Lady, whose Chapel it was,
declared, That he intended to have been there himself, hearing the Liturgy
would be read there; but being indisposed, he could not come, desiring her to
do her self the Honor to break up the Meeting which was to be there: But she
thought it a greater Honor to encourage Mr. H. to preach, and the People to
hear. His Servant staid Sermon, as well as Service, and told his Master what
was done, according to his Command; and said, to his displeasure, he never
heard a better Sermon, and desired him to send him thither as often as he
pleased.

A Lawyer, and a Parliament Man, advised the Lady to have the Liturgy read in
her Chapel, and the Justice could not touch them: Which was done, and for all
that he sent out Warrants to levy the Fine upon the Hearers, and sent several
times Officers to take Names; and March 8. sent a Threatening to Mr. Heywood, he
would come and pull him out of the Pulpit by the Ears; and sent a Warrant to
distrain Forty Pounds upon his Goods, for a second Offense. Mr. H. was
appoineed to meet the Justice at Leverpool, but instead of a good
Understanding, he grossly abused him, threatened to send him to Prison on the
Five-Mile Act, and said openly, The King had no Power to grant Licenses to
preach. March 29. an Usher of Holland read Prayers that day, and soon after he
began, the Constable and Overseers of Scarsbrick came to the Desk, clapped a
Warrant on his Shoulder, and charged him to go with them to Justice E. who
threatened him with a Prison, and underhand bad him go home. The Justice
continued to give disturbance to Mr. H. almost every Day, till December
following; and upon December. 19. sent out his Warrant upon the Five-Mile Act,
because he dwelt within three Miles of Ormskirk, where he had been Minister.
And on the Lord's Day, December. 20. there came three Men (such as they were)
from Sir R. B. and him, about eleven of the Clock, while Mr. H. was in his
Prayer before Sermon, walking up and down while Prayer was ended; then Rigby,
one of them, came up to the Pulpit, and said, Sir, you are our Prisoner come
down, and go along with us. Mr. H. desired them to forbear till he had
preached, and then he would submit; but Rigby held his Pistol to Mr. H.'s Head,
This is the Common Prayer of these kind of Reformers, used more than the
Liturgy.
and said, God-damn-me, come down, Sirrab or I will crack your Pate. Mr. H.
desired him to be more civil; such Language was unfit for that Place. Then the
Lady, who with her Children and Servants stood at the Pulpit-door, required him
to show his Warrant, and told him, She might keep a Chaplain; and if he had no
Authority but Guns, she had Guns in the House too. He showed a written Warrant,
which was obeyed: And the next day, the old Lady Stanley, and two
Deputy Lieutenants, and several Gentlemen, came and appeared for Mr. H. His
living within three Miles of his former Place, and preaching, being a
Nonconformist, were urged against him: He defended himself with Argument, and
it could not be proved, that he lived within three Miles: But the Thing
insisted upon was, That he should promise to preach no more. Several Junices
stood for him; and one told his Prosecutors, If Mr. H. were sent to
Lancaster-Goal, he should be as comfortably maintained, and as honorably
released, as ever Prisoner was. At which the Prosecutor went off the Bench in a
Rage, and went home, and sent his Warrants to distrain for Twenty Pounds upon
his Goods: The Doors were kept shut for half a Year, and the Officers were
often chidden, (who alleged they had no Power to break open Doors) because
they did not get in, when they saw his Children playing in the Streets daily.
His Person was kept from Goal, and his Goods-from Distress, but his Spirit
could not be preserved from great Grief, for he was heard to say, a little
before he died, I think this turning out of our Licensed Places will cost Mr.
Yates and me our Lives. O this goes heavily! Our casting out of our great
Places, was not so much as casting us out of our little Places.

I leave the considering Reader to his Observations, which are obvious; only we
plainly see, to what use the Laws are applied, and by whom executed.

Here, as before, is to be seen the Irreverence which some Men expressed
toward his Majesty's Power and Declaration; and to them I will add one more
Instance of it: And because it was so notorious, as to be brought before the
King and Council, I need not be so shie to relate it, neither do I produce it
as an Evidence of Disloyalty to the King, which I will not impeach, nor of Zeal
for the Laws, as of an Antipathy against some religious Things and Persons.

Mr. Sam. Doughty had the King's License to preach in his own House, in Ashby
dela-Zouch, was convicted by the Lord B. and Lord S. Forty Pounds were levied
upon him, twenty Pounds for his House, and twenty Pounds for preaching in it.
He made his Appeal to the Quarter Sessions, pleaded his License from the King,
that there was neither Sedition, nor Breach of Peace; but he found no Relief.
Afterward he complained to the King and Council; the Lords were sent for up to
Council: The King was graciously pleased to give him his part, but he could
never get it.

The Losses by Nonconformity were very great, as being the Loss of a settled
Subsistence; but the Loss by the Five-Mile Act was far greater, in many
respects, to the poor ejected Ministers, and their Families.

Mr. John Mott, Minister of Kings-Bromley, near Litchfield, was separated from
his People, from whom good Preferment, with the Urgency of Friends, could not
allure him. After St. Bartholomew he took a Farm of Sixty Pounds per an. in the
said Parish, on which be lived handsomely four Years, and was a good Tenant. But
behold what a Crime it is to be a Nonconformist! He was threatened, and sued by
a Gentleman in the Parish and one of his Landlords turned against him, saying,
It was not fit a Rebel against the King should live so near the Church: And
another of them, or the same, after he had made him a Promise to seal him a
Lease for sixteen Years, as soon as he returned from London; at London let the
Estate to another, at the very same Rent, only he had a Watch in Earnest of the
Bargain; which Bargain stood, and the new Tenant turned out Mr. Mott, and his
Family, to his great Loss, and at once was forced to leave the Place where his
Relations lived, himself was born, and had been a painful Minister. After this,
he was accommodated with a part of his Wives Mother's House in Stafford, where
he lived in a very afflicted, troublesome Condition, frowned upon by the
Magistrates, (regulated Magistrates could do no less) threatening him with a
Prison, (for the bold Offense of living in a Corporation, when he could live no
where else.) When his Wife was big with Child, (of her sixth) he was committed
to the Marshal's hand, because he would not give in Bond, wherein he was
required to renounce the Covenant, (no doubt that Bond was drawn by the Advice
of Counsel learned in the Law, or rather did not the Arbitrary Spirit act in
those Counsels?) and further threatened to be sent to Titbury Castle, to be safe
there. But he was at about a Fortnight's end distharged, when Reason and good
Nature advised together, only paying his Fees, and the Charges of the House.
After this, the Corporation-Act came out; and what Malice without Law could not
do before, this Law gratified the Malice of them, that thought a Corporation
could not be safe, whilst one Nonconformist was in it. He was then forced from
his Wife and Children, came to them sometimes privately; and if for many Years
he appeared openly, Information was presently given to the Magistrates, and he
brought before the Mayor, and commanded to be gone, or stay in Prison. Once he
was brought before the Deputy Lieutenants; some told him (strange News) that he
was in a Plot; but he was dismissed, upon his Promise of Appearance whenever
required. So vigilant was the Eyes of some upon him, or severe was their
Inspection, that he hardly durst attend the Funeral of his own Child, or stay
to comfort his Wife under her Motherly Grief, occasioned by that Loss. These
Troubles, and Cessation from his former Work and Business, did affect him into
a Decay of Health, and Oppression of Spirits, that it hastened his Death, as is
verily believed.

Mr. Tho. Bakewell, Rector of Rolleston, and afterward Lecturer of Burton upon
Trent, in the County of Stafford, was suspended by B. H. for preaching in his
own House, and was taken by a Warrant, together with Mr. Ford, (an eminent
Minister, as he is said to be) his then Auditor, and brought before Sir -- who
demanded Sureties for the Behavior. Mr. B. asked, if Preaching was a Breach of
the Behavior? The Justice said, It was: Then said they both, We will give no
Bond against Preaching. Upon which they were imprisoned ten Weeks, and released
without any Imposition (of Bonds or Security.)

After the Oxford Act, he left his Wife and Family at Burton, and kept away for
many Months, till be saw the Edg of his Adversaries abate, preaching and
shifting from House to House. When the King's Declaration came out, he was
invited to preach eight Miles off; and to keep himself from the Officers, that
had Warrants against him and the People, they congregated in Lanes, and woody
Places: But the Huntsmen sent their Dogs after them, from place to place, and
took Names, and informed, and Distresses were made, for Persons, but not for
the Common on which they met, not being known to be in any Parish.

It is observed, That all one Summer, which was wet, they were not wet with
Rain, while they met, insomuch that the Country People said, They can have fair
Weather to keep their Conventicles, when others could not get fair Weather to
get in their Harvest. He was confined to his own House, as a Prisoner, not
daring to go forth without great circumspection, for some Years; and by strange
Providence, like Athanasius, escaped great Dangers, and narrow Searches.

Mr. Tho. Jollie, Minister of Altham, upon his Ejection, broke up House, and
with three small Children, was put to wander for a considerable time, without
any certain Dewlling Place. When he was a Sojourner at Healy, October 9. 1663, he
was seized upon by a Lieutenant, and three Soldiers, in a rude manner, was set
on Horseback behind one of them, not permitted to draw on his Boots, nor put on
his Hat: These carried him to Burnley, and committed him to a Guard. He was
examined about keeping Meetings, which could not be proved; but yet he must
find Sureties for the Behavior: and, as if that was too little, he must be
sent out of his Country. When he was at Family-Duty, in a House to which he was
committed by a Colonel, a Captain came in boysterously, pretending it was a
Conventicle, and with some Words of Blasphemy, plucked the Bible out of his
hand, and drew him to the Court of Guard, where he must sit all Night, insulted
over, and was not suffered to lie down till toward Day, when he was permitted
to lie on a little moist Straw. He was, contrary to the Order of a Justice of
Peace, and without the Command of the Colonel, set away on the Lord's Day, in
extreme Rain, to Skippon in Yorkshire, and there lay under the Marshal's hand,
till sent back, because the Officers there knew not to what purpose, or for
what Cause he was committed.

November. 4. 1663. he was taken Prisoner by three Troopers, not showing him any
Warrant or Order, and not telling him whither they would have him, but carried
him to York, and put him under the Marshal's hand, who lodged him in a cold
Room, without Fire, in the depth of Winter; and no Crime objected to him there:
after a great Expense, and Hazard of his Life, he was sent home in Peace.

Feb. 12. 1664, he was taken at a Meeting by the same Captain; his Soldiers
brake down the Doors by his Command. When the Captain came in among them, his
Courage failed him, and his Countenance fell; so that he went away, and left
Mr. J. to his Soldiers, one of whom (W.) raged against him in vile and bloody
Expressions: Soon after which, he, and another Soldier were taken away by
Death, in a terrible manner. He and others were carried before two Justices,
who sent him to Lancaster Goal, where he continued the full Time appointed by
the first Act against Conventicles.

After his Release, he was again ( November. 23. 1665.) seized, by Order from the
Lord Lieutenant and Deputies, and by them turned over to the Justices, to give
Bond for the Behavior, or to be sent to Goal; but Justice Rigby confessed it
was without Precedent, and therefore sent him home, upon promise to surrender
himself, if he sent for him within a Fortnight.

After the Five-Mile Act came out, he was separated from his Friends, and
forced to leave his own Estate, and put to continual Night-Travels, to enjoy
Divine Ordinances, for many Years, by which he contracted Diseases, to the
danger of his Life. Being upon a time taken Preaching, for which a Warrant of
Banishment, for the third Offense, was sent out against him; but it miscarried,
and he escaped.

April 25. 1669, he was taken by Captain -- and his Man, who brought him before
some Deputy Lieutenants, who sent him to Lancaster Goal for six Months, for
preaching within five Miles of Altham, where he had been Minister.

In October, he was sued for Forty Pound, upon the Five-Mile Act, by the said
Captain N. which Suit cost Mr. J. about Eighty Pounds.

December. 5. following, a Warrant of the Behavior was served upon Mr. J. for
(as he says) fulfilling his Ministry, in feeding his Flock, according to his
solemn Vow made at his Ordination.

About June 14. 1674, before he knew his License from the King was out, he was
taken preaching in one of his licensed Places, by Captain N. who commanded him
to come down, or he would pistol him, (holding his Pistol at him in the Pulpit)
and swearing blasphemously, and calling him shamefully. After the Captain had
detained him as a Prisoner, (being made a Justice) he sent forth a Warrant to
distrain Twenty Pounds upon Mr. J.'s Goods; and because his Goods were removed
out of the way, he sent out two Warrants, to distrain upon two of his Hearers;
which Goods of theirs Mr. J. redeemed, because taken instead of his. Another
Warrant was sent out for Twenty Pounds for the House. The whole of the Fines
for that Meeting came to about Forty four Pounds, which was all imbezelled,
without paying to the King his part, or giving to the Poor theirs, save only
one Forty Shillings. The King did graciously remit to the Sufferers his part;
but the Captain would not obey the Order of the Lord Treasurer: Yet this is for
the King. The same is known to be true of a Justice in Lancashire.

About November. 7. 1678. Mr. J. with several other Dissenting Protestants, were
presented among the Plotting Papists: They made their Appearance, and desired
their Business, might be put off till the next Sessions, which the Justice
granted, because the Parliament had the Case of Dissenters before them: Yet the
Clerk of the Peace returned him and the rest into the Exchequer, thereby (as he
says) cheating them out of their Liberty of Traverse. This was chargeable to
him, besides the Sequestration of two parts of his Estate, which he looked for,
when he wrote the short Narrative of his great Sufferings.

N. B. Some have exposed some of the Nonconformists to Jealousy and Sufferings,
as being confederate with Jesuits, or maintaining a Correspondency and Interest
with them; but this Nonconformist found no such Friendship from that Party: For
Mr. W. of Drusenhaugh, a great Papist in his Parish, charged his Steward, a
Papist also, to shut him out of Lango Chapel, where he was Lord of the Soil.
His Adversaries were great Intimates with the Popish Gentry, which are numerous
in that County; and some of his Adversaries had been professed Papists a while
before.

There are many very remarkable Instances of God's Providence toward him, and
of the insatiable Malice of very ill Men against him; with the Divine Hand
stretched out against several of his Persecutors.

Two Captains, Gentlemen, and an Ensign hindered him to preach, or commend his
People to God, before August 24. 1662. after thirteen Years laboring among his
People. He withdrew, and gave way to their Violence, leaving this Admonition
with one of the Gentlemen: This is not the way to turn the Wrath of God from
your House, which has long lain upon it, but to bring it on to the uttermost.
The Gentleman answered, Be it so.

Their Carriage toward Mr. Jollie was an Offense and great Grief to the
Country.

One of the three Excluders of him died in the pursuit of his most debauched
Practices, with unexpressible Horrors.

Soon after another of them, whom he had warned as before, died (having seen
his Male Issue rooted out before) by his own hands, by a Relapse into excessive
Drinking, after a little Recovery. His Disease apprehended him, as if he had
been struck with a Rod upon his Arm.

Another (but not one of the three) violent Prosecutor died in great Poverty
and Disgrace.

A younger Brother, and next Heir to the admonished Gentleman, was the Cause of
Mr. J.'s Apprehension, April 25. 1669. who not being well, would needs have his
Chamber-Window in A. H. opened to see Mr. J. carried by a Prisoner; but such an
Air came in at the Window upon him, that he took cold, and soon after died,
without any male Issue: And says the good Man, Lord grant the third Brother
may take warning.

Another Gentleman, that sent Mr. J. Prisoner to Lancaster, was shortly after
made a Prisoner, and all his Estate in Lancaster seized upon for Debt.

One F. a Retainer to Capt. N. and an Instrument in the Prosecution, a drunken
and debauched Fellow, after a Revelling-Bout at the Ab. in W. was taken or
smitten with an insatiable Thirst, insomuch that two days after he lay down and
drunk at the River, to quench his Thirst, upon which a Stitch took him, and
killed him presently.

About the latter end of 1677, Mr. R. a Justice, met at a Privy-Sessions, at
which one of the Justices asked, Who Mr. J. was? Another answered, He is a
Miuister: No, said Mr. R. he is an Enemy of Christ, and a Traitor to the King.
Presently after (as some present are ready to testify) that Gentleman fell a
trembling, could not hold his Pen to sign any Warrant, nor sit up, nor stay in
the Place, but was necessitated to leave the Sessions, and never came more to
the Bench, dying soon after, as a fearful Spectacle.

The same worthy Person concludes a short Sum of his Sufferings thus; We might
give an Account of the special hand of God upon us for Good, all along,
throughout all our Infirmities and Temptations, leading us by the hand, and
upholding us, either signally saving us from, or strengthening us under our
Troubles, filling us with Peace passing understanding, and Joy unspeakable,
supplying our Wants every way, who are a very weak and poor People. -- Yea,
either convincing or changing our Adversaries, or baffling and blasting their
Designs. -- All this for the everlasting Honor of his most glorious Name
alone. Hallelujah.

Compare the Spirit of the Prosecutors, and the Spirit of the Sufferers, the
End of the one, and of the other, and then judge seriously, who is the best
Christian, and who is most approved of Christ, they who serve him, or the other
who trouble them for it.

Mr. T. M. of L. (I conceal his Name because of his Modesty) in beginning and
ending his Letter at the Importunity of his Friend, thus he begins: Honored
Sir, were it not for the false Reflections and Calumnies against the
Nonconformist-Ministers of England, -- your kind and serious, sympathizing, and
seasonable Letter had not extorted these sad following Lines. -- I am in some
sort compelled to comply with your Importunity, in the ensuing epitomized
Narrative. And he concludes with a Spirit that commands from me a great respect
to his Christian and humble Temper.

He left his Living in the City of L. where he had been a Minister some Years,
having a Wife and several Children, lost 80 l. per an. and 40 l. which should
have been paid to him in the beginning of the Year, and in a low Estate left
his Living: Yet he continued in Town, living upon mere Providence, till the
Oxford Act came out. Then he was forced to leave Wife and Children, being
scarce free from an almost deadly Cold, which he thought would put an end to
his Life, continuing about three Months upon him. He saw not Wife nor Children
after that in eleven Weeks, and durst not come to them publicly in eighteen
Months, or thereabouts, and having no Dewlling Place abroad, journeyed in that
time (as he thinks) thirteen score Miles on foot, from place to place. If at
any time he should steal home by Night, he was in great fear and danger, and
durst not stir out of his Chamber; and whenever he went out again, he went
either very late, or very early, and sometimes on a sudden, for fear of being
taken. After that time he made bold to come home; but the Zeal of some growing
so hot, that one Mr. Grace, an aged worthy Minister, coming to Town, they made
search for him, which he escaped, leaving his Horse in his Inn, and escaping on
foot: Then Mr. M. thought it unsafe for him to stay, and made haste away the
next day, and durst not return in a long time. One time he was sent for to a
Magistrate that lay sick, and continued his Night-Visits for a Fortnight; but
the Evening before he died, he was sent for in haste by Daylight; and because
he was seen to go to the Magistrate's House, he was complained of to the chief
Magistrate of the Town, by a Curate, which made him hasten away next morning,
(Saturday): The chief Magistrate was so kind as to send notice to his Wife, on
the Evening of the Sabbath, that her Husband should be gone, for some had been
twice with him for a Warrant. After this he absented long. He was cited into
the Ecclesiastical Court, for baptizing his own Child. One time as he was going
along the Street, one cried out to the Town Clerk, who went after him, Do you
see the Rogue Mr. R. do you see the Rogue? He is before you: But God was
pleased to give the Town Clerk another Heart than to apprehend him. But this
made him be much from home, and walk the Streets very sparingly. He has been
forced into the Country in Snow and Rain, to preach before day, and to shift
from House to House before day, for fear of a Magistrate in the Country, who
has said, he would have him dead or alive. And so not daring to be in the
City, nor to appear in the Country, in that Magistrate's reach, he has been
constrained to retire into the Fields and Solitudes, to keep Sabbath all alone.
He has lived upon Providence for eighteen or nineteen Years; and tho (...)
been in danger of Life, by reason of Heats and Colds, yet has he (...) been
forsaken, nor his Seed begged their Bread, nor suffered as they did who were
destitute, tormented, afflicted, wandering up and down in Sheepskins and
Goat Skins, Dens and Rocks, and Caves, etc. With many other pious Expressions
of God's Goodness, and wonderful Providence, his own Unworthiness, as unworthy
to be counted a Sufferer, he concludes to his worthy Friend with Praises and
Prayer.

Having mentioned Mr. Grace of Sheerston, as an aged worthy Minister, I
remember some short Account of him, which take as follows.

Mr. Grace, upon his Ejectment from his Living, on which he lived comfortably,
was with his Wife and eleven Children reduced to Straits. Hoping to get some
Supplies of Maintenance, he took a Farm of about Thirty Pounds per an. -- (But
preaching in his own House was, it seems by his Letter, a Crime not to be
passed by.) He was in a short time after his other Troubles, apprehended by two
Justices, Noncenformity is such a great Sin in some Men's eyes, that it excludes
them out of natural Affection, as well as Charity and Compassion. This worthy
Person was so near akin to A. B. Sh. that he and his Family could not be much
nearer. Either he or his Wife was Cousin-German to the late A. B. of Cant.
and, with many of his Hearers, bound over, which was very chargeable. Not long
after, he was sent for by a Party of Horse, called out of his Bed, and carried
Prisoner to Stafford, for what he knew not, nor was ever told. He being unable
to bear the Charge of his Imprisonment, made application to the
Deputy Lieutenants, was forced to give in Bond of a hundred Pounds, to appear
when called. He was dismissed, after many hard Speeches, but no Charge laid
against him. After these Troubles, he was by the Five-Mile-Act necessitated to
remove five Miles from the Corporation, to a Place where he lived at great
Costs and Charges, separated from his dear Relations, and his Farm left to the
management of Servants, which proved exceedingly to his Loss.

Some Nonconformists in the North of England have been often imprisoned. Eight
were indicted for Roman Catholics, and their Estates sequestered: Their Proof
and Plea, that they were true Protestants, When will the Jesuits and Papists be
at this pains and charge to prove themselves Protestants? Is this a Sign that
Nonconformists are Papists, or in with them in a Confederacy?
both in the Country, and at London, cost them about Forty Pounds. They were
indicted upon the Statute of Twenty Pound a Month, and Twelve-pence a Sunday.
Ten were prosecuted upon the Statute of 35 of Eliz. came to London, and were
put in a way by a noble and powerful Lord, to get off: And had not Sir William
Jones, then Attorney General, (whose Name is and will be in honor, while any
honor will be paid to a professed and open Assertor of true Loyalty, Laws, and
Religion) been so generous and merciful, as to cause but one Fee for ten, (that
is, 30 l. instead of 210 l.) due at the several Offices, they had been great
Sufferers, and their straight Condition had been reduced I cannot tell into
what Streights and Poverty, they being no ways able to pay it; for even what
was paid, was raised by the Charity of good People in London.

If any Man that has any value for the precious Souls of Men, for whom Christ
died, and has any knowledge of the miserable Condition of large and dark Places
in those Counties, he may judge it to be a great Disservice to Jesus Christ, and
immortal Souls, to silence, imprison, and punish Preachers, and thereby to
leave poor ignorant Souls to the Improvements of natural Ignorance, and to the
Power of ill Examples, and irreligious or superstitious Customs. A Traveller,
unacquainted with the Country, is not in greater danger in the Night, of
falling into Cole-Pits and Precipices, than those poor Souls of falling into
the Bottomless-Pit, if they are denied the Guidance of faithful Ministers.
Shall poor Souls abide in Darkness, and err from the Ways of God, to their
everlasting hazard? and Ministers, that have knowledge of their Danger, and a
charitable Sense of their great Need, look on, and see them fall, and sin, and
die, and not call, and warn, and exhort, and teach them? Their painful
Ministers, to avoid Offense and Dangers, and to show poor Souls the Way to
everlasting Life, have gone under the protection and concealment of the
Darkness of the Night, and preached and prayed in Caves and Pits, venturing
their Healths and Lives, to save Sinners from everlasting Destruction.

One Mr. Davis in Cumberland preached in one of them, and got a Cold that
proved mortal, leaving six Children to the Charity of good People, and
particularly to the Care of Mr. Richard Wilson, a Gentleman of a small Estate,
but of great Piety and Usefulness in the North, and one who had like to have
been ruined on the 35 of Eliz.

And what a poor Reward is a Threatening, a Frown, a Fine, and an Imprisonment!
Is this a Prophet's Reward! Not to receive them that speak Peace, into their
Houses, is an Unkindness: To bid them depart out of their Coast, is a fairer
dismission than to send them to a Prison. If their Rewards be only in this
Life, then of all Men, they who are punished in those and other dark and poor
Corners of the Land, are most miserable.

Active and successful Mr. Tho. Tregosse writes thus to his Brother-Minister:
Warrants are granted for levying Two Hundred and Twenty Pounds upon me; yet God
has kept them off, but I am expecting daily to be stripped of all; I am also
threatened upon the Corporation-Law. -- I am constantly expecting an
Imprisonment.

To avoid that Mischief, and others which he expected, some have removed often
from Place to Place. It is not painful to ambitious Men, to remove from a worse
to a better, from an old to a new Preferment; but Removes are chargeable and
burthensom, from a Freehold to a Farm, to a Chamber, or a part of another
Man's House, etc.

I hear, Mr. Stevens, of Fennie-Drayton in Leichestershire, after his Ejection,
removed seven times for his Peace.

Mr. Baxter, ( Life of Mrs. M. B. p. 51.) historically tells us of his several
Removes, which must needs be very troublesome to his sickly Body, and to his
Mind fixed upon Studies; and to have no better Accommodation, than a part of a
very poor House of a Farmer's in Totteridge, where the Rooms smoked so
extremely, as greatly annoyed the Health of the nobly charitable Mrs. Baxter.
The Winter was very hard and cold, the Coal-smoak filled the Room in which they
sat all day, so that it was as a Cloud, and they were even suffocated with the
Stink. It was ill living without Fire in a cold Winter, and bad having Smoke in
their Eyes, and Stink in their Nostrils: It was ill studying for him, in great
pain besides; and ill living for her, whose Lungs could not bear Smoke and
Closeness.

It does as often affect me, as I call to mind what Reverend Mr. T. writes, in
a Letter to a Relation. -- I am now septuagenarius, and hardly able to pass
from one Chamber to another, without some help, over and above that of my
Staff. Being driven out of my Place, worth above Two Hundred Pounds p. 1 an.
with my Wife and eight Children, and by forced Confinements, and sometimes
Banishments, for the space of a whole Year from my House and Family, did
contract those Weaknesses and Distempers, under which I now languish. But still
I have cause to bless God, who corrects me far less than I deserve; and why
shall a living Man complain?

Take another Instance of the Effects of Confinements upon the Health and Life
of some more, and upon their Families.

The well-known Divine, Mr. G. Hughes of Plymouth, was summoned to appear by a
Lieutenant of the Garrison, as from his Superior, and to bring his Son with
him. An Officer, with two Files of Musketeers, was commanded to convey Mr. H.
to an Island in the Sea, not suffering his Son (to be his Companion and
Comforter) to go with him, but confined him to Plymouth. While Mr. H. was in
the Island, the Earl of B. came upon it; but Mr. H. could not obtain the
Justice or Friendship to speak with him, tho nothing was laid to his Charge.
Here in his Patmos he answered Mr. Serjeant's Sure-Footing. And here that
Disease, by the Saltness of the Air, possessed him, that never left him: His
Legs were black and swollen, and could not be recovered. After nine Months
Imprisonment, he was offered his Liberty, upon condition of giving Security of
a Thousand Pounds, not to live within Twenty Miles of Plymouth. He yielded to
the Importunity of his Friends, who gave that Bond without his knowledge, to see
if better Air would relieve him, and came in a languishing condition to take
his leave of his Friends, and the Place of his Ministry, and removed to a Place
twenty Miles off, and there died.

His Son Mr. O. was in no Charge or Employment (...) not liable to those Laws
which were against such only (...) were in Places; for all that he was
imprisoned, and in December. 1665, the Oath which is in the Oxford Act was
offered him, (before that Act came out) he refusing it, was continued till
March 30. following: At which time he was brought into the Fort, and required
to sign and seal a Promise, not to remain in Plymouth forty eight hours after,
nor to return thither, without leave from the E. of B. or his Deputy; upon
promising so to do, he was dismissed.

Mr. Tho. Martin, Lecturer of St. Andrew Plymouth, 1661, (certainly so good and
innocent a Man as I took him to be could not provoke any Man, much less
Authority) was, upon a rigorous Interpretation of Words, suspended ab Officio;
and one time it being given out, that he intended to preach, was threatened by a
Man, who carried Anger in his Breast, and a Sword at his Side, to be plucked
out of the Pulpit by the Ears.

Anno 1665, he, together with Mr. Hughes, Vicar of that Church, was sent to the
Island, and kept Prisoner under very hard Circumstances, for ten Months, in
which he, his desolate Wife, and eight Children, suffered much Discomfort, and
his Estate a great Impairing. He humbly desired a Removal, when the Sickness
was among the Soldiers, and some of them very near his Lodging, which was
denied. But at length, for the sake of Liberty from such a Restraint, by the
Command of the E. of B. he gave Bond of a Thousand Pounds, and two Sureties to
his Majesty, not to inhabit in, or to come within twenty Miles of Plymouth,
without his or his Deputy's leave. He and his Family suffered great
Disadvantages by their Separation from one another; and when his Presence was
necessary to advise, relieve, and comfort his Family, in Sicknesses, and Death
of some, he durst not come any nearer to them. In all this time he was not
accused of any Crime, or Breach of Law or Statute, and was never admitted to
come before the E. of B. about this Business.

I shall not collect Stories out of what is published to the World, nor gather
all which might be soon brought together; but I shall communicate one Story
more, to show them that knew not the Temper of the Times, and to what we may
impute many of our Divisions and Miseries, something worth taking notice of.

After Mr. N. S. had spent diverse Years in Oxford, and had been legally
ordained by Episcopal Hands, he returned to P. the Place of his Nativity, of
his Ancestor's Abode, where his Estate and his Relations lived, and betook to
his private Studies.

Two Officers of the Garrison came from the Governor (as they said) to his
Lodging, ( October. 6. 1665.) and told him, the Governor desired to speak with
him at the P. Tavern: Mr. S. hasted thither, where he found diverse Ministers on
the same Business. After they had been there a while, they perceived a Guard of
Soldiers was put upon them. October. 9. Mr. S. with others, were removed to the
Fl. Tavern. Mr. Sh. was rudely treated by the Sergeant, for offering to step to
his Lodging without his leave. The Sergeant that Night doubled the Guard, and
set two Sentinels at his Chamber, and the Liberty of the House was denied him.
In the Evening he was conveyed with four Musketeers, with their Matches
lighted, to the Col. who conveyed him to St. Nicholas Island, with Orders from
the E. not to converse with Mr. H. and Mr. M. Prisoners there, and to have a
Sentinel set at his Chamber Door, and not to go out of his Chamber without a
Guard. He continued under this Restraint, till December. 4. In January he was
brought before the Earl, who told him, If he could satisfy the Bishop, he would
be satisfied. The Bishop knowing him in Oxford, wrote a very obliging Letter to
the Earl, as much in his favor as could be. The Oath in the Oxford Act was
tendered him, which he refused, as not concerned in the Act it self, when the
Act came forth, not then in being. His Prison was changed, and March 30. was
released upon his Bond to depart the Town within forty eight hours.

Mr. Worts, (commended as a worthy Person, by a Gentleman able to judge) Pastor
of a Congregation at Guestwick in Norfolk, was imprisoned by a Writ De
Excommun. capiend. taken out November. 15. 1664. and continued in the Common-Goal
till September. 3. 1665. when the Plague was at the height in London, he was made
close Prisoner until November. 9. not knowing by whose Order, or for what
additional Offense. Feb. 2. he, with six more, were put into the Castle, in a
Hole in the Wall, over an Arch, on the West side of the Castle, which had
neither Door, Window, nor Chimney. There was room in a Corner for one
Truckle-Bed, the rest lay in Hammocks. The Hole had three Wickets into the
Felon's Yard, one of which must be open Night and Day, lest they should have
been stiffled in the Night with the Steam of the Charcoal. For five Weeks the
Door below (for the Hole is about forty Steps high, up a narrow Passage in the
Wall) was kept locked Night and Day. The Keeper usually went away about four of
the Clock with the Key to a Neighbour-Village, about a Mile and half distance
from the Head-Goaler's House, and returned not till about eight in the Morning,
in whose absence none could come to them, whatever occasion might be. During
those five Weeks, they were not permitted to set foot into the Yard. If a
Prisoner's Wife came to see him, he was called down to the Door, and the Keeper
would set his Back against one side of the Door, and his Foot against the
other, and so the Husband and Wife might only see and speak with each other.
They had leave to run up and down Stairs as often as they would, which was
instead of a Walk or Gallery for the space of five Weeks. Their Maid was not
allowed to come up with their Provision. After the five Weeks, these Persons
were permitted to go into the Castle-Yard, during the time of their continuance
there, which was about two Months; then they were removed to another Prison.
They were wonderfully preserved this Year from the Contagion, while the Arrows
of the Almighty fell mortally very near them, an one side and another, there
being only a Lane between, so that they could both hear and see some that were
shut up, crying for Bread, and themselves shut up also, and could not flee,
save only into their Strong-Tower, the Name of the Lord, where they found
Safety and Peace. Some time after a great Man, then in Power, told the Jailer,
he must carry them forthwith to the Castle, and put up each in a Place alone:
The Jailer answered, It cannot be done, the Castle is full, and I daily fear
the Plague should break out amongst them: He replied, Then put them into a
Place together, adding, What do I care if the Plague be in it. Yet were they
preserved in that nasty Hole, at whose Wickets came in the odious
excrementitious Odors of the Common-Yard of the Felons. One of them was even
suffocated by it; the Physician could not help, so long as the Patient was put
up there: Upon which an Account was speedily sent to the Sheriff of his low
Estate, with a Petition to remove him for a little time, his Life being in
danger: The Sheriff answered, He durst not meddle, he must abide it: The Man
revived notwithstanding, and lived.

Mr. Worts continued Prisoner full seven Years, as the Gentleman remembers,
from whom I have this Narrative, and who had it from Mr. W. while a Prisoner.

It is observed by the Reverend and intelligent Mr. Baxter, that many have been
excommunicated in the Diocese of Norwich, (and there was a severe Prosecution
of the Excommunicate) but to the honor of that most excellent Evangelical
Bishop Reynolds, it is observed those Proceedings were not from him, who
retained that good Spirit which he discovered, when he preached those and other
composing and healing Sermons, before and upon the King's Restoration. The
Guilt of this Severity and Inhumanity is imputed to Dr. M. Chancellor of the
Diocese, with reflection upon his Greatness under the Usurpation; but the
Chancellor was most away, and left the Management of the Office to inferior
Officers, which was a great Trouble to the good Bishop.

Who does not see, that some Great Men have ventured to exercise an Arbitrary
Power? and what Remedy for the Oppressed? This Greatness was too big for a
High Sheriff, the King's highest Representative in his County, to oppose or
offend, by an Act of Justice and Mercy. Such Severities have been used as much
without the knowledge of the King, as contrary to his Nature, (and perhaps
others in superior Power have been abused by their Inferiors) who declared
himself to be against sanguinary Laws, in the Case of Mr. Holdcraft, (who was a
Prisoner many Years in Cambridg Castle, and threatened with Banishment or Death,
on 35 Eliz.) and was heard to say, It was a barbarous Act in the Bishop of
Bristol, to be against the removal of worthy Mr. Thompson out of a loathsome
Chamber above a Privy, when sick of a high Fever, of which he died, in
Bristol-Goal. His Royal Clemency extended far into the West, in the Enlargement
of Mr. Tregosse, by a special Order to the Marshal of Bodmin, which was a noted
Answer to his Prayers; and who released Mr. Parsons, and remitted his Fine at
the Intercession of the Lord Newport. The Justice of several of the Judges, and
of some Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices, who have qualified the Heats of
others, deserves an honorable Observation, and they have as great a Share in
the Honor of being of the Government, as they who arrogate to themselves the
sole or eminent Title, that a Man cannot relate their extravagant Miscarriages,
but they are ready to arraign him as a petty Traitor against the Government,
thereby to keep Sufferers in awe, from making Complaints, or speaking Truth.
But some particular Persons have given all the Vent they could to their Enmity
against Nonconformist-Ministers; if not against Religious Duties, and followed
them beyond the Boundaries of Law.

Some acting upon the Act of Uniformity beyond Law, have been restless till
they procured an Act against Conventicles. Great Complaints were made of the
Nonconformists Meetings, when Sir Edward Turner, the Speaker, presented the
Bill against Conventicles, (the first Act) he told his Majesty: Whilst we were
intent upon these weighty Affairs, we were often interrupted by Petitions, and
Letters, and Motions, representing the unsettled Condition of some Counties, by
reason of Phanaticks, Sectaries, and Nonconformists: They differ in their
Shapes and Species, and accordingly are more or less dangerous; but in this
they all agree, they are no Friends to the established Government in Church or
State. He calls Conventicles, the Seed-Plots and Nurseries of their Opinions,
under pretense of Religious Worship.

From the few Narratives given in before, and an ordinary Observation of Times,
and the Knowledge we have how easy a thing it is to procure Addresses, Motions,
Petitions, for any thing, and against any thing, which some great Men would
have, we may imagine from what kind of Men such Representations were made. And
considering that such a Representation thus made to the King, so long a
Stranger in his own Kingdom, by a Speaker in Parliament, it is wonderful, the
King did not proceed to an utter Extirpation of all Nonconformists, as Enemies
to his Government, and no Lovers of his Person, in whom the Regality is
invested. And to tell the King, that all Nonconformists are no Friends to the
established Government, was to motion a fair Reward of the Loyalty of very
many, who used all Endeavors to restore his Majesty and Government; and to
contradict what the King himself told the Ministers of London, on the Day of
his happy Return, when the Reverend Mr. A. Jackron presented him with a Bibe in
their behalf, as he passed through St. Paul's Churchyard, to this effect, That
he must attribute his Restoration, under God, to their Prayers and Endeavors.

This spiritual Antipathy against good Men has been very troublesome to many
wise and moderate Magistrates, and pressed out all the Sowrness of some Men's
Spirits into the Cup of the Nonconformists, and forced milder Natures into an
obsequious Severity to Pride and Anger, which could not be restrained from
falling on these Men, that were to be set at naught; and they who showed them
respects, forfeited the Civilities due to themselves.

I will conclude this Head with a few Instances of this Antipathy and
Incivility.

A wealthy Citizen, of very good quality, in time of the Plague went to visit
his native Country, and secretly to distribute his Charity, which was
proportionable to his Estate and Mind; and being in a Town in the Assize time,
was brought before some Justices of the Peace; these demanded Bond for his
Behavior, or else he must to Prison. He understanding himself, and being
conscious there was no cause of Imprisonment, refused the first, and having a
good Spirit, a good Purse, and good Counsel, escaped the last.

After the Oxford Act came out, a peaceable and inoffensive Nonconformist was
constrained to think of a Removal from a convenient Settlement. He was
necessitated to leave his Family, which Separation was next to an Exile to him,
and when he could come home, to come in the Night. He employed his Friends, and
rode about himself, to find an Habitation. After much enquiry he was directed
to a very good convenient House, which he was glad of, with respect to his
Wife, who was a worthy Gentlewoman, and bore her part of his Sufferings with
decency and affection. The Landlord was a Courtier. The Minister took the House
of him that was entrusted to let it, gave Earnest, brewed, and prepared for his
Settlement; but before he could remove, a Gentleman of that Neighborhood, who
had no power either to let or hinder, came and hung a Lock upon the Door of the
House, and wrote a Letter to the Landlord at London, acquainting him with what
he had done, and begging his Pardon for the Presumption, for he thought it was
not fit that a Nonconformist should be his Tenant. Surely this Gentleman looked
upon a Nonconformist, as the Samaritans upon the Jews, and would deny him
Water, or not receive him into his House, or bid him God speed. And so the
Gentleman was to seck again for an Habitation, to his great perplexity and
trouble.

A Gentleman of Quality and Truth gave me this Relation of one within his own
knowledge: One, (says he) a very worthy Person, was sorely exercised with
Witchcraft, which the Witch confessing, was brought before some Justices, one
of whom (said to be a famous Persecutor) bad her go home, and if she bewitched
none but Fanatics, she should never be troubled for him. And so he had no
relief from the Law, nor Ease otherwise, till the Witch died, several Years
after.

Did they who so strongly brought in our Terms, foresee that there would be
Nonconformists, and that Nonconformity would not only eject them out of their
Habitations and Benefices, but out of Corporations, and their own hired Houses,
but exclude them out of the common Right of Humanity and Justice, then they
have the greater cause to repent: If they did not, they are the more innocent
Causes of many and great Troubles to many truly good Men, and are engaged to
endeavor their Deliverance from all these Troubles.

It is remarkable, that the most active Instruments in this Anti-Evangelical
Work, have been none of the best, but indeed the worst of Men.

And of them it may be noted, (1.) What their Quality is, and has been. (2.)
What their Impiety, and heinous Wickedness, of the grossest Nature. (3.) What
their Success has been. (4.) What Appearances have been of God against them,
and what their Ends have been. Some of them have been convinced, converted, and
taken off from this Way and Course; and some have been made Examples of humane
and divine Justice.

There are abundance of inferior Officers, that are very vicious and dishonest,
and yet nothing is to be seen very remarkably differing them from other vicious
and poor People; but that of all Sorts of Instruments these Informers should be
noted out by Divine Providence, as Examples of notorious Vices, Falsehood,
Perjuries, and miserable Deaths, may be a Warning to the worst of Men, not to
grow so bad, and bold against the Ways of God.

It is not necessary to refer the following Narratives unto the abovementioned
Heads; I shall not pretend to so much unprofitable Exactness, but relate what
is well attested, in a promiscuous way.

About the Year 1674, about twenty five Persons, Men and Women, were indicted
for a Rout or Riot in Staffordshire, (that is to say, for a Meeting for
Religious Exercise): The Prosecutors were, Thomas Ward, Bailiff to the Lord
Stafford, (executed for Treason, and the Popish Plot) and five more, whereof
one died immediately, others lost their Places, and others came to Poverty.

One Holmes, an Informer, hunting to find out Mr. Bakewell's Meeting in the
Night, fell into a Pit of Water, and was in danger to be drowned, had not some
helped him out; which Danger did operate upon him, so as to say, that he would
go no more upon that account.

And Mr. S. Minister of B. met Mr. Bakewell, and professed he was sorry for any
thing he either said or did against him, to bring him into Trouble.

It is observed, That those who became Enemies to Mr. Bakewell of Burton, had
been Professors of Piety, but fell from it, and they fell into great and
apparent Decays of Estates, even to Poverty. [ Note, Most commonly they who
never made a show of Piety, or fell from it, trke the way of Informing.] --
Godliness is gainful, and has the Promise of the Life that now is; but
Ungodliness has the contrary Curses.

I will confirm this Observation with a fearful Example of Apostasy and
Wickedness, most remarkably punished, with Ruin of a good Estate, and a most
miserable shameful Death.

The Narrative was communicated to me by a Gentleman of great Worth.

John Hunnucks of Braintree in Essex, was the Son of a serious, discreetly
pious, wealthy Draper and Grocer in that Town. A pious Education and Example
had little Efficacy upon him; but being witty, and capable of the Management of
his own and his Father's Trade, was left Co-Executor with his Mother-in-Law,
who prudently agreed with him, to get into her own hands her Part, and the
Portion of one Child. He married the Daughter of a very worthy Person, had four
Children by her, observed Family Duties, and wanted not Gifts, was wont to go
sometimes to hear the Nonconformists, who were afterward persecuted by him.

Not many Months after his Wife died, he grew wild and debauched, swearing,
drinking, and with his drawn Sword forcing others to drink up to his Measure.
He was very vexatious to his Dealers, and unrighteous in his Trade, unnatural
and unjust in detaining his Sister's Portion, compelling her Husband to go to
Law, forswearing himself about his Father's Will, that it was lost, and that
his Father died in Debt as much as the Estate would satisfy, which was prized
at 2200 l. besides 4 or 500 l. brought in as bad Debts, the most of which this
Man recovered. He sued his Brother-in-Law, arrested him, and in person goes
with the Bailiff to see him in Prison, not ceasing to put him to great Charges,
till his Brother-in-Law died. In nine or ten Years time he consumed all his
Father left him and his other Children, ran far into Debt, and cast himself
into the King's Bench.

The first Lord's Day after the Act against Conventicles came in force, he
began to inform, and (as was said) he reckoned to get Sixty Pounds per Week by
that good Work, after the failing of other Trades. But God would have stopped
him, if his Heart had not been hardened; for before that Lord's Day came, one of
his Children looking into a Tub of Water, fell into it, and was drowned. When
he heard of it in an Alehouse, he made no haste home; and when he came, he bad
his Neighbors, that came to see if they could recover the Child, be gone, they
had no Business there. The Child (as is remembered) was buried on the Saturday,
and the next day he went and informed the Officers of a Meeting, with Witnesses
to attest his Information. The Officers charged him to go along with them, and
forced him in, (he being unwilling to go in when he came to the Door,) and show
them the People: When he came in, they shoved him up over against the Preacher,
he would neither look up, nor speak, but fell a trembling. The Officers cried,
This is your Informer, he answered, I am no Informer, I will be no Informer.
But being reproached for his Faint-heartedness, and animated by some, he came
again the next Lord's Day, and continued the greatest part of that Summer with
great Fury, taking some with him, riding about, and searching, to the Expense
of about Fifty Pounds, but not getting Five, (a thriving Trade!) During this
Time he grew more debauched and vile, reckoning this amongst his Glories, that
he had converted, and brought more to Church than all the Preachers. It Is said,
he fillip'd up a Shilling, to see whether he should go to God or the Devil, as
that fell Cross or Pile. He has sworn he would kill the Preacher, and forsworn
himself often, swearing such Persons to be at the Meeting, who were not, but
diverse Miles off. When one Mr. Bromball, an aged pious Man, was to be buried,
he provided several Fiddlers to go to the Burial-House, where he pranced with
his Horse before the Door, and broke the Windows with his Staff, and would have
the Fiddlers go along with him, playing by the Corpse, with Language fitted for
his Mouth and Actions.

He found no Success or Advantage by his Informing, but about a Year after God
took him to a Reckoning: He was broken and blasted in his Body, as before in
his Estate; his Eyes sunk in their Holes, and his Flesh consumed, etc. so that
he was not known to his Acquaintance; his Strength failed him, that he could
not go abroad; he cast away his Estate, and his Friends cast him off: And now
what place was left to receive him? None, but a common lower Room in a poor
Hostler's House, in the Noise and Company of poor rude Children. Thus his Pride
was stained and humbled. But his Heart seemed to be more humbled yet, because
he sent for the Preacher whom he had disturbed and persecuted, a first, second,
and third time; and when he came to visit him, he spoke, You are the Person I
have a great desire to see; I think you, and the People whom I did persecute,
to be my Friends. He said, he had been so vile a Wretch, and guilty of so many
and great Sins, that he knew not by which he had most dishonored God: He had
sinned against Light, and was afraid God was not at peace with him; and that it
had been better for him he had been a Toad than a Man. He was very importunate
and urgent with the Minister to pray with him, and would have one stand at the
Door in the mean time, that he might not be disturbed by any Company, and that
the Children should be all put out. When the Minister ended his Prayer, he was
very thankful to him, and reached out his hand to him, and held him long. He
said, he desired to repent of all his Sins, was afraid, if God should try him
with longer Life, he should return to his Filthiness; but he looked for Death,
which came and took him away a day or two after, but (as it is feared)
unprepared and impenitent, upon such Reasons as I am loath to recite out of the
Narrative, for their ill Example.

There are several remarkable Passages of God's Judgments upon him: (1.) He had
one Child drowned, when he went to inform. (2.) Another choked at Nurse, after
he had gone on a while. (3.) Was crossed in his Hopes of Gain by Informing.
(4.) The deformed Consumption of his Body, and being cast off by his Friends.
(5.) That so haughty a Person should lie in a contemptible Place and State.
(6.) That a third Child should be taken by an Host, to be kept in Charity. (7.)
That the only visible Sign of Repentance should be, to send for that Minister,
and desire his Prayers, rather than any other. (8.) That being a Prisoner at
London, he should, upon leave obtained, come to die in that Place and State, in
the Face of his Companions, to convince and terrify them, and of them that he
had persecuted, to acknowledge his Fault.

This Service proves (as the Devil's commonly does) unprofitable; a Man may
spend all in it, but is very uncertain of gaining any thing by it. It is rarely
seen, that the Devil bears the Charges of his Servants, as others have found to
their Cost, in this present Life.

One W. V. of M. H. has been very poor ever since he took up the Calling,
having scarce Bread to eat, and most remarkably visited in his Family. His
Brother Informer, J. H. about two Years after the Act against Conventicles came
out, threw up the Trade as unprofitable; and since he became an Auditor of Mr.
M. C. And one time this J. H. was informed of (by new Informers) as being
present at a Meeting there, and was fined 5 s. He was a very serious and devout
Hearer.

After Sir John Hartopp was chosen Knight for Leichestershire, against a great
Opposition, they who voted for him, were called Hartopians, and a Revenge was
contrived upon the Protestant Dissenters of H. To that end, one J -- W -- was
made Constable, who indicted them all, not one spared, upon the Statute of
Twenty Pounds per Month; which Fines amount to so great a Sum, that
understanding Persons compute, if the whole Town of Harborough were to be sold
for ready Money, one Moiety of the Purchase would not discharge the Fines.

In December. 1679, this Jo. W -- was thrown into Northampton-Goal, and tho none
came in against him at the Assizes, the Judge saw sufficient cause to continue
him in Prison; but upon great Solicitation, he was bailed till the
Summer-Assizes. Within three Weeks after his coming home to Harborough, he took
upon him to be Informer for the King. At the Summer-Assizes, he appeared to
save his Bail, and to receive a Sentence of Condemnation (as it proved) from
Judge Ellis, and Monday following was appointed for Execution, but it was by
some means, not publicly known, procured he might be respited till Thursday
following, at which time there was a vast Confluence of People come together,
from the Town and Country, a great way about, who knew him to be a grand
Malefactor, to see Execution: But in the Nick of Time a Reprieve came down, (as
some have said, without the King's Knowledge.) So little abashed was he at the
Sentence of Death, that within an hour after he committed his common Sin in the
Goal, as was reported upon good Credit. And on the expected Execution-Day, he
made himself merry at the great Concourse that came to the sight of it. But
after this he came home again, and made great Brags, that the Fanatics should
repay his Charges, (of procuring Reprieves, and other Charges, which cost some
hundreds) reckoning his Moiety would come to Four Hundred Pounds. But as he
could not leave the pursuit of his evil Deeds, so the Justice of God pursued
him, and took him, (for Horse-stealing, Coining, etc.) and Vengeance fell upon
him at Wisbich, where he was, after many Escapes, once again condemned, and
executed.

There is a Successor of his near the same place, and three of his perjured
Hirelings, who take no warning as yet, and may in time become Examples to them
that take no warning: They can to appearance as freely forswear themselves as
they can speak, being hardened in Sin, and senseless of Hell, and having
Countenance, dare show their Faces.

At East-Salcomb in Devon, there dwelt one Joan Baston, a Widow, aged, and
blind, who for a supposed Conventicle kept at her House, Anno 1673, was fined
Twelve Pounds, and for non-payment of it, was threatened with a Goal. After some
Weeks, the Officers came and broke open her Doors, and carried away much Goods
above the value, terrifying her over and over with the Goal, and as was
conceived, laboring to extort dangerous Words from her. They sold as many
Goods as were worth thirteen Pound, for Fifty Shillings; six Hogsheads, valued
at Forty Sihllings, for nine Shillings; and Pewter, Feather-Beds, etc. for
Twenty Shillings; and demanded of her Tenants her Rent, by which means she
suffered much.

This is signed by J. B. and the Story related by another hand, and
sufficiently attested.

The Constable having seized J. Baston's Goods, told me, We have been up and
down about our Office, seizing the old Woman's Goods: This is the Fruit of your
Rebellion. And as for Mr. Geo. Cawley, (the Preacher) he has spoken Treason:
To whom I replied, No, Sir, I hope not: Yes, said he, and if he do not die, I
will die for him. Sir -- managed that false Accusation against him, from which
he was cleared at the Assizes.

The Constable that falsely accused Mr. Coals of S. was taken ill at Exeter, and
continued ill a Night and a Day: On Friday he endeavored to go homewards with
his Neighbors. In his Journey a wild Duck flew over his Head and backward and
forward, at which his Horse made a stop, and would not go forward. His Company
demanded the reason of his Stand; he replied, he could not go further, I see a
Fire befere me. A while after he went on, but the same Fire followed him to and
fro all the way homeward. After his coming home, he fancied Thieves to be about
his House, attempting to break open the Doors; he heard such a Sound and Noise,
he sent down his Servant-Maid to see, who found all fast and quiet. She having
lighted a Candle, he cried out, There are some coming up Stairs with great
Lights, etc. Thus he continued till Lord's Day at Night, and about two or three
in the Morning died, senseless of his Condition. Thus it proved true, Mr. C.
should die, or he die for him; he died, but not for Mr. C.

The Constable and Assistants, that ransacked the old Widow's House, brought
forth the Pulpit into the Highway, with half a Hogshead of Sider, and
therewith a Company of base Fellows drank Healths in the Pulpit, and when they
had done, brake the Pulpit in pieces.

Edw. Warden's Bible was distrained for his Fine of Three Shillings, when other
Goods were refused.

See the Piety of some of our Suppressors of Conventicles: Preachers are
threatened with Hanging, and the Death of Traitors; they pull down a Pulpit, to
set up Healthing in it; tear the Pulpit, distrain and sell the Bible to choose,
when they might have choice of other Goods.

November. 1670, an Information was taken by J. T. Esquire and given by certain lewd
Fellows, against some near Cruse Morchard in Devon. The Informers were, John
Partridg, that went always armed for fear of Bailiffs, Chr. Short, and Jo.
Short: These lay lurking about the House of Tho. Melshurst, suspecting a
Meeting. Soon after they gave out, there had been Praying, or Preaching, or
Expounding there, but which they could not tell, because they were kept off
from the House by a great Bull-Dog, (which was shortly after poisoned.) The
Justice took a general information, (whether upon Oath or not, is not said) and
sent out his Warrants to bring certain Persons before him; one of which
understanding the Informers were in the House, desired the Justice to call
them, and asked the Informers, how they could tell there was Praying, or
Preaching, or Expounding? and desired to know which was done, seeing by their
own Confession they were kept off by the Dog. The Justice perceiving them to be
at a loss for an Answer, made Answer for them, They might know well enough
which it was by the Tone; and upon that convicted them, and among the rest, one
Nich. Melshurst, who was two Miles from the Place at the same time, as could be
sufficiently proved, paid his Fine. And Agnes Brook, Daughter of G. Br. of
Morchard, was convicted and fined, who had been dead several Years before; I
hope therefore she paid not her Fine, nor was threatened, or sent to Goal for
Non-payment.

Now observe the Vices of these Persons, and their Ends by divine Justice. P.
and Sh. were strongly suspected for stealing six Oxen, four from G. Bodley of
Morchard, and two from Hen. Lee of the same Parish: They were apprehended, and
brought to their Trial, and Sh. was found guilty, and burnt in the hand, and
since has consumed his Estate, and is fled the Country for fear of Arrests. P.
died not long after; and the other Sh. was taken in the Act of the unnatural
Sin of Buggery, was found guilty, and died for it.

One Helmere was suspected to be a Conspirator in the said Information, and was
apprehended as a Partner with the forenamed in stealing the Oxen, found guilty,
and burnt in the hand. And since that, he and his Son were taken in the Act of
Burglary, was sent to Prison, which he brake twice, and is fled, and not taken.

These Relations are ready to be attested by Persons of unsuspected Credit.

Aug. 26. 1676, four Informers had laid a Design to take Mr. J. Barret of
Nottingham, and his Hearers, who at that time had none to give intelligence
from abroad of any coming to disturb them. At the Town's-End the Informers
divided themselves; some rode for a Warrant, others came to espy the Meeting.
One of them walked again and again between two Styles leading into the Yard,
belonging to the House where the Meeting was; and yet (as he confessed to the
Owner of the House some time after) he knew not what ailed him, but he had not
power to go over the Style, tho sometimes he had his hand upon it; and tho the
House and Stacks about it, were shown him before he came to Town, and had no
reason to doubt but that was the House, it standing at a distance from any
other House, yet he turned to another House, being nearest to it, where a Woman
being at home, was asked, Whether it was not such a Man's House? or whether the
Meeting was not there? And she says still, she was so surprised with fear,
that she could make him no Answer: whereupon he said to the Woman, Can thou
not speak? art thou dumb? or art thou mad? This Account she gave then, but it
being so long since, she may have forgotten; but being lately asked of it, she
says, he said, Art thou a Fool? But by this Consusion they were in, the People
met, were gotten away before any Informers came in. The Informers haunted them
several times after, and one time came in when there were but four besides the
Family, and the Children of the Town under sixteen Years of Age. When they saw
how they were crossed several times, and Mr. Barret had charged him that came
first, and his Companion, with breach of God's Law, not keeping the
Sabbath Day, but hindering others, and put him in mind of a great Fit of
Sickness he had, when he lay under very great Terrors, how often he had visited
him, and how welcome he (...) to him then, to visit and pray with him. This
Informer and his Companion seemed to relent. One of them was (not long after)
put into the Goal for Deer-stealing.

Mr. O. H. makes this Relation of a great Amazement and Disturbance of Mind,
upon some that were to take the Names of his Hearers.

May 22. 1670. As I was rising out of my Bed, my Servant came to me, and told
me, there were two Men desired to speak with me; whose Business was to ask me,
If I durst adventure to preach in the Chapel, Mr. H. being absent, and no
notice being given to the People, many of whom would come, and be disappointed?
I utterly denied at first: They were loath to bring me into Trouble; yet if I
was willing, the Chappel-Doors should be opened, and the Bell rung. I
considered of it, consulted some Neighbors, begged direction of God, and about
an hour after I consented, upon these Considerations: They were my ancient
People, I was forcibly thrust from them, the Spirits of Men were much
moderated; I knew the Sabbath would be profaned; it being Whit-Sunday, many
Strangers walking abroad to see their Friends; Quakers twit us, that we will
not venture upon Hazards: But above all, my Lord's Example, and the Necessity
of Souls; and who knows what Good may be done?

Upon this, about nine of the Clock, I went up, read, sung, prayed, preached
quietly, on Judge. 5.31. Let them that love him be as the Sun, when he goes
forth in his Strength. About one in the Afternoon we met again, and about three
of the Clock, Mr. St. Ell. brought Th. H. Churchwarden, and Sam. W. Overseer,
awing them with a Fine of Five Pounds if they refused. St. Ell. put in the
Officers before him, who were exceedingly daunted. One of them was so awed and
ashamed, that he crept down into a Seat, and was so exceeding sick, that he
could not give account of one Person. The Informer went along among the People,
looked straight at me, said nothing, went down the Alley, and looked upon the
People as he went along. It was a Cause of Distraction to us; but I went on,
and called to the People to look Proofs, which would be a Help to them against
that Distraction. When they went out, St. E. sent Th. H. again into the
Chapel, to take Names: He again walked through the North Alley, stood at Seats
ends, went out into the Chappel-Yard, where they conferred Notes, writ down
Names: And tho the Chapel was full of their own Neighbors, yet they could not
take ten Names, they were so confounded. The Monday seven-Night following, Mr.
W. and Mr. C. two Justices, took my Business into Examination. The Informer St.
E. stood there, examining the Officers by Interrogations: Did not you see such
and such there? And so they extorted ten Names of many Hundreds that were
present.

July 13. 1670, J. M. Constable, Th. H. S. W. came to make distress of my
Goods, with three Bearer; to carry them away. The Constable took hold of the
Bed whereon I lay, put off his Hat, saying, I seize upon this Bed for his
Majesty's use. I told them, It was enough for them to mark them, and leave
them, till they had Chapmen to buy them: They said, the Informer would buy
them. So they took Bed, Bedding, Tables, Chairs, Chests, Books, to the value of
Feurteen Pounds, for Ten Pounds. My Wife desired them to take Chairs, rather
than our Meal-Chest; but they laid a Curtain upon the Floor, and poured out the
Meal upon it, and took away our Chest. They carried the Goods into an Alehouse,
and drank upon them, got Prizers, who prized them at 10 l. 16 s. 8 d. They had
bespoken a good Dinner, saying, They would bring Overplus Goods enough to pay
for all. They prized ten Books at thirty Shillings. They caused the Bell-man to
cry the Goods in Hallifax, August 13. but could sell none of them. The Justices
bad the Officers to take them themselves. They answered, they had Goods enough.
The Constable grew weary of the Business, delivered all to the Hands of the
succeeding Constable. Nonconformists Goods a dead Commodity; Who paid for the
Feast then?
The House where they were laid up grew weary of them, and desired the next
Constable to find a Room for them, or they would cast them out: They got leave
to set them in a Barn in Coley-Hall. June 6. 1671. One Robert Reyner of
Wakefield, brought a Cart and five Horses to fetch them away, -- When they laid
a Chair in the Cart, one said, Where Is Heywood 's God now, that he used to pray
to? They remained still at Wakefield, August 15. 1680.

In December 1668, Mr. John Shuttlewood, sometimes Minister of R. in the County
of Leicester, was taken with many others, singing a Psalm by M. B. and thirty
or forty Horsemen with Swords drawn and Pistols cocked, several of both Sexes
were beaten and driven into the Field, and dismissed upon promise of appearing
next day before some Justice of Peace; Mr. Sh. was examined by Justice S. when
he had been at his Parish Church to hear Divine Service? Mr. Sh. answered, he
knew none charged him for Absence: the Justice asked him, if he would promise
to go the next Sunday? Mr. Sh. answered, he did not know how Divine Providence
might dispose of him before that time; upon this the Justice made him his
Mittimus for a Breach of the 35 of Eliz. and delivered him to the Custody of
one Charles Gibbons, a Quartermaster in a Troop of the Trained Bands, to
convey him to Liecester Goal.

It being too late that Night, they rested where they were, and Mr. Sh. craving
a Blessing upon their Meat, Gibbons comes into the Room, and swore a bloody
Oath, and said, What, are you a preaching? Soon after a Neighbor Gentleman
came, and made request, that Mr. Sh. and the rest of the Prisoners might go
that Night to their own Houses, and offered a Bond of a thousand Pounds for
their Appearance; the Gentleman pressing hard for that Night's Liberty. Gibbons
girt his Sword about him, and swore desperately, that since he loved them so
well, he should go with them, and continued swearing all the Night, that in
case he stirred, (to use his own Phrase) he would make the Sun shine through
him. Next Morning Gibbons sent the Prisoners away with some Soldiers, and
staid himself with the Gentleman; and glad they were, they were going to
Prison, as being in worse than Prison till they were there. Mr. Sh. and the
other continued in Prison till the 24th of February, and were then dismissed.

Anno 1670, soon after the Act against Conventicles came out, the said Gibbons
came with armed Men, and took Mr. Sh. and six or seven at a House in Th. and
carried them to an Alehouse, and after some time dismissed them upon promise to
appear at four a Clock next Morning at that Place; next day he carried them all
to three several places in Leicestershire and Northamptonshire, keeping them a
considerable while in each Place, and at last brought them to C. in
Leicestersh. where Justice C. would have extorted some Confessions from the
Prisoners, and Gibbons, though commonly a desperate Swearer, told the Justice
in the presence of them all, He would damn his Soul for none of them. A common
Swearer afraid of Perjury and Damnation, is much better than those who fear
neither Perjury nor Hell. Indeed be could not swear a Conventicle, for as the
last Sentence went out of the Preacher's Mouth, he came to the Window and swore
a dreadful Oath.
He could not swear there was a Conventicle, whereupon the Justice was about to
dismiss them: but a Lawyer present told him, he might convict them upon
notorious Evidence, which he did, and sent Warrants to distrain upon Mr. Sh.
for 20 l. and 20 l. on the owner of the House, and 5 s. a piece on others; Mr.
Sh. conveyed away his Cattle, but the rest paid. Anno 1672, while Mr. Sh. had
the King's License, Gibbons came upon him, and took him and the Master of the
House, and brought them before Capt. C. of L. who then refused to act, but
afterward did send out his Warrants to distrain 20 l. on Mr. Sh. 20 l. on the
House, etc. but both escaped, tho not without Damages: but great Fines were
laid upon the Hearers. In the end of February, 74, Gibbons came with armed Men
to Mr. Sh.'s House in Lubnam, Leichestershire, roaring into the Congregation
after his wonted manner, and took several Names, appointing Mr. Sh. and them to
meet him next day, at an Alehouse in Shoaresby, to appear before his Great
Master, Col. F. who was wont to furnish him with Warrants beforehand. But the
Colonel's Son, a Son of his old Age, dying that morning, (who fell sick, as it
is said, that Day his Father gave his Warrants to break up that Meeting.) They
all appeared according to promise, and were dismissed, upon promise to appear
upon lawful Summons. Instead of such a Summons, Gibbons got a Warrant of Sir
Th. B. (not long after deceased) to distrain upon Mr. Sh. for forty Pounds: And
the Officers took away seven Milch-Cows of Mr. Sh.'s, and offered them to Sale;
and the best Chapman that came, was D. S. of M. who paid seven Pounds for them,
and Sixpence Earnest, (without the privity of Mr. Sh.) which was paid to the
Officers, who paid it to the Justices, who gave Receipts for the Money.

D. S. branded four of the Cows, and joisted them in the Grounds of one J. W.
of Langton. Gibbons, and his great Companion Percy, hearing of the Cows, go to
the Constable, who had a Warrant to distrain upon the said Jo. Wilson for 2 l.
15 s. for being at the same Meeting; Gibbons and Percy got the Warrant out of
the Constable's hands, pretending to take something out of it, but it was to
put more in, viz. to empower Percy to distrain the four Cows. And so both went
into the Ground, and drove the Cows, impounded them about an Hour, and then
took them out, and drove them to Gilmorton, where they were met by another of
their Companions, one Savage, and set a Guard upon the Cows. D. S. hearing
these things, went to Capt. C. for a Warrant, to fetch Gibbons before him upon
suspicion of Felony; but the Jussice refused to give him his Warrant except he
would lay flat Felony to their charge, which D. S. could not do, because they
impounded them first. He goes to Gibbons, to know by what Authority he took
away the Cows, demanded the Cows, which they refused to do, Gibbons telling
him, he should not have a Tail of them to wipe his Mouth with. He went to Mr.
H. Undersheriff, for a Replevin, which he told him he could not grant, because
it was against the King.

One of the Persons distrained upon, came to pay 2 l. 15 s. to the Officers;
Gibbons caught up the Money, and gave it to his Partner Percy, and said, he
should be Constable; and away they went with it.

D. S. heard, that Gibbons had conveyed away the four Cows in the Night, after
which he never heard of them more, and sent for a Writ for him; but when the
Bailiffs came to arrest Gibbons, they found he was protected by the abovesaid
Col. F. a Parliament Man, (and in the List of Pensioners) as one of his
Servants.

But the Justice and Vengeance of God took him out of that Sanctuary; for being
at Lutterworth, in December. 1675, very full of Drink, and having that day given
out many threatening Speeches against several Dissenters, he would not be
persuaded to stay all Night, tho it was late, about nine in the Night, but
would go home: But when he had gone about half a Mile toward home, he fell
into a Ditch, through which a little Water runs, and falling asleep (as we must
suppose) he damm'd up that little Issue of Water by which he was found drowned
next Morning by a Milk-Maid, in a very remarkable manner; for all his Body was
above Water, except his Neck and Face: neither was the Water high enough, when
it was damm'd up, to cover all his Face, for some part of his Nose and Forehead
were seen above Water.

A Conforming Minister, and a worthy Man, since deceased, who knew him well,
entered this following Remark in Beard's Theater of Judgments: Charles Gibbons,
a notorious Swearer and Drunkard, having been at Lutterworth in
Leichestershire, being full of Drink, and it being late at Night, was dissuaded
from going home, which was at Kimcot, two Miles off, swore he would go home in
spite of all the Devils in Hell; but he was found dead next morning in a
shallow Run of Water, which did not cover his Body, betwixt Lutterworth and
Misterton.

One of Gibbons's Companions, that had been drinking with him that Evening, and
parted with him when he went out of Town, was sadly affrighted in his going
home to his own House in Lutterworth, with something like a black Sow, which he
said, when he heard next Morning that Gibbons was dead, was the Devil going to
drown Gibbons.

When Gibbons was found, he had not one Penny in his Purse, and his Goods were
valued at Two Shillings and Sixpence. Here Is one Example more of outrageous
Profaneness, a miserable sudden Death, and deep Poverty. Who ever read or heard
of an Informer, blessed in Body or Goods?

And the Fortune of his Companion Percy ran very low; for all he could muster
up to pay the Charges of D. S.'s Suit, which was 9 l. 10 s. came but to six
Pound, made off the little Goods he had, fled his Country, became a Driver of
Beasts about Islington, afterward a Foot-Souldier, afterward a Beggar, and so
he died, as is commonly said.

In October, 1681, Watson and Holdsworth, both Inhabitants of Deeping in
Lincolnshire, ( Watson was a very witty; close, cunning Fellow; Holdsworth was
a heavy, clumsy, poor Fellow; the one fitted to direct, the other to follow)
came to Okeham in Rutland, (in hopes of good Markets, by the Sale of Modesty,
Truth, and their precious Souls, and other Men's Goods) there a Nonconformist
Preacher and his Congregation met out of Church-time: The Preacher kept up in
an upper Room, and the Doors of the House were locked, so that the Informers
could only sometimes hear a Voice indistinctly, but they heard enough for their
purpose: They went and swore against the Preacher, (whose Name they had learned
since their coming to Town) that there was an unlawful Meeting in his House.
Upon which a Warrant was issued out for Twenty Pounds upon him; and yet they
named no Preacher, nor Hearers.

They informed of a Meeting of Quakers, and swore there were ten Persons at it,
and particularly one Bowman, who was not there, nor had been there in half a
Year before.

These Fellows, in their return home, were overtaken by a sober Person, who
rode about two Miles with them, and, to their great vexation, discoursed of the
Calling of Informers, and the untimely Ends of several of them, and therefore
warned them often and earnestly to take head: But Watson said, The Dissenters
were Hell-born Rogues, and an Informers Trade was lawful.

About February following (last past) Watson fell ill, his Tongue was black
and swelled, some while before he died, and led his Companion the way into the
other World, where there is not as much as a Preacher's Voice to be heard.
Within a Week after Holdsworth followed him, crying out in his Sickness, The
Devil, the Devil; he will fetch me, do not you see him? and wisning he had not
engaged in that Way.

These miserable Wretches were poor and broken Men before they took this Trade,
were defeated of the Fines levied upon their Informations, in the Parts where
they lived, and died extreme poor.

Some Soldiers came one Lord's Day, in April last, 1682, Low-Sunday, as it is
remembered, to break up a Meeting, and to take Mr. Browning of R. in
Northamptonshire. The Constable admonished them to be well advised what they
did: For (said he) when Sir -- was alive, he eagerly prosecuted these Meetings,
and engaged eight Soldiers of the County-Troop therein, whereof my self was
one. Sir -- himself is dead, (it is said, he died not long after) six of the
eight Soldiers are dead; some of them were hanged, and some of them broke
their Necks; and I my self fell off my Horse, and broke my Neck in the Act of
Prosecuting them, and it cost me thirty Shillings to be cured and recovered. It
has given me such warning, that for my part I am resolved I will never meddle
with them more. He told this Story to them all at several times that day. This
Story is related by others with some considerable Circumstances; but this being
the more moderate Relation, I give it almost in the very same Words, in which
it was sent from a good and reputable hand to a Friend.

Several Justices of Peace were in a great Heat that day in the pursuit of the
Preacher, and the Meeting; but the Birds were flown, before they could cast
their Net, and so escaped.

I do not hear that this Consiable, for all his Conviction, is at any time a
Hearer at that Meeting. It is remarkable, how such Persons may be restrained,
and how readily the Conscience, a little awakened, makes Constructions of the
Divine Providence to be Acts of Judgment, and Admonitions to them.

From the same hand I am assured of another Example: Since that, W. H. one of
the Churchwardens of the same Parish and one of the most imbittered Enemies of
the Meetings, who had often Quarrels with some of his near Relations about
them, and especially the Night before he died, who was suddenly struck dead in
his own Yard, and never spoke, nor breathed one Breath after he was taken with
it: As he had no notice of its Arrest, till it came; so he gave no notice of
his being to die, to any other. Surely the Constable must needs be confirmed in
his Resolutions against Acting, by this sudden Death. Some threatening Words
against the Barn, the common Name of Meetings, spoken by him, are by some
remembered; but general Words are most sparing, and I will content my self with
them.

That it may not be thought that our Nonconformist Brethren do stretch and
enlarge small and ordinary Occurrences, and Acts of Divine Providence, I will
show you what Caution and Modesty is to be seen in their Accounts of Passages.
One writes thus, who is known to have suffered Imprisonment, and to wade
through many Troubles, and is at this time under a most severe and watchful
Eye: As to my self, I have been so careless in keeping any exact Account of
what I have met with, that I cannot do it: In the general, I can only say this,
That in all I have met with, God bath so dealt with me, that I have suffered
very little. Another to his Friend: I could have sent you some other Accounts,
but that I and others are afraid to grate too much upon some Persons. And
another to his enquiring Friend, with a like Modesty: Thus much I know in the
general, that several foul Perjuries have Informers in this County been guilty
of, for which some of them have been prosecuted and convicted, and afterward
fled and absconded, to escape Punishments. -- And very many of the Informers
and Persecutors, have been Persons of most profligate Lives. -- And the Hand of
God has most eminently appeared against some of them, by untimely Deaths, by
the Hand of God remarkably stretched forth against them, as I have been
certainly informed, by Persons of undoubted Credit; but in regard I cannot give
an exact and particular Account of all Circumstances, I am constrained to pass
by these Things in silence, than to wrong the Account by any Mistakes.

I cannot pass over one Observation within mine own view. In the Country where
I live, the Informers are a new Set of Men; some that were Informers in former
Years are yet alive, but desist and refuse to inform, either upon Conviction of
Conscience, Fear of Evil, Observation of the short, shameful, and miserable
Ends of others, or other strong Restraints upon them. I am credibly informed of
one, whose Name and Person I know, that has gone to a Nonconformist Preacher,
with these or the like Words: Sir, I have done you Wrong, and brought Trouble
upon you; I pray forgive me, etc.

But most free and full, truly pious and penitent, is this Copy of a Letter,
which was sent by one that had been an Informer, to a molested Dissenter,
faithfully transcribed by me in the Informer's own Words.

A Letter of a penitent Informer.
Goodman Fenn,
I Acknowledge mine Error, and that I did foolishly in coming to your House, and
in disturbing the Company which were met there, and in bringing you and them on
the Stage, and into a suffering Condition; which has several times troubled me
very much, and at this time lies heavy upon me, because I am not in a Condition
to return you and your Friends, what is out of your and their Pockets: But if
ever it shall please God to make me in a Condition able thereto, I do intend,
to the best of my Power, to bear your and your Friends Disbursements, which you
and your Friends were put to by my occasion, by returning to you and them, some
of what you and they have been forced to pay by my means. And in the mean time,
I do earnestly desire you, and your Friends which have been Sufferers with you,
to forgive me the Wrong which I have done to every one of you. I do desire you,
and all that were Partakers with you in your Sufferings, to be earnest with God
in your Prayers for me, not once, but often, to desire the Lord to forgive me
the Sin which I committed against him, in what I did against you, and them
which were met at your House, when I disturbed Mr. King in his Exercise. How do
I know but that God may hear your Prayers for me, and turn his fierce Wrath
from me, you being the Persons grieved? The Almighty God has been pleased to
encourage me to send to you all, which are concerned in the Suffering, by what
he did in the Case of Job, chap. 42. verse. 7, 8, 9. So the Lord of Mercy move
all your Hearts to pray for me, that he would pardon my Sin, for not doing that
which was right to those that were worshipping of him; and it may be the Wrath
of God may be appeased at your Request, and have Mercy upon me, and not deal
with me according to my Desert. I hope that God of his infinite Mercy will
forgive that Sin of doing his Prophets barm, and for offending of his little
Ones; and also give me Grace for the Time to come, not only to forbear doing
his Prophets harm, and not offending of his little Ones, but do the best I can
to defend his Prophets, and cherish his little Ones. The Words of Saul are
verified in me, I find it hard to kick against the Pricks.

R. S.
Hoxne, Suff. July 8. 1680.

I have by these Instances cleared the Ground of the Observations laid down in
the Entrance of these Naratives, which I do heartily wish may become effectual
Admonitions and Warnings to them that walk in their Steps, to turn them back,
before they fall under the like Observation, as Examples of God's Displeasure.

I shall propose some other Objects of God's Displeasure, tho not of Informers,
but of such as have opened their Mouths in Menaces against Ministers, that have
declared a Spirit of Disobedience against God, and Persecution against his
Servants.

The great Use that some make of the Laws is, to be Instruments of their
Disaffection to, and Revenge upon such as they hate, not knowing how to come at
them by any other Law, being inculpable as to other Crimes and Misdemeanors.

Feb. 13. 1660. One H. H. of T. Ev. in the C. of W. was very active in getting
a Warrant against Mr. P. Minister of that Place, and several other Ministers,
for not reading Common Prayer, (while there was an Indulgence in that Point.)
He left Order with his Uncle A. H. Constable, that if any such Warrant came in
his absence to him, he should speedily execute it: He went that day to G. a
Neighbour-Village, and being drunk with one T. C. a debauched Companion of his,
coming home, fell from his Horse, and fell down dead in the place.

This Judgment of God might have befallen him for him Drunkenness, or he might
have escaped it, as many Drunkards do; but his Enmity against his Minister,
known to be a worthy good Man, was an Accumulation of his Sins, and a refusing
to be taught and reformed by him. What cared such Persons for the
Common Prayer, as it was the Form of Service paid to God? If it had been from
Zeal to that, he would have abstained from his scandalous Sins.

June 16. 1661. Mr. B. of B. St. J. said to a Gentleman of Quality, That he
would leave never a Horse in his Team, nor Sheep in his Fold, but he would rout
out Mr. S. the Minister of the Parish, (who would not comply with Profaneness)
before Harvest, as near as it was, if he did not read Common Prayer, and that
if he were not gone before Harvest, he would be gone himself; God took him at
his threatening, for he was gone out of the World before that time came.

June 2661. R. M. of D. and J. B. with other bad Men, had procured the outing
of Mr. J. a very eminent Minister of the Place; M. was heard to say, that the
day that J. should go away from D. would be the happiest or merriest day in the
Year to him: Upon the very day of Mr. J's going away, M. going with a little
empty Cart and one Horse into the Field, the Horse by a strange Providence,
drew the Cart over his Leg, which crushed the Bone to pieces, and tore the
Flesh from his Thigh, of which Wound he lay in tormenting pain some days after,
and then died miserably.

November 21. 1661, The foresaid J. B. of D. in Wilts, the Enemy of Mr. J. of
whom he said blasphemously, that J. and his God had cheated the Parish these 14
Years. He had been drinking at Wily, where he threatened, that he would be at a
Neighbor Parish to preach next Sunday; meaning that he would execute a Warrant
upon some Phanaticks (as he called them) that would hear a neighbour-Minister
preach: But riding homeward that Night, he affronted some sober Travelers upon
the Road, drew his Sword upon them and made at them, and one of them in his one
defense, shot him with a brace of Bullets into the Body, of which Wound he died
that day sevennight. The Gentleman that killed him was tried and acquitted the
next Assizes at Sarum.

March 1661. One Thorn of D. who had about that time twelve Month taken a false
Oath against the said Mr. J. at the Assize in Sarum, being stricken in the
Tongue (as he himself afterward confessed) before he came out of the Court,
which grew worse and worse, and by degrees rotted away in his Mouth, till the
Worms crawled out; he died desperately and miserably.

Mr. Lewis Facy Minister, imprisoned by a Capias in Bodmyn Goal in Cornwall,
was no sooner entered, but was railed at, by a violent spirited Woman in the
Prison: He mildly desired her to forbear, kept himself retired, and while he
was at Prayer, she came and railed at him, at his Chamber Door, at which she
was taken with a Numbness (a Palsy) so that she could not speak nor help her
self.

Mr. Collins of Ottery St. Mary in Devonshire, was by the contrivance of a High
Constable, apprehended by a Petty Constable, (lodged in the High Constable's
House to that purpose) as he was going to a Funeral, The famous Acts of this
Justice B. may be read in a printed Narrative from Devon.
by a Warrant from one Justice B. and H. and put under Guard, and made to pay
his Guard, till they carried him to Goal for six Months, for living within five
Miles of this Parish. The Head Constable goes out of the way, conveying himself
to Exton, before Mr. Collins was taken. But as near as can be computed the High
Constable was taken ill at Exton, in the very hour in which the Petty Constable
served his Warrant on Mr. Collins, and was carried home, the next day died.

Mr. Thomas Tregosse relates this following Providence of God, in Mercy and
Judgment. In the Lent Assize, at Exon, 1670, his Trial was put off, the
Deputy-Mayor of Torrington attending, who was the grand Enemy. At the next
Assizes, the said G. S. Deputy-Mayor, could not attend, and thereby Mr. Treg.
was acquitted by the Jury. But what hindered or kept his Adversary at home? He
had in a drunken Voyage, fallen from his Horse, by which his Shoulder Bone was
dislocated, and he became unable to dress or undress himself, and so like to
continue to his Death: His Wife, a violent Woman, died of a Tympany (a fearful
Spectacle) the Lord's Day Night, after Mr. T. had preached at Torrington. One
Denis, Brother-in-law to Smith, who rejoiced at the breaking up of the
Conventicle, which he said did him more good, than all his Losses did sadden
him; this poor Wretch (said he) did hang himself in his Study, and his Estate
forfeited to the Town; this great Judgment befell his Wife, to have her Husband
hang himself, and his Estate forfeited, who belched out these Words upon Mr.
Treg. Hang the Rogue, bang him at the Sign-post, or next Tree, and never send
him to Exon.

Before ever I saw the Life of the said Mr. Tregosse I received the Substance
of a Story related in it, from an indifferent hand resident in those Parts; and
because it is exposed in Print already, I shall be the more bold to transcribe
it: Mr. T. To. a Justice of Peace had committed Mr. Tr. to Prison for three
Months; he had not come home out of Prison four days before Mr. Rob. gave out,
that he would speedily send him back again to the Place from whence he came. He
designed to go to Market to get another Justice of Peace to join with him; but
before his going thither, he went according to his usual custom, to visit a
Tenant's Wife, and in his return, was set upon by his own Bull, which never ran
at any one before, which goared him so, that he died of his Wounds.

A Person of Quality too violently acted, and influenced by some of high
Dignity, set himself to prosecute the Nonconformists that lived within his
reach; and one time making a visit to a great Peer, did make too much sport
with his Employment, saying, He had been persecuting the Godly Party; and among
other Stories, representing them very odiously, he told this Passage, full of
Blasphemy (and I doubt not as full of Falsehood in those who told it him) in a
Prayer, speaking to the Divine Majesty; Thou art like George on Horseback,
thou seem to come, but do not come. If it had been true and certain such
Language had been used, certainly it should not have been repeated with
Pleasure. His Coachman did not make Expedition in bring his Coach to him: then
said he, My Coachman is like George on Horseback, he seems to come, but does
not come. Thus making Sport; but in his return home, he was taken so ill, that
he betook himself to his Chamber and in his Bed, and all the Prayers and Tears
of his Friends could not prolong his Days, Death made speed and would not tarry.

Now it is time to bring home these Examples and present them to the view, and
lay them not at the Doors, but before the Hearts and Consciences of three sorts
of Persons, at this time too deeply, if not too heartily engaged in the
Suppression of Nonconforming Protestants.

1. Those Magistrates that serve the Design. 2. Those of the Clergy that wish
or approve it. 3. Those Underofficers and Agents, that go under too
dishonurable a Name, in my conceit, to come in the same Page, or stand a-brest
in my Division, with Magistrates and Ministers.
1. Of the Magistrates.

Noble and worshipful Gentlemen, I made bold in a former Plea, to address to
you on the behalf of my Reverend Brethren, so I call them, because Christians,
and because they are Protestants and Divines of Age and Learning: I account
their Sufferings to be a great breach upon our Protestant Body, a weakening of
our Strength, a Blot upon our professed Christianity, no Service to the King or
Church, but a rejoicing and a Service to their and our professed Enemies: it
can be for no Man's Interest, Profit, or Honor to trouble the Servants of
Christ, and to provoke his Wrath, which if it be kindled but a little --
Blessed are all they who put their trust in him.

I may better speak in the Cause of others, than in mine own; and when I plead
for them, I really believe, I offer you a Service that should not be despised,
but favorably construed, and kindly taken; for I do warn you to have nothing
to do with the Ruin of just, good, peaceable, holy, learned Men and
Christians, and the King's good Subjects, yea, and some of your best Friends;
for I do believe, they make many Prayers to God for you, to turn your Hearts,
to save your Souls; and their Intercessions for you, are as one piece of
Defense between you and harm. If these are my Mistakes, I am mistaken; and if I
am altogether mistaken, I beseech you pardon the Mistake, and accept the
Affection, Respect, Honor, and Good Will I bear you; for I would serve you
without a Mistake if I could. But verily, I think, I am pretty right in my
Judgment of this Case; and have the concurrent sense of some of them, or of
their Relations, who have been active in the same way in which you now appear.

You are not all of a Mind and Temper; you act from various Dispositions or
Habits of Mind; and these are as various, as those observed by that ancient
Christian- Cicero, Lactantius, of the Prosecutors of the Christians. Accepta
enim Potestate pro suis moribus quisque saevivit --. Some for too great a fear,
have ventured to do more than they were commanded: Others out of a private
Hatred of their own against just Men; some from a natural Cruelty of their own;
some that they might please, and by this Office (or Service) prepare (or
secure) a way for their Advancement; some ran headlong to kill, as one of
Phrygia, who burnt all the People with the Conventicle or Meeting Place it
self, ( Lactan. de Justitia. l. 5. c. 11. p. 490. Lugd. Bat. 1660.) Thus Men
were moved of old. From what of these Principles or Affections they now move,
concerns them to enquire, before that measure which they mete to others, be
measured to them again. Generous Minds should be locked up against the
Intrusion of Temptation, to bring in such low Affections as these are, by which
a Christian Heart is more profaned than the Temple was by Paul's bringing in
of the Gentiles into it, these are too base Affections for such as hope for
Heaven.

You say we have a Law, and according to that the Nonconformists ought to
suffer, and you are empowered to execute the Laws indifferently.

This was the strained Pretense of the Jews to be so urgent with Pilate to
crucify our Savior; John 19.7. We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die:
Whereas he ought not to have been accounted a Blasphemer, in saying, He was the
Son of God, for he was so; and if he had been a Blaspemer, by which of their
Laws did they cry, Crucify, crucify him? Give me leave I beseeeh you to speak
freely. I have not in all my Narratives touched upon any that I know now to
have his Sword drawn in this fresh Assault; but have related things past to be
your Admonitions and Examples, that I may not provoke, but profit you.

I grant you have a Law, and I believe many of you do wish there were no such
Law, and many are weary and cautious, sparing and fair in the Execution of it.
But I beseech you once again to keep to the Scope of the Law, and to the Law it
self, as relating to the Scope, and there will be no need of Tumults to guard
any of your Persons to find out and disperse the Meetings, nor such fear of you
from the Nonconformists. That Preaching and Praying which contains matter of
Sedition, Rebellion and Insurrection, and is expressly of that nature without
forced and uncharitable Construction, or perverted illogical Inferences, are
the only Exercises under the name of Religious Exercises, which you can justly
punish. Reading Scripture, singing Psalms are Religious Exercises, and the
matter of them undoubtedly godly. Preaching and Praying are as undoubtedly
God's Ordinances, as the Scripture is (...) Words. It is as manifest Impiety to
forbid these, any of these, or all of them in one Assembly, as it would be to
obliterate any part of Holy Writ, or to cancel any Divine Law. It is Impiety,
and not to be supposed that any Christian Legislators should make a Law to
prohibit any Religious Duty or Exercise in it self considered; and if any of
you think you may punish Preachers or Hearers, for such undoubted Religious
Exercises, you sin against God; and all the Laws in the World cannot justify
your so doing, for no Law of Man can defend any Man in sinning against the Law
of God.

It is true that the Preface of a Law is not a Law, and the Scope of the Law is
not the Law; but as the Scope of the Law expressed in the Preface, was the
Reason and Intention of the Lawmakers; and all the general Words in the Law,
were formed with reference to the Scope (or else they were not made as rational
Means conducing to its Ends, no more than it would be to forbid speaking, that
there might be no swearing). Any Exercise of Religion, that tends to Sedition;
Rebellion, and to move Insurrection, is so far punishable, as it is abused and
perverted to that unsufferable End; or else you punish Religious Duties
absolutely taken, because by such Numbers, or by Persons above sixteen Years of
Age, in such Numbers; and then you will say, it is not religious Duties that is
punished, but the prohibited number, of above four besides the Family. But then
again, the number absolutely taken does not make a Crime, or should not, but as
it is supposed to soment Sedition. For, why shall it be unlawful for twenty,
forty, or a hundred of diverse Families to meet in one Place for Religious
Exercises, any more than for some noble and great Family, of some one Nobleman
or Gentleman, or Boarding-house, which has so many Persons in it, to meet
together in one Hoom for Religious Duties?

Besides this, it is clear that the Clauses in the Act against Conventicles,
refers to Such an Assembly as is prohibited in the beginning of the Act: for
these words, Such Offender, so convicted, such Offense, like Offense, such
Meeting, such Conventicle, is repeated twelve or thirteen times in the body of
the Act. Now such relates to a Meeting before described and forbidden; Such
Meeting we find in the beginning of it. The Act is for providing further and
more speedy Remedies against growing and dangerous Practices of seditious
Sectaries, and other disloyal Persons, who under pretense of tender
Consciences, have, or may at their Meetings contrive Infurrections.

Be it enacted. etc. That if any Person of the Age of sixteen Years, or
upwards, being a Subject of this Realm -- shall be present at any Assembly,
Conventicle or Meeting (mark the words) [under color or pretence] of any
Exercise of Religion, in other manner than according to the Liturgy, and
Practice of the Church of England, in any place within the Kingdom of England,
Dom. W. or T. of B. upon T. at which Conventicle there shall be five Persons or
more, over and besides those of the same Household; or if it be in a House,
Field, or place where is no Family inhabiting, Then where any five Pirsons or
more assembled as aforesaid; It shall and may be lawful to and for any one or
more Justices of Peace upon Proof of such Offense --. Which Proof is either by
Confession of the Party, or Oath of two Witnesses -- or notorious Evidence and
Circumstance of the Fact, to make Record, etc.

Will you cut off the Act from the Preface? or have you no regard to the words
of the Act, under color or pretense of any Exercise of Religion? then you take
no notice of the Description of the Persons who make up an unlawful Assembly or
Conventicle. Here are three things to make a Conventicle. 1. The Persons,
Number and Age, called seditious Sectaries, and disloyal Persons. 2. An
Assembly of above four of these, under color and pretense of any Exercise of
Religion, over and above the Family.

Where observe, 1. What is implied or suspected, (nay, it must be evident,
because it must be proved by Witnesses, or Confession of the Party, or
notorious Evidence or Circumstances of the Fact) that some ill Contrivance is
carrying on, under color or pretense of any Exercise of Religion.

2. It is said, any Exercise of Religion, that is, as I conceive any particular
Duty, as reading a Chapter, singing Psalms, as well as Preaching, Praying,
administering Sacraments, or Discipline: whereby it is clear, the Law forbids
not any Exercise, no not preaching in it self, but the color and pretense of
it, in clear and express words.

3. In other manner than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of
England. The meaning of which is ambiguous, and commonly interpreted, if any
Exercise of Religion be without the Liturgy, and then it is ambiguous, to say,
in other manner than, etc. when the meaning is, without the Liturgy. The
Nonconformists have no other manner of Reading, Singing, etc. than is usual in
the Practice of the Church of England, nor other manner of Preaching, than what
is practiced in the Church of England. This is the meeting of such ill Persons,
that abuse Religion as a color and pretense, to conceal desperate and
pernicious Practices in any other manner than according to the Liturgy. And
such Persons, such Offenses, such Meetings so convicted, are subject to such
Penalties.

Now then Gentlemen, keep to the Laws, and spare none, But then consider; why
have any acted so, as to make no difference between seditious Sectaries and
disloyal, and peaceable loyal Persons? why have they not distinguished, as the
Act does, between any substantial, innocent Religion, and the color or
pretense of it? but taking it in the lump, it has been punished, without
inquiry after the Leaven of Sedition that leavened the Lump.

I do heartily wish this may fall into the Hands, and upon the Heart of that
Minister of Jussice, who drawing out Evidence from an impudent Informer, to
prove an Information, asked him this Question, Was there Preaching there? If
the Informer could have truly sworn, that there was Preaching there; let the
Examiner, as one that shall be judged in the great day, think beforehand, how
Preaching (not tainted with Sedition, or tending to any Evil to the State)
deserved to come in as a Crime, or the Preacher punishable for it. Certainly
Preaching should be judged a Duty encourageable and not punishable in a
Christian Judicature. It should be harsh to a Christian Ear, to hear Preaching,
an Ordinance of God, and the Power of God to Salvation, enquired after as a
Crime! I wish God may not lay it to any Magistrate's Charge, You have fined and
imprisoned my Servants, for preaching and hearing my Word; and I wish that
every such one may judge himself for it, and repent before he go to God's
Judgment.

Why have any punished the singing of a Psalm in a Meeting, which was in the
Meter and Tune practiced by the Church of England? Why, when the Informer being
present, and making the fifth Man, have the rest suffered as a Conventicle,
there being but four above the Family, and the Informer the fifth?

Is there no way to execute a Law, but by a violation of the Law? What Law is
there for tearing up Free-Holds, pulling down Houses, tearing up Seats? Which
looks liker a Rout or Riot? a Company of Boys and rude Fellows, some with
Swords, and others with Staves and Clubs about the Streets, to break up
Meetings of Men without Arms, and Women and Children? What Law is there for
executing Warrants on the Lord's Day? There is one against it. What Law is
there for Justices to give out Warrants, that lie dormant in Officers hands,
empowering them to break up Meetings that are foreseen, or foretold to be? What
Law requires a Justice to be an Informer? to break open Doors at unseasonable
Hours, to fright Women with Child, and others into Fits, when there is not so
much as any notorious Evidence or Circumstance, much less Oath of any Witness
or Witnesses?

Now let us come to the Proof; What is a notorious Evidence or Circumstance of
Fact? Of what Fact? Of any Religious Exercise without the Liturgy; that is the
Fact: Now what is the notorious Evidence of it? Not a Tone, nor a Voice, nor
such a Number; not Preaching, nor any other Exercise of Religion, can be
notorious in it self, that it is such a Fact, but to them that are present at
it. Such Exercise may be, and yet not differing from the manner of the Church,
by its own Evidence, but to him or them to whom it is evident upon the place,
or by Oath of two Witnesses. But why shall two infamous Witnesses carry it from
the contrary Testimony of more than two, and more credible? Because it is for
the King? No Lie, nor Perjury, nor Oppression of the King's Subjects, is for
the King, but against his Honor, Wealth, and Strength. Why will Magistrates
employ, set on, and encourage infamous and known lying Fellows? How can they
believe them, that were not Witnesses, nor present in the Meeting from the
beginning to the end, but lay skulking at a distance, that went scouting up and
down; that took Names upon Trust and Hearsay; and that cannot tell the Text,
nor one Sentence of the Sermon, nor who the Preacher was?

Here Regard is to be had to the Credibility of Persons on both sides: Are
there not as honest, just, conscientious Persons as Informers? I hope, I know
there are; why may not they be believed, and the Parties relieved upon their
Appeals? Is it a sufficient Reason, because they swear for the King? If for the
King as a Party, then Judges judge between Party and Party, and in doing Justice
against the King's Cause as a Party, they establish his Throne as a King, and
thereby act for him. If it be for the King's Profit, it supposes the Right to
lie on his Side first, or else it is no Profit, but a Worm in his Exchequer.
What other Reason is there why these Witnesses must be believed? Is it because
they swear positively in the Affirmative? Because some that construe Things in
their favor, do take this for a Rule, that a Negative cannot be proved,
therefore their positive Swearing cannot be disproved? I do think it worthy a
few Words to explain it, which may help Men's Understanding: therefore I say, A
Negative cannot be proved, because it is grounded (pardon the Word) upon a
Nonentity; that is, There is no such thing; therefore such a thing cannot be
affirmed and proved. Truth is the positive in Being and Reality, and therefore
Truth can only be affirmed. In a Contradictory, one Side can only be true. If
one Man swear a Lie never so positively, he positively swears a Negative or a
Privative: He that swears the Truth, tho it be contrary to an affirmative
Falsehood, or Lie, swears a Positive. Now when an Informer, or any other
Witness, swears positively so and so, and another swears the contrary, the Judge
and Jury, (who are Judges of Evidence) must know, that he that swears Truth, he
only swears the Positive, and the other the Negative; and therefore in this
case they must use their Reason, to compare the Credit of the Persons that
swear on both Sides; and if there be an equality in them, they must have regard
to Circumstances, and find out what Evidence they can. Let Juries take heed of
the Guilt of a false Verdict, when they are tempted and deceived, that it is
for the King: They are to proceed according to the Credit of the Evidence, and
then it is for the King, when they proceed according to Truth: Then you are
Loya! Subjects, when you act according to Law, for Law is the Rule of Loyalty.

It is too apparent, that too many now do study, by what Laws Protestants may
be brought into Trouble; as Lactantius reports, that Domitius ( Vlpianus de
Officio Proconsulis, lib. 7.) rescripta nefaria collegit, ut docere quibus
paenis affici oporteret eos, qui se cultores Dei confiterentur. [ De Justitia,
lib. 5. p. 491.]

Honored Sirs, you have a Law, and Laws; keep strictly to them, and do not
your selves transgress them: You have Laws against others, keep to those Laws,
and you will not give Dissenters such just cause to complain, as they have. You
have Laws, and you have a Religion too, in great danger from the Execution of
them at this time, and in the usual manner, if the Judgment of a great part of
them, who had Ability to judge, and Power to declare their Judgments be of any
value; You have a Law, but keep to your Places, lest you give great advantage
to them that complain of illegal Sufferings.

Many of you do not like the Laws, but besides the Law, there is a Penalty, and
an hundred Pounds will make a Hole in some Justices Estates, especially in
Towns and Cities, who are Tradesmen: But keep strictly to the Laws, to these
Laws, and you may venture your Penalty. If you were not too forward, or too
fearful, the Informers would fear to come to your Houses, as Men afraid to be
sent to the House of Correction, or a Goal; and you may easier defeat them,
than they recover a Forfeiture upon you, with all their Arts of Falsehood and
Perjury: But if you value your Forfeiture, above the preservation of the
Protestant Religion, in a great part of it, how will you be able co suffer the
Loss of all against Popery?

And lastly; Consider seriously the manifold Manifestations of God in these
Things: The Judgments of God are rarely and seldom executed, because of his
Patience and Mercy; but they are sometimes, that they may be noted, and that
Men may fear. The Lord is known by the Judgments which he executes.

This may be called Fanaticisin, and vain Observations of weak and
superstitious Minds: But as it is a Contempt of God, not to observe his
Providence, and his Judgments; so Christians in all Ages, have made and given
Observations of God's Hand stretched out against them that have persecuted his
People, or helped forward their Affliction.

You know how unwillingly Pontius Pilate was drawn to deliver our Savior. Who
ever accounted Ger. Jo. Vossius below the most learned of his Age? He gives
this Censure of Pilate's Act, ( Harmon. Evang. l.2. c.5. p. 246.) Cujus
injustitiae graves a Deo poenas luit: For he who suffered himself to be carried
with the Accusations of the Jews, which he knew to be false, so far as to
adjudg innocent Christ to Punishment; he also himself, circumvented with the
false Accusations of the Jews, was banished to Vienna; as Josephus, Lib. 18. of
his Antiq. c. 7. Neither did Herod escape unpunished, who professed he found
nothing worthy of Death in Christ, for his cruel handling of him; for he was
(tho for a far different Cause) by Caligula banished unto Lions. Joseph. Antiq.
l. 18. c. 25.

This might be sufficient to discourage any from being forward, or inciting and
promoting this Work, either by Threats or Promises, and to make the unwilling
resolute in their Averseness and Forbearance. He that said, Remember Lot' s
Wife, does expect that all Men should read what God's hand writes upon
Examples, and declares by his Public Judgments. Tertullian observes to
Scapula, the Public Judgments of God for the Persecution of the Christians;
such as not gathering their Harvests, the former Years Rain, and the Fires
which hung over the City of Carthage all the Night; they knew what they
threatened, who saw them, and what the Thunders sounded: Nec unquam impiorum
scelere in nostrum nomen exurgitur, ut no^statim divinitus vindicta comitetur,
etc. Cyprianus contra Demetrianum.
Omnia haec sunt imminentis ^^ae Dei signa. These are all Signs of the Wrath of
God hanging over our Heads: And they shall feel the universal and last or
utmost Wrath of God, who do otherwise interpret these Examples of his: For that
Sun in the Assembly at Vtica, when the Light was almost put out, was a Prodigy,
and could not be from any ordinary Eclipse, being then in its Altitude. -- We
can also lay before thee the latter Ends of several Presidents, who near their
Death have remembered that they sinned, in vexing the Christians. Vigellius
Saturninus, who first drew Sword against us, lost his Eyesight. Claudius
Termianus in Cappadocia, taking it ill his Wife turned to our Sect, dealt
cruelly with the Christians, was in his Palace destroyed alone by Pestilence,
after that Lice had creep'd from him while alive. Let no Man know this, said
he, (keep this secret) lest the Christians rejoice in their Hope. -- And they
who seem to themselves to be unpunished, shall come into the Judgment of God.
Thus that ancient Writer, Tertullian.

Ecclesiastical Historians do not pass by particular Judgments upon particular
Persons, nor general Calamities, such as Darkness upon the Face of the Earth,
the Noise of Thunder, not from Heaven, but the roaring of the Earth,
Earthquakes, ovening of the Ground, Centur. 4. cap. 20.
swallowing up Houses, and many died with the Terror of it; Cities drowned and
overthrown by the Sea the Pestilence, and other Calamities. Has not God called
us to turn to him by many Judgments? And is this a Sign of our turning to him,
that Religion is exposed to Scorn, and truly religious Men are least endured;
and Dissenters from Humane Inventions, and unnecessary Things, are prosecuted;
and Dissenters from God, and his plain and open Laws, and the very serious
Profession of Christianity, are too commonly spared? Is this the Effect of our
Repentance? Yea, what Zeal against Dissenting Christians to root them up, to
punish Preaching, Praying, singing Psalms, mutual Editication expressly exhorted
to by the Apostle, Col. 3.16. And instead of Christian Communication and
Converse, what a lewd Generation of Dammum's, that Health-Prosperity, and
Destruction to Persons, according to their interests and Passions? The
professed Devotees of profane Observances and Irreligion carry the Day, and
keep the Wall, while sober and religious Persons are driven into Corners, and
cannot enjoy them with quiet. We have heard of Swords, and Blood drawn at
Play Houses, or by occasion of them; and was ever any of them indicted for
Riots? But how common a Practice has it been to indict peaceable Men and
Women, and bind them to the Behavior, for undoubted Christian Exercises? --
God has spoken by Wars with a Nation of our own Profession, by Pestilence, by
many dreadful Fires, by raging Fevers, and other Diseases not commonly known,
in which God has not long debated with wretched Mortals, but taken them away
suddenly. He has contended by great Decays in Men's Estates, by hideous
Darkness, by scorching consuming Heat; and lastly, by pouring down immoderate
Rains, (will neither Fire melt us, nor Rain soften us, no, not so much as into
one Fast?) And is this a sign that God is attended to, and his Voice
understood, and his Warning taken, that the Meuths of his Servants shall be
stopped? And what tho God has remembered Mercy, in giving us great Plenty,
after both excessive Heat and immoderate Rains; does not he expect to be
entreated, and that we should amend our Ways? Shall this go for a Reformation,
that they who cannot serve God in a public Station, shall not serve him in
private Meetings? Or that a more plain Way of Worship shall not be endured in
public? And many who for fashion sake cry up the Public Service, do not live
by it; and severely punish others for not coming to Church, who are not so
often there themselves as they might be.

Be pleased but to look about you, and see how many Gentlemen are either cut
off, or taken away: How many Noble and Gentlemen's Families are fatherless and
masterless! -- Quanto major fuerit persecutionis injuria, tanto and justior
fiat and gravior pro persecutione vindicta. Cyprian. contra Demetrian. Ruinis
regum, jacturis opum, dispendio militum, diminutione castrorum -- Idem ib.


Houses shut up, or a Passage in at the Back and Kitchin-Doors, into a cold
Kitchen, and an empty House! And do you think this is the way to live long upon
Earth, and bring down a Blessing upon your selves, and your Posterity, to
discountenance or to extirpate the Professors of Christian Religion? Could but
the Dead advise you, they would advise you to be truly pious, and piously
zealous, to encourage them that mind the Way to Heaven, and to hedge up their
Way with Thorns, that transgress, and are extravagant out of the Ways of God:
They would tell you, that many that keep the other Side of the Thorn-Hedg, (to
use the Words of an eminent Guide in that Way) do meet at the Journey's End.
But the Dead speak not; and it will be too late, your Work will be done, before
you can go to advise with them. O hearken to the Voice of God in his Word, in
his Judgments, in your many Examples, and in your own Consciences! Can you
discern a Judgment of God, when you see it at another Man's Door? Must it come
in at your own Doors? must it come up Stairs? must it come to your Bedchamber?
and must it hinder the Success of all Physicians upon you, and follow you to
your Graves, before you take a reverent Notice of it.

I beseech you be not displeased with me for telling you what I think: The
Curse of disobedient Children, the Curse of Swearing and Drunkenness, and many
other Impieties; the Curse of Poverty, and Necessity to mangle, if not to
alienate Estates, comes into many Houses, because they would not have the
Blessing of Obed-Edom, by entertaining the Ark of God: And do not you in your
Consciences know, (if ever you do reflect) that they only, or for the most
part, who have bent their Power against Nonconformists, have made but a
Pretense of the Church, to disguise their natural Disgust, or close Displeasure
against the Practice of religicus Duties: For till a Man's own Heart be
persuaded and converted to God, he does not well digest Religion in any other;
and indeed he can no more love it in others, than condemn himself; for he must
needs condemn the Neglect in himself, that commends the Practice in another.
Have you known the most pious and sober Persons, of the most unswayed Reason,
to be forward and eager? Have you not traced the Pipes, that have conveyed the
Oil of Interest to feed this burning Zeal? Name but one Man that has stood
upon his own Legs, without dependence or expectation; name but one Man, that
was wise, sober, temperate, serious, and conscientious in the Practice of
Religion, in his own Conversation, and in his Family, that was incoherent from
some in Power for their own worldly Aims, that offered himself to this Work:
Name but any one that did execute these Laws from a pure Heart to please God,
and advance his Honor; and for that one, you may suspect many others, if not
know your selves, to act from a private, worldly, if not revengeful Spirit.

Have you not known that Men have taken their Aims and Measures from the Wills
of some in higher place? and that have cried up, or beaten down Religion, as it
has opened their way, or stood in it to their designed Projects? The Spring of
these violent Motions is as apparent as the Gnomen of the Dial, to the Eyes of
all those that see what time of day it is. I have been sparing of Names,
because I would not offend; yet for warning and example sake, be pleased to
observe what they have done and been, that have gone before you: Do you take
your selves to be more eminently Loyal than all that are laid aside? Do you
think it will be a meritorious Service to suppress Dissenters, else you can be
no Friends to Caesar, no Sons of the Church? But who is the Caesar, or which is
the Church, for whose sake Protestants must be undone? Not the King, nor the
Church of England. This is your time of acting your parts. There is as great
Reason to be shie and tender in Execution of Laws against Dissenters, as to be
severe and zealous for other Laws. Take heed! for God is concerned, you, and
your Families and Posterities concerned; and as you must account to God, abuse
not the Power given you, to serve any Man's Pleasure, or your own corrupt
Affections. Take Example by some of as mean Parts as Estates, who have been
recommended to Power by for their Forwardness in such Services as these, and
have not had the Honor and Comfort of living in their own Houses, yet have
been busy in opening, and breaking into, and rifling their religious
Neighbors; and by others of large Estates and Fortunes, who eat their Commons
not dressed in their own Kitchins, and have not common Liberty, but what they
ask leave, and pay for. Take warning by some, who have run but a very short
Race and Course in the pursuit of Dissenters, and have left none of their
Children to succeed them in their Power. Take the Example of them, who have
seen the Hand of God stretched out against them and their Families, and whose
Consciences have applied the meaning of it in the Death of their Children, both
of their Reubens and Benjamins; and that have not prospered in this World, but
have fled, and hid, lived and died in a Place that has no Mark of Honor upon
it, but that it is entitled to be the Kings. Elias was as great a Fanatic, and
Disturber of Israel, as any Nonconformist now: Choose you, Noble Sirs, to be
Obadiah's, rather to hide the Prophets of the Lord by Fifty, than be either a
Captain of a Fifty, or one of the Fifty, that go to take the Prophets: Every
one those unhappy Captains had an Authority as high as yours can be: But Obadia
could distinguish between a Prophet and a Rebel, a faithful Preacher, and a
State-Disturber, and of all the Captains he was preserved. And so I do heartily
pray, that you may be in your Spheres a Terror to evil Doers, and a Praise to
them that do well; and so Death and Judgment will be no Terror to you, and you
shall have Praise of God: Spare no Teacher of Sedition, but honor them that
fear the Lord.

II. I crave leave to write a few Words to my Brethren in the Holy Ministry.

Reverend and beloved Fathers and Brethren, I am not unsensible of my unfitness
to write to you, both in respect of my own Inability, and your Prejudice
against me. I fear my Charity to my Reverend and worthy Brethren the
Nonconformists, have lost me much of yours. I am sorry that any have so little
of this Oil, that they have not enough for them and me too: But I will
adventure to open my Mind a little to you, tho it be tho less. I do humbly
conceive the Word of Reconciliation is committed to us, and the Holy Ghost is
invocated upon us more than once; and those Graces which all Christians have,
we should have more abundantly, and should be as well known by that Grace, by
which our Savior would have his Disciples to be known of all Men, by loving
one another, as we are known by our distinguishing Garbs and Habits. We can
speak at large of the Excellency of Love and Peace, and of the ill Effects of
Enmity and Dissension; and represent and inveigh against Schism, as if that
were the Sin against the Holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven in this
World, nor in that which is to come, or as if that were the Sin unto Death: And
indeed it may be called a Sin unto Death, in a sense, because it is so contrary
to Charity and Peace, and destructive of the Life of Saints, which does much
consist in their Communion. But were we impartial, we should as warmly admonish
our own Hearts, to take heed of Schismatical Passions, and excommunicate them
from within us, as admonish and cast out others that differ from us. Is there
not some Fondness for our own Opinions, and Self-Love in the Praise of Unity,
and Reproof of Schism? For most of the Discourses I have heard or read of late
Years upon this great Subject, have been to condemn or censure all that differ
from us. We would have all Men think, not only charitably, but well and
honorably of us: but if we have any Charity for them that are out, we are very
careful that it be done in secret, and without sound of Trumpet. I am far from
extending this to all the Conforming Brethren, but to them, and them only, who
from Misinformation received an obstinate Prejudice, or Policy, are profuse in
the Expense of Words and Passions. We do take it extreme ill from some
Nonconformists, that they censure and speak ill of us, that they revile, and
render us as scandalous and odious, as ready to decline and apostatize; but
really are not the hottest of them matched, See the second Sermon of the Right
Reverend Bishop of Cork, of Invective Preaching.
if not beaten out of the Field? I may be thought to have an Intimacy with
them, and a Partiality for them, whereas my Acquaintance is very little; but as
far as it does extend, I must do them this Justice, that they are of a very
loving healing, and uniting Spirit. I have heard them speak very well of good
Conformists, and as free to acknowledge the Grace of God in them, as in those of
their own Persuasion, and as ready to hold Terms of Friendship with us. Have
not we given them as great Offense, by doing what they cannot do, as they have
given us, by not doing that we have done? they have lost by our Compliance, but
we have (...) lost by their Nonconformity, except, as they are often told, we
lose by their means among the People, but we gain among the Princes by it; and
do we love them so ill, that we would not have the People love them? Alas! what
a peckled Bird is a Nonconformist in a Princes Court, and in most noble
Families, at a public Meeting! What! is a little Popularity grudged them? I am
grieved to think what a Crime it is to be conscientious. Certainly, if they are
not conscientious, they have not common Sense; and the opprobrious Jeers and
Sarcasins with which they have been treated, have not sufficiently set out
their Folly, if they suffered great Losses, to gain the cold Breath of
Popularity, which would sooner starve than refresh them. Who should be so
compassionate, courteous, officious, loving and peaceable toward them, as we
who are Ministers? Who should better know the Darkness and Weakness, the
various Workings of the Mind, than we? Who should more heartily use them that
dissent from us, than we, who know our many Dissents from our selves, at
several times, and the same Points? Who should allow more to the scrupulous
than we, who know the Weakness of our own Light, and ascribe much to the
Authority of Conscience? Conscience is no Sovereign, but Conscience is next and
immediately under Christ the King. Conscience is subject to Mistakes, It is
suspicious, that some Men's Conformity is ill built, who say, That a Claim of
Conscience is not to be allowed; as if Inferiors were to lay that aside, or we
can never attain to Peace; as if that were to be resigned up to Rulers.
but its Judgment is of highest Authority next under God, and to be controlled
by none but him. It is Hypocrisy and Impiety to pretend it; and it is too great
a Boldness, and Intrusion into the Throne of God, to judge that they do but
pretend Conscience: And very ill Service is done to Christianity, and great
Encouragement is given to Impiety, by some Men's arraigning Dissenters for a
bare pretense of Conscience, by making the dissolute act as securely, as if
there were really no such Power as that of Conscience. Is it not a Word too
common, Hang 'em, hang 'em, there is none good, no Trust to be given to Men
that pretend to Conscience? Who should better understand what Unity and Consent
is necessary between Christians, and what Condescension and Forbearance is
necessary? Who should better understand the differing Practices of ancient
Churches, than we? And that there is no perfect Unity, till we come to perfect
Light and Grace? We should know that there are hard things in Conformity.
Subscription and Conformity is the easiest thing in the World, if there were no
more required, than that they will not rebel, but support the Government, and
be peaceable under it: If this be all, tell them pleinly, in these or like
plain Words, and then see if they will refuse. But to impose upon us Maxims of
State, the Determination of Problems, is to bring many Men into the Clouds, tho
others get near the Sun, and have Light enough to read their meaning. We should
know the Education of a Scholar, the Charge of Studies, the Necessities of
Families, and how harsh a thing it is to be too much indebted to Charity since
all things have ceased to be common. We should upon many Considerations
commiserate them, and their Families. We should be hospitable, and not
forgetful to entertain Strangers. How comes it then to pass, that it is such a
Crime in some Men's Eyes, to be courteous to a dissenting Brother? and his very
Neighborhood is become intolerable, especially if he preach the Word?

In a word, as I said before, we that preach the Word of Reconciliation, should
be of reconcilable Spirits and Tempers. Proud and erroneous Pharisees were
given to cast out of Synagogues. It is a Sectarian Spirit, to make Sects, or to
use a sound Christian as if he were a Sectary. The Spirit of Sanctification is
necessary to all that will be saved, and for us more than others: We declare we
have received that Spirit before Ordination, when the Holy Ghost is invocated,
and we are sent with Authority from him.

Give me leave to bring to your Minds the excellent Words of Cyprian. --
Idcirco and in columba venit Spiritus Sanctus, simplex animal and loetum, non
fell amarum, non morsibus saevum, non unguium laceratione violentum: Hospitia
humana diligere, unius domus consortium nosse, cum generant, simul filios
edere; cum commeant, volantibus invicem cohaerere; communi conversatione vitam
suam degere, oris osculo concordiam pacis agnoscere, lege circa omnia
unanimitatis implere. -- Quid facit in pectore Christiano luporum feritas, and
eanum rabies, and venenum lethale serpentum, and cruenta saevitia bestiarum? --
He speaks of the Catholic Church, in that excellent Book, De Simplicitate
Prelatorum.

Barbarity and Cruelty rages in the Wilderness without the Church. How
unbecoming a Scholar, yea, a Man? a Minister, yea, a Christian, is it, to
imbitter the Lives of them that are cast out of their Churches; and Houses, and
Free-Holds, and cast down to be trampled under foot? To exasperate Magistrates
against them! Is it to our Honor to put on the Magistrates Spurs? Is
Whispering and Backbiting a Grace in us? Are Invectives, Sermons? I do not
marvel that some Men do not pray before their Sermons, when I consider what
their Sermons have been; but do much more marvel, that after their Sermons they
have repeated an excellent Prayer out of the Common Prayer, That the Word might
sink into our Hearts, etc.

There are two Things which are taken exceeding ill from you, by conforming
Gentlemen, and Members of our Church: Your meddling with State Affairs in the
Pulpit, and your exciting the Magistrates to prosecute Protestants; by which
you do not save your selves, nor gain others. Have not some of you driven away,
and lost your own Auditors, by your Invectives against Protestant
Nonconformists of longer standing in the Church of Christ, and that have gone
through those Trials, and stood fast, which you have not felt as yet, and whom
you ought to honor as Fathers and Brethren? It can never be a comfortable Day
to you, if you lived to see them all used as you would have them used. How
unworthy a thing is it in a Minister, to go next way to a Magistrate, and
inform and incense him against your Brethren, (so you should esteem them) for a
private Discourse, which had nothing of Danger, but some pleasantness in it!
Some have been sensible of this afterward, and ashamed. How zealous an Act is
it in a Minister, to importune a Magistrate, time after time, to drive Minister
out of his own Family, out of a Town, or into a Prison? Must that Man be clear
in his own Soul, that cannot abide the Neighborhood of a Nonconformist,
because he thinks himself condemned by his Resolution and Constancy? Whether
was the more Christian Act and Temper, to molest a Nonconformist living, or to
beg his Pardon dying, for an unfriendly, uncharitable, perfidious Carriage? How
uncomfortable is it for a Minister, to disturb, and procure the Punishment of a
few dissatisfied Persons, by which they are cut off from him, and grow and
propagate? They increase, and he grows more discontented and troublesome, and in
his declining Age outlives their Love, and his own Honor, not among them
alone; and to sink and fall in the Esteem and Honor, which once he had out of
the Confines of his own Parish; and his Labors, once esteemed, are become
fruitless. I do not know, that kindling of Fires is any part of the Office of
an Evangelical Priest. I conceal Names, and proceed no further.

Some of you are zealous for the Laws, for all, and for a full Obedience of all
Persons to all Laws: But, my Brethren, as going to Law is the last Remedy to be
used by an injured Person; so omnia prius tentanda, by us, in Cases wherein we
may appeal to, or call in the Assistance of the Law. Have we stated the
Differences? have we argued with the Spirit of Love with them? have we prayed
to God for them? Have we given no just Offense, either by bitterness or
negligence? Have we become all things to them, to gain them? After all means,
have we exercised Forbearance? and begun with the first Offices of Love, and
then risen higher and higher? But as soon as Men come into a divided Parish, to
present them, or complain to Justices, is to begin where we should not end
without extreme unwillingness and trouble. Our Master never caught us this
Method of Proceeding. To correct by Warrants, is not edifying and converting.
It is commonly said, That Executioners of the Law are to act, and not to judge,
or use their own Discretion: No! why then what is the reason that wise and
discreet Men are at any time put into Office?

I have answered what Objections I met with before; I shall but touch one
common Grievance, which is, (besides the general Accusation of Schism and
Separation, and other Matters of Debate) that either some of your Parishioners
go abroad to hear, or some of the Nonconformist Preachers preach in your
Parishes. In this Case there are abundance of Circumstances, that aggravate or
diminish, and by consequence aster it. If the Nonconformist Minister be an able
good Man, I think we should be glad and thankful for his Pains, and live (as in
some very great Places some eminent Conformists and Nonconformists do) in great
Love and Agreement, and both are edified in Love. You know, St. Paul rejoiced
that Christ was preached, tho out of Envy to him. But has Necessity brought
Preachers among us, or carried away careful Souls from us? then who is most to
blame? Suppose there were two Churches in your Town, you are not grieved that
all hear you not in that Case. I know the great Convenience of Parish-Bounds,
both for Ministers and People, especially where Parishes are thick; and People
should be tender how they leave a painful profitable Parish-Minister sent unto
them: And I have heard, some Nonconformist Preachers have persuaded People to
hear them; and Nonconformist Hearers, that could not in Conscience forsake good
Men, if they had such in their Parishes. Others are of another Temper, weak,
and subject to Passions. But in this Case, as I should labor conscienciously
to be a profitable Minister; so I should not be a Hindrance to the greater
Profit of Souls elsewhere; I should not think them to be lost to me, that are
gained to Christ by another Minister. But this Complaint is made against some
Conforming Ministers, that they draw too. The Answer was home and blunt, of a
Conforming Preacher, either given or sent to a Neighbour-Minister, who was
aggrieved his People left him, and went to the Neighbour-Minister: I preached
them hither, and let him preach them home again, if he will. If our Hearts were
set upon our Work, and if God's Glory was uppermost, and Self-denial nourished,
these things would be better born. The Dissenters are either peaceable in their
Dissents, modest in their different Opinions, sincere in their Ways; or they
are of a Sectarian Spirit: To the one the Spirit of Meekness, Love,
Forbearance, is best suited, and we may live together with Comfort and
Edification; to the other, Severity is an improper Cure, for it makes him the
more a Sectary. We are to gain, and to gather, and to use all Means that are
proper, and effective of that End. Are there not in all our Parishes, ignorant,
profane, careless Sectaries from God, and his holy Body? What Imprudence would
it be, to bring them all under Fines and Troubles? They should be a greater
Grief to us, undoubtedly, than honest scrupulous Saul's, that seek the way to
please God. If Nonconformity be such an Eyesore, let us take heed that we do
not make Nonconformists, and not blame them so much as our selves, if they seek
to mend themselves elsewhere. It is certain, High Conformists made
Nonconformists, in 1662. And it is too evident, that Conformists do make many
still. I am persuaded, if St. Augustine had been alive in our Days, he would
never have persuaded the Magistrate to make such Laws, nor any of the Fathers
before him, much less the holy Apostles; their Salutations expressed the
Largeness of their Hearts, and their Catholic Love to the Corinthians, among
whom were great Divisions; to the Galatians and Colossians, among whom were
some very erroneous: So did their Benedictions; Peace be to the Brethren, and
Love, with Faith from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 6.23.
And Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus in Sincerity. verse. 2. But
to love the Nonconformists into Silence, into Poverty, into Disgrace, into
Bonds, is a Love not known to be numbered among the Characters and Signs of
Christian Love. If Christ died for them, if any of them love Christ in
Sincerity, love them better for Christ's sake; and let not Conformity be a
necessary Condition of private Charity, as well as of Ministerial Liberty and
Maintenance: (I know it is not so to all, some have Hearts and Hands extended,
but) I speak to them whose Zeal, or something else, makes them strait and
rigorous. Would you love them if they would conform? Why do you not love some
that have conformed, but not above Conformity, after your Pattern and Example?
Do you say, it would not trouble you if the Laws were smoothed and relaxed, but
while they are in force, it is fit, and for the Honor of the Government, that
they should be executed? But is it likely that those Laws will ever be abated,
by your means at least, which you that style your selves the Church do like so
well, as to call and press for their Execution? Why have you so little Honor
for those Noble Gentlemen in Parliament, that would have disannulled them? Some
say, let Authority make what Laws they will, they must be obeyed. If you
thought more gentle Laws would do better, why do you so much approve of these?
If these be so very good and fit, are we ever like to hear of more moderate, if
you can hinder them? Your Zeal is for Uniformity, as well as Government: Why
may not another Act be as grateful to you, as this Force? and a new Uniformity
as desirable as the old? Then you say, It Is dangerous to alter Laws and
Establishment. You are zealous against Disorder, that is, to say plainly, you
would preserve Order, by cutting us asunder into great Distractions. Ruins
before the Gates of a Royal Palace, is an unpleasing offensive Sight. The
Ruins of the Nonconformists lie at your very Gates: agree with Surveyors, and
wise Builders, to raise out of the Ruins a beautiful Fabric, for Peace and
Love to dwell in: If not, know you assuredly, there are those at work, that
will lay you as low as you have done them. And who can be assured of the
contrary, but that our holy and honest, our good and farthful Brethren, have
perfumed, air'd, and consecrated Common-Goals against our going in? which if we
suffer, I wish we may have Grace to endure as they have done; as I am confident
we shall be more of the same Spirit with them in such a Case, than now you are.

It cannot be blotted out, that the Clergy and Cardinal of Lorain did instigate
and inflame the Magistrates; O that this were a Blot only in Popish
Martyrologies! How alien is this from the Mind of our Lord? from the Temper of
Christianity? And how unlike a Course to persuade Dissenters, or to quiet the
Church? Let this go among the Virtues of the Pharisees, Papists, and Friars.
The Words of the Reverend Dr. Burnett, of the best and worst of Clergymen,
will not increase his Honor, or procure him love from many of us. I Will make
bold to repeat a few of them: It is observable, the best Clergy Men have been
the most gentle to those that differed from them. But the Unworthy, who know
that a good Cause may be spoiled, but is not likely to prevail in their Hands,
and will not trouble themselves with the laborious Methods of conquering
Errors, are always apt to extreme and cruel Courses, since they know they must
prevail with these, or none at all. History of the Rights of Princes, page 257,
258.

The Apostle's Wish, I would they were cut off that trouble you, falls
somewhere else, and is not to the purpose it is often produced for. We that are
commanded, if we love Christ; to feed his Lambs, are not to set any on to worry
straying Sheep. The Holy Ghost is often invocated upon us, and therefore except
the frequent Invocations be in vain, we are to breath out from that, and not
another Spirit.

III. A Word to Informers, to whom I have but little to say at present.

How unsavory is the Memory of Gardener and Bonner! the former a cunning
Informer, both Instigators and Persecutors. An Informer, in the purest Sense of
Index, is a naughty Man turned honest, when he does it out of abhorrence of
evil Counsels, and Conscience of Duty. A King and Kingdom may owe their
Preservation to such a Man. But Quadruplatores, Informers for a fourth part of
the Forfeitures, or any other Moiety, for Gain, have been branded amongst the
worst of Men. When they have run from one way of Wickedness to another, from
Avarice and Necessity, to sell their Souls, Truth, Modesty, and the little of
Humanity that is continued with the Face and Shape, then they are to be
abominated by wise, just, good, and merciful Men. The Days are evil, when such
necessary Evils walk about by Daylight. We read of them in Plautus's Persa.
Sat. Tacitus Annal. lib. 3. cap. 25. lib. 4. cap. 30. and how Vespasian
commanded them to be whipped in the Marketplace. Suet. Vesp. cap. 5.

All the Threatenings of Torments could not move St. Cyprian to inform the
Proconsul of his Brethren in Carthage. After other trying Discourses, Paternus
the Proconsul asked him, Tell me where are those Presbyters which are faid to
be in this City? St. Cyprian answered, Ye have well ordained, and like Men,
that there ought to be no Informers, therefore they ought not to be betrayed by
me, but you may find them out; and because ye have judged, that no Man shall
accuse himself. The Proconful answered, But I will torment thee, but I will
find them out by thee. The Saint of God answered, They shall not be destroyed
by me. The Proconsul answered, It is the Command of the Princes, that the
Christians keep no Conventicles, nor go to the Burying-Places of the Martyrs;
and if any Man transgress, he must be punished with the Sword. The Saint of God
answered, Do as thou art commanded. Passio B. Cypr. per Pontium ejus Diaconnm.
By the Canon of the Council of Elebris, if any of the Faithful turned Informer,
he should be excommunicated.

It was an odious Sight, but much to the Honor of the Justice of those Days,
to see Dr. London and Symonds ride with their Faces to the Horses Tails, and
Papers on their Foreheads, to the Pillory for Perjury; two greater and more
worshipful than any of you Informers now. Dr. Burnet's History of the
Reformacion, Part 1. Book 3. page 327.

You are in great Power, and of Use at present, (even your own Friends esteem
you a necessary Evil, but indeed some of you are more necessitous than
necessary) you have many Justices ready at your Call, and a Multitude of
Followers at your Heels, in many Places. You make a small Gain of the Godliness
of some; of the Scruples and Errors of others; but count all, and then the
total will come to worse than nothing. I shall not revile you, but by what I
know and hear of some, you are a great Reproach to the Christian Religion, and
the Scorn of all Men, that have any Spark of Humanity or Virtue lest in them. I
have faithfully represented true Histories of the Lives and Deaths of some of
your Predecessors, that you may take warning, and (...) peradventure that you
may repent: For you have assumed an Office and Calling merely to serve your
Lusts, and your Bellies, which before had consumed the little Substance you had
(if ever you had any) of your own, or other Men's. If you were baptized, your
Godfathers and Godmothers were exhorted to call upon you to hear Sermons: If
you had Baptismal Grace, you would do it, and renounce the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil, all which you serve in this way which you make your Trade, (tho
it may be some of you act from a Principle of Malice and Revenge, and that is as
bad, if not worse.) At present you act more sasely than they that steal and
kill; for you pretend the Law is on your side, by which you have taken away
from many Reverend Divines their Books, Goods, yea (many times) the very Beds
they lay upon, and have left them destitute of Maintenance for themselves,
Wives and Children: Yea, you have taken (or caused to be taken) their Persons,
and cast them into loathsome Prisons, which have occasioned the Death of some,
and the Sickness and Ruin of many of them; and had not Royal Favor interposed,
you would never have left, till you had utterly ruined ast, both Ministers and
People. But ere it be too late, I beseech you consider your evil Ways, and
repent, else your Reward will be according to your Work. Doeg was an Informer
against David, and the Priests; was one of those that loved Evil more than
Good, and Lying rather than to speak Righteousness; and his JVDGMENT was, --
God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and pluck
thee out of thy Dewlling Place, and root thee out of the Land of the Living.
Psalm. 52.3, 5. Read 1 Thessalonians. 2.15.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Expect to be told of the Sufferings of the Loyal Clergy in the Time of War:
I have distinguished between a Time of War and Peace, of doleful Havoc, and
Security and Law; but it is not observed. I say now, that these Ministers I
have mentioned in the foregoing Treatise have been Loyal Persons, and in the
Times of Usurpation ventured their Lives and Estates for the King's happy
Return. I know no Man so disingenuous, as to envy the Care that has been to
preserve Mr. Huddleston (a Papist) from the Laws, for his good Service about
the King, in his Escape. But no such Care was taken of Mr. Parsons, Mr.
Heywood, Mr. Harrison, Mr. Cook of Chester, who was in the Tower when the King
was called in, who ventured their Lives and Estates for the King with Sir
George Booth. Bishop Walton would speak civilly to Mr. Cook, but told him, he
must conform, or he could not help him. Now many of the Loyal Clergy were out
of Livings or Employments, that did not take their Ease, or enjoy a studious
Retirement? How many that loved Preaching, or did cleave to their Flocks, that
did not enjoy some Liberty and Encouragement? I could reckon up many that had
Livings in the City, and preached in Churches without any Let; as Dr. Hall,
(afterward Bishop of Chester) Dr. Ball, Dr. Wild, (late Bishop in Ireland) Dr.
Hardy, Dr. Griffith, Dr. Peirson, (now Bishop of Chester) Dr. Mossome, Mr.
Farringdon, with many more, besides Abundance in every County. How many of them
fled on choice, left their Places, even in the King's Quarters? I could name
some of them, when I was a Boy; and now I live where a Minister did voluntarily
absent forty Months before he appeared, and in the mean time the Patron
presented.

It Is true, O. Cromwell, and his Officers, did once, upon some provocation of a
pretended Plot against him, by a Proclamation prohibit their Preaching, keeping
Schools, etc. But by the Intercession of that excellent Man Archbishop Usher,
they had their Liberty again, and preached, and enjoyed their Places all the
Time of the Usurpation; and those that were kept out of their Livings, had the
Fifths allowed them. I speak not this to excuse the Evils of those Times, but
to show that the Loyal Clergy found some Mercy and Pity even from Usurpers; and
some of them have ingenuously confessed, that they received great Kindness from
some in Power then: And shall not we now exceed them in Mercy? Does it not
become us to act according to the Christian Law, to overcome Evil with Good?
and according to the Law of the Land, (the Act of Oblivion) in not reviving the
Memory of the Evils of former Days, to the detriment of any Person or Persons?

But now such a Storm is raised, that is ready to carry away not only the
Goods, but the Persons of the Nonconformists: I know not the Reason, unless it
be because they were too zealous for the Bill of Exclusion. Indeed Sedition and
Rebellion is pretended, that they are Enemies to the Government, that they are
acting the old Game of Forty One, and Forty Eight. Let these things be proved,
and then let them suffer; I plead not for any such.

Nay, Moderation, and moderate Divines of the Church of England, are become now
hateful and exposed, and especially if any of us dare be so Bold as to plead
for Moderation toward Dissenters; and in so doing we are represented as
Enemies to the Church, and threatened to be cast our. It Is said, we have
reflected on our present Clergy, when it is only such of the Clergy as are
over-zealous and fiery, and hinder the Union of Protestants. For if Phaeton (as
Dr. Stillingfleet in his Iren. says) drive the Chariot of the Sun, the World
will be soon on Fire: I mean such in the Church, whose Brains, like the
Vnicorn's, run out into the length of the Horn; such who have more Fury than
Zeal, and yet more Zeal than Knowledge or Moderation.

The Generality of our present Clergy are great Admirers of Archbishop Laud,
and those that adhered to him; and yet Mr. Hammond L'Estrange (one that was a
zealous Churchman, and as keen against the Presbyterians as his Namesake)
has said more of him and them, than any of the moderate Divines now have, or
dare to say of the present Clergy. Viz.

Mr. Ham. L'Estrange's History of K. Charles the First, page 143, 144.

-- His Zeal to Order (meaning Archbishop Land) carried him thus far, (that
is, to put the Canons in Execution) transported him a little too far: The
Communion Table, which formerly stood in the midst of the Church or Chancel, he
enjoined it to be placed at the East End, upon a graduated advance of Ground,
with the Ends inverted, and a Wooden Traverse of Rails before it, to keep
Profanation off, to which Rails all Communicants were to resort. These things
were decent and comely in Contemplation, and had been so in Practice, had they
been within the Rule of the Church Directions; but being Anomalous Innovations,
and so severely urged, many became thereupon precise, and separated themselves
into factious Sidings; nor was this a Schism of an ordinary Size, but grew to
that process, to that degree, as, to speak in the Primitive Mode, Altar was
erected against Altar, that is, one Bishop impugned and opposed another: For
the Bishop of Lincoln ( being affronted by one Titly, Vicar of Grantham)
published a Tract under a concealed Name, positively asserting therein, That
the holy Table anciently did in the Primitive Times, and ought so in ours,
according to the Dictates of our Church, stand in gremio, and Nave of the
Quire. And as the Archbishop, whilst he so vehemently pursued Order, did a
little outrun Authority; so was he unhappy in those he did employ, as
Instruments and Subordinates under him, some whereof endeavored to
super-induct many Things, as Will Worship of their own, and which came within a
Mathematical Line of Popery: Nor were they blameless in their Lives, some being
vicious even to Scandal, nor of so meek and humble Behavior as was to be
wished, but insolent at a rate so intolerable, as one was bold to say, He hoped
to live to see the Day, when a Minister shall be as good a Man as any upstart
Jack-Gentleman in England. To such a height of Infatuation had a petty Blaze of
mistaken Honor elevated this high Flyer, who in lieu of those frolic Days he
looked to see, lived to see that very Hierarchy extirpated, and lived to see
himself deplumed of all his Pomp. These Exorbitancies of those Sons of Eli from
the Rules of Ethics, created a very great Disgust against them; and many well
enough affected to their Empire, did exceedingly blame their Imperiosity, etc.

FINIS.
The Reader (in regard of the Author's Distance from the Press) is desired to
amend what Errata he meets with.


