THE QUAKERS Last Shift found Out: Or, an ANSWER to WILL. PENN'S Complaint
against the Meeting at Barbican, Upon the 28th. of August, 1674. AND His New
Way of Stating an Old Challenge.

LONDON, Printed by T.M. and are to be Sold by D. Newman in the Poultry, 1674.

The Quakers last shift found out, etc.
MEeting with a Paper given about the Streets, and at Coffee-Houses, it looked
at first somewhat like a Doctors Bill; but taking it into my hands to read, I
quickly perceived from whence it came, and what the Author (William Pen) would
be at, viz. to cast some small rubs in the way of those whom he had just cause
to fear would be awakened and made to see how miserably they have been deluded
and abused by one, and other heads of the Quakers, if they were either present
at, or have heard of the horrible Doctrines and practices of several of them
(and they, none of the inconsiderablest of their Tribe) laid open and
manifested in the sight and hearing of many hundreds, at a public Meeting of
Christians assembled at Barbican the 28th. of August, 1674.

The occasion of which solemn Meeting was this: It having pleased God to make
Thomas Hicks very instrumental (by his Book entitled, A Dialogue between a
Christian, and a Quaker) to bring to light several of the Quakers opinions and
practices, and thereby undeceive the minds of several honest and well-meaning
persons whom they had brought over to their Persuasion; this turned the canting
spirit, into a raging Devil, against the said T. H. insomuch, that W. P. could
not forbear boldly to tell him, that his head should not go down to the Grave
in peace.

But perceiving those menacing expressions to have no desirable effect for
stopping his mouth, or hindering his Pen; but on the contrary, he grew more bold
for God, his Truth, and the interest of Holiness, and put out his third part of
^^^logues; (...) all persons, into whose hands that Book should come, that if
at any time they hear he was assassinated, they would remember those words of
W. Pen to him.

The Quakers think of another expedient, and that is, by courting the Baptists
in and about London, to speak to T. H. as they tender the glory of God, and the
honor of Religion, that he write no more such Dialogues: take it in their own
words. Now, if you the Teachers and Elders, etc. among the Baptized People, do
not publicly clear your selves of Thomas Hicks, and these his unjust
Proceedings against us; and hereafter he further persists therein, We may take
it for granted, that you own his Work; and may justly deal with him, and pursue
him, not only as Tho. Hicks, but as the Baptists great Champion, peculiar
Agent, or Representative. But if you ingenuously clear your selves of him and
his Corrupt, Perverse Work; then his future Miscarriages will be chargeable
only upon T. Hicks himself, and you will appear to the World so far clear
thereof, and approve your selves the more honest and sincere toward God,
Truth, and Religion. Upon this appeal, the Teachers and Elders amongst that
People desired that T. H. would in a public Meeting, bring forth his evidence,
and produce his Witnesses, as to what errors and vices he had charged on the
Quakers in his three Dialogues, and which they had with so much confidence
denied: And because the Quakers should have timely notice of it, Mr. Kiffin,
Mr. Knowls, and four others, wrote Letters the 15th. of August to W. P. and G.
Whitehead, informing them of the place and time that they had appointed (in
persuance of their own appeal to them) T. H. in public, to make good his
Charge on the 28th. day of that month, at Barbican, stating not only the day,
but place and hour. W. P. his Letter was sealed and delivered to Philip Ford
(who is W. P. his Agent in London) who returned answer, That W. P. was out of
Town; yet the said Philip Ford had an opportunity thereby given him, to
acquaint the rest of the Quakers of the said Meeting, appointed at their own
instance and request, and it is Reported, that W. P. himself was at home the
very Night before the Meeting was, and so needed neither Letter nor Messenger
to inform him.

And whereas W. P. says, he is also assured by a Letter of G. Whitehead from
Bristol, that he received no account of the Meeting until the 29th. of the last
month, being the day after its appointment; by a good providence, the contrary
of that is cleared, for T. Hicks having occasion to write the Tuesday before to
a Friend at the Vizes, accidentally it happened that G. Whitehead was then in
the same Town, and saw the Letter; this is ready to be attested and proved,
when occasion shall serve. Yea, so careful was T. H. and his Friends to prevent
the least color for the Quakers pretending Ignorance in this Meeting, that
they did not fail to inform all they met with; and as for J. Osgood, he had a
Letter also delivered into his own hands upon the Exchange, in the sight of the
said T. H. wherein himself and Friends were invited to hear the same, which
trouble and care was more than the Baptists were obliged to be at, they having
no tie upon themselves to have the Quakers there, yet were heartily glad to see
so many of them come; and it is credibly reported, that even those, came
contrary to the order of their Leaders. For the Baptists were the people
appealed to, and these are William Pens own words, viz. That to which an Appeal
is made, must be capable of giving an Infallible Judgment, and so a true Judge,
or else the Appeal is Foolish. Spirit of truth Vindicated, Page 78.

And therefore W. P. prevaricates, when he says, that the Baptist concerned
them in a meeting; for it was they that concerned the Baptist in that Meeting;
and it was purely upon the account of their own Appeal, for they were men of
business and occasions, as well as the Quakers, and their time as precious to
them.

As for W. P. telling the world, that he offered J. Gladman to meet the said T.
Hicks with the Bible in one hand, and his Dialogues in the other; the said J.
Gladman does remember that W. P. and he, had some words about T. H. and his
Book; but that there was any formal challenge urged by W. P. or rejected by
him, he wholly denis: But on the contrary, he says, that if any such formal
challenge had been, he would have acquainted T. H. with it, who has offered it
long ago with these Conditions. (1) That he might have liberty to produce
their own Books, and to have them read openly (as they were at the Public
meeting). (2) That a rule might be agreed on, to determine their Discourse by.
(3) That but one at a time might speak. (4) That W. P. would promise to speak
directly and plainly to each Question. (Lastly), That any man that would, might
write after them. Dialogue 3. Page 87. However, W. P. is to be commended for
his prudence to offer another meeting, but the time and place, that is reserved
in his own breast: But however, he would do well, to tell the World what he
would have for more satisfaction then has been done; and that in the very way
and manner that he has himself propounded to be concluded by: For T. H. had
but two sorts of Accusations to make good against the Quakers; the first was as
to their Doctrine, for which he produced their own Books, the Authors being of
the Eminen'st, and such as had most esteem by their own party to prove every
title: the other was matter of Fact, which was so gross and palpable, that he
brought witnessess Viva Voce, to the Satisfaction of all to whom they had
appealed: And if they will but have a little Patience, they shall have it yet
more Public, and as loud as the press can speak, that the World may see their
Errors condemned out of their own Mouths; and their practices Spoken against by
all that call themselves Christians.

London September 8. 1674.

