THE Remonstrance OF THE Suffering-PEOPLE of GOD, CALLED QUAKERS: Clearing
their Innocence from the many false Aspersions, Slanders and Suggestions, which
are lately come abroad in the Nation causlesly upon them.

For among my People are found wicked men, that lie in wait, as he that sets
snares. They set a Trap, they catch them. As a Cage is full of Birds, so are
their Houses full of Deceit: Therefore they are become Great, and waxen Rich.

Jer. 5.26, 27. London, Printed in the Year, 1665.

The REMONSTRANCE of the Suffering-People of God, called QUAKERS; clearing
their Innocence from the many false Aspersions, Slanders and Suggestions, which
are lately come abroad in the Nation (causlesly) upon them.
FOrasmuch as the everlasting God of all Truth has visited us from on high,
out of his Everlasting Love unto us, and has revealed Jesus Christ, the Light
of the world and the Life of men, unto us and in us; who have waited and longed
for his appearance unto our souls, that we might be partakers of his Heavenly
Power from on high; and that we might know his Eternal Power made manifest to
us, and in us, by which the Saints in former ages were led and guided into all
Truth, and to walk in the same to the honor of God, the Everlasting Being,
from whom Eternal Life is conveyed, through Christ Jesus, unto all that do
believe in the measure of his Eternal Spirit, which he has given to every one
a measure of to profit withal, even every man that is come into the world, to
that intent and end that every one who receives it, and closes with it in
their hearts, might be led from darkness unto Light, from sin unto
Righteousness, from Satan's power to the Power of God; and from death, and him
that has the power of death which is the Devil, unto God, the Everlasting God
of all Truth; and to have fellowship with him in the mystery of the Gospel of
his Son Jesus Christ; by which remission of sin is obtained, and an inheritance
among the Sanctified Ones, who were made meet to be partakers thereof, who are
gone before, and rest in the bosom of the Father; unto which high and great
Calling God has called us, even to be partakers of the same Faith, Hope,
Inheritance and Calling, through the riches of his Love, manifest to us in
Christ Jesus, in the end of the world. Now, and in the last times, that has
yet been in being, or ever appeared amongst the sons of men, a necessity is
laid upon us on the Lord's behalf, in whom we have believed, to speak the truth
as it is in Jesus, before God and all his holy Angels, and before all men, and
to the Witness of God in every man in the world, who yet does not believe; yet
according to this in all Consciences will his Judgment be, and unto that
everlasting Testimony of God in all English-hearted-men, and all men of every
Nation, Kindred, Tongue and People upon the face of the whole Earth; and to the
Testimony in all Consciences who live and have a being, according to Gods
everlasting Witness in them, we appeal, and that shall bear witness to us; that
either before, now, or hereafter, that we have, do, and shall speak the truth
as it is in Jesus Christ, and according to which we must all be judged; and to
receive Sentence from the hand of the Lord (according to what we shall declare
unto all in this particular) for evermore.

We are a People who have enquired after the Lord, and only desired to know Him
and his Worship, and that we might worship him in Spirit and in Truth, and find
acceptance with him, and have fellowship with him in that which endures for
evermore; that our souls might live in his sight, and that we might witness his
Countenance and Favor manifested to us; and the Evidence of his Spirit bearing
witness to us, and in us, that we are accepted of him through Christ Jesus. We
are not ignorant of all the set and stinted Forms of Worship, and Formal
profession in our own generation, and what it is, and what the enjoyments of
all are in respect of God and his Worship; for we our selves have traveled
those paths in diligent circumspection, and much vigilance, in the observation
of all those outward things, which are accounted by some, as Divine and Holy
Institutions and Ordinances of God, which generally the People take upon trust
from their Leaders and Elders, Tradition of time, or Custom of Nations; but
alas, we know how it was with us in that state, and how it is with all such,
who are so busying themselves about bodily exercises, which profit little,
while their hearts are not upright to that of God made manifest in them, by
which he shows unto man his thoughts and his evil, and also that which is good
and acceptable in his sight; yet notwithstanding all such who are professing
God and Christ in words and worship, and yet be enemies to him, and that which
may be known of him in their hearts, both in life and works: And such were we
in times past, in ignorance and unbelief, and yet had a profession, and a zeal
according to the times, but not according to the true knowledge of God in
Christ Jesus.

But God out of his rich Love and Mercy had compassion on us in this estate,
and knew the longing and thirsting of our hearts after him that we might obtain
him, manifested his Eternal Words of Life and Power in our hearts, which became
a Light unto our feet, and a Lanthorn unto our paths, by which we came to see
our selves and our own estate, and that all our righteousness were as filthy
rags; and that all the inventions, traditions and ordinances of men, which are
repugnant unto the Will and Ordinances of Christ, that all these were and are
abomination unto the Lord, and that he has no pleasure in them; neither in
them that draw near unto him, pretending honor and worship unto him, while
they offer up unto him in the darkness and ignorance of their minds, with
polluted hearts and lips, and that which he never required. These things are an
Abomination, we being made sensible thereof by the Spirit of God, which
discovers both words and works; and knowing his Judgment to come upon us, not
only for sin, but also for that which has been, and is by some yet counted for
righteousness and worship, who are still in the unbelief; the Lord made a
separation in our hearts betwixt the Precious and the Vile, and called us out
of the unfruitful works of darkness, and out of the World, and its wisdom which
knows not God, and out of the paths of those who are in the Fall, and in the
Apostasy, and are erred from the Life and Power of God, and the holy
Injunctions of Christ, not to have any more fellowship with them in the vain
corrupt traditions of men, nor them that would set man's threshold by God's
threshold; and not only so, but would even overthrow both the Life, Power and
Virtue of all true Religion and holy Exercise, to set up the Constitutions and
Decrees of man, and Ordinances and Imaginations of men, in a bodily show of
holy Worship, when God requires no such thing of man; moreover, would impose
the fallible Judgments and changeable Institutions of men, upon men's
Consciences, and would be Lords over men's Faith: such we cannot own, neither
have fellowship with, but are clearly separated from such things in our hearts,
and cannot own such with the presence of our persons, in conformity to that
which we see no ground for, neither themselves can give any, out of the
Scriptures of Truth, or from the Examples of the Apostles, and primitive
Church, so called. For this thing we have been railed and slandred,
misreported, defamed and evil-spoken of, falsely accused, evilly entreated,
reproached, mocked, stocked, stoned, imprisoned, whipped, buffeted, our Goods
spoiled, and our Families sought to be ruined, and we not counted worthy to
live in our Country and Land of our Nativity: Therefore Devices have been made,
and Engines formed against us, and Laws and Acts made that we must either
conform to that which no man as yet has convinced us of, either by discourse,
word or writing, or else we cannot enjoy our Liberties, as men, in the Nation;
but must be banished, as persons unfit to live among men, or in our natural
habitations, separated from our Wives and dear Children, in jeopardy of our
Lives if we return in seven years; nay, in peril daily, in loss of Goods,
Mulcts, Fines, long Imprisonments; and he that does the most mischief unto us,
thinks he does God the most service, and the Kingdom the best office.

But as the enemy of mankind, the Devil and Satan, cease not to represent the
best of the Lords works in a bad form; even so does his Instruments, the Lords
People; and of their life and works to stir up a dislike in Peoples minds
against them, and therefore the greatest Truth by some has been counted the
greatest Heresy. The Jews, the alone Church of God in that age, all the
Gentiles hated, and the Nations that knew not God, whom God reproved: Christ
the Prince of Peace, was said to be a Samaritan, and to have a Devil, and to
cast out Devils by Beelzabub the Prines of Devils, and to be an Enemy to
Caesar, and a Friend of Publicans and Sinners, and a Blasphemer, and a Breaker
of the Law of Moses, and a Transgressor of the Ordinances of the Jews, and what
not? He was numbered amongst Transgressors, and a Murderer preferred before
him; and he that was given for the Light of the Gentiles, and the Salvation of
Israel, and of all, to the ends of the Earth, was counted as the Troubler and
Disturber of their State and Government: And so it happened to all his
Followers, and the Prophets that went before; Elias was reckoned by Ahab, his
Enemy, and the Troubler of Israel; and likewise, Micah and Jeremiah were
reckoneo as men fallen away to the foreign Enemies, viz. to the Babylonians in
the the time of Zedekiah; because he pleased not the Princes of Zedekiah, they
put him in the Dungeon, his feet stuck fast in the mire: Isaiah was counted a
Troubler of the People, and a Disturber of Jerusalem and the Country, so that
they, said, Speak no more of these things unto us, for we will not hear them.
What should I speak of Paul, of Peter, of James, of Stephen, of Silas, of John
and of all the Holy Men of God, of John Baptist, of all the Believers among the
Jews, of all the Believers among the Gentiles, and of the suffering Brethren in
the Apostles days, and of all the suffering Christians by the Romans, and in
the ten Persecutions in latter years in Europe, where the Name of Christ was
published? so that the best of men have been in all ages reckoned by the Powers
of the world and People thereof, the greatest Malefactors, and have been
counted, not worthy to live; but Enemies to States and Governments, Turners of
the world upside down, Seditious, Pestilent, desperate, Wicked, Ringleaders of
Sects, Setters out of strange gods, Deceivers, Deluders, Despisers of Princes,
Enemies to Churches, States, to Commonwealths, and Enemies to all mankind,
Disturbers of Reace, of Misbehaviout, and what not? In a word, not one of the
faithful People of God, in any age or generation, but they were condemned, and
censured, as Evildoers, and were made to suffer as such, the most, by some
public pretended Law, or (if I may say) perverted Law, or other, whereby they
were judged; or else by making some Law or other to suit their intended
purpose, to be a cloak and a cover unto them of some show and seeming Reason
why they so proceed, in a seeming way of legality, to blind the minds of
People; that it was done by the force of some Equitable Power, and that all
that were Transgressors of such Ordinances and Laws, though never so repugnant
to the mind of God, yet all ought to obey them: And they that suffered by them
were reckoned as Evildoers; And so all the Saints have suffered, and were
condemned by the world: But Christ is come for this very end, to convince the
world of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment, and will condemn that Judgment
which is acted by the power of the Prince of this world, because he shall be
cast out, and must not for ever sit as Judge over the Heritage of God; for then
the Lord's Heritage would be laid waste, and the Destroyer and his Instruments
trumph in their wicked enterprises.

We who are brought forth in this last age of the world, and have been made to
tremble because of the Word of the Lord, and the dread of his Holiness; that we
have seen and known, called reproachfully Quakers; We have been a suffering
People, since the Lord has called us, and chosen us out of the world, to bear
witness to his Name, and to that everlasting Truth, by which freedom from Sin
is witnessed; which the Prophets and Holy Men of God of old, the Apostles, and
Members of the Church of Christ were made Testators of; and we are Members of
the same Body, and do believe no other things than that which all the Prophets
bare witness unto, and all the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, and Members of
the Church of Christ, which is his Body; believed, and no other Hope or Faith
have we, or profess we, than that which was once delivered unto the Saints of
old, in the pure and holy Plantation of the Gospel; nor no other belief have
we, either as to Doctrine or Practice, but that which is consistent with the
Church of Christ, and according to the Scriptures of Truth: And though we have
had greas opposition, yet has none convinced us of Error, or of Evil-doing in
point of practice, as walking in the societies of men; but we have endeavored
with great diligence, to make our Calling and Election sure, and that we might
have a Conscience void of offense toward God, and also toward all men, and to
serve the Lord in our generation, and to do good unto all men, as much as in us
lies; and to study Peace and Quietness, minding every one our particular
Calling whereunto God has called us, that we might adorn the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by a holy and blameless Converlation, by which we have
received remission of Sins, and are remitted unto God; yet notwithstanding,
great has been the enmity that has been raised up against us, and great has
been the outcries of many, and much the hatred; though we can say, in a clear
Conscience, with David, without a cause: And great have been our Sufferings
this many years, insomuch, as we may say truly, Long Furrows have been plowed
upon our backs, and we have had all manner of Evil spoken of us; but we bless
and magnify the Lord, not for evil doing, but falsely, yea falsely, for the Name
sake of Christ; though we have been slanderously, and fasly reported from time
to time, by the the Time-serving-Ministers of Antichrist, who have always
Witness that their Address to Richard, called Protector.
flattered the Powers of the world, and stirred them up against us, by false
suggestions, flatterings, and daubing insinuations, because we have discovered
their Deceit, and our Conversation has been more blameless than theirs; they
have prevailed so far, as to raise up unbelief in peoples hearts, and to set
the Rulers of the Earth against us, as much as in them lay, to our utter ruin
and extirpation in this life, as ever Haman did against the Jews: But seeing
the adversary of mankind has prevailed so far with many, to hear, receive and
believe the many false slanderous reports of us, and to publish them abroad;
and seeing that traps are laid for us, and snares for our feet, both to ensnare
our Consciences, and to the ruin of our Estates, to bring us into bonds, to
the separating us from our Wives and Children, to confiscation of our Estates,
to Banishment of us our of our Naive Country to seek our bread among strangers,
to the rendering of us odious unto all, to the making of us Slaves and Bondmen,
and sell us to any for a thing of naught; to make People believe we are not
subject unto Authority, that we disobey the Laws of the Nation, which are just;
that we plot Mischief against the Government; that we are ready to side with a
Foreign Enemy, to bring the Nation again into a Civil War; that we hold
correspondency with Foreign Enemies; that we annimate one another in Sedition,
and Rebellion; and that the principal end of all our Meetings and Conventicles,
so called, is, to confirm one another in Malice against the Government; And
that we make Collections for the support of a Party, who are listed to appear
in any desperate undertaking; That we have designed the very time; That we are
industrious, and dextrous, and spread abroad our intelligence to stir us Strife
and Commotion, and to disturb the public Peace of the Nation: And this greatly
reflects upon us, and not only upon us, but the everlasting Truth of Christ
Jesus, which we profess, which if these things were true, we were not fit to
live in a Nation, but to suffer according to our demerits. And seeing two Acts
are chiefly made against us, for the suppressing of our Innocent and Peaceable
Meetings, whereby diverse thousands are, and have been, and are like to be in
bonds, only (we say) for the Worship of God; and keeping Faith and a good
Conscience; yet how great severity has been used against us, God knows, and
many good People in the Nation also! Notwithstanding, as though this had not
been enough yet, our Sufferings are augmented, and Affliction unto Affliction,
by a Letter lately sent by some Chief Magistrate of England (as we are
informed) to the Nobility and Justices of the several Counties, which is read
in some places in the public Sessions; in which, though we be not particularly
nominated in that Letter, yet many of those things contained in it, are imputed
unto us; and the Justices of Peace, and others, take it for granted: And so our
Miseries, Bonds and Sufferings are augmented time after time; which, if the
Lord by his eternal Power does not change the minds of them that are bent
against us, we are like to be destroyed as men from having a being amongst the
rest of our Neighbors and Countrymen.

Therefore, all these things considered, We are necessitated to declare our
Innocence unto all, and to clear the truth of such things wherein some are
jealous of us, and to speak the truth from our hearts and Consciences, as
before the Living God, the Judge of the quick and the dead, who in his day will
render unto every one according to his works; and also before his holy Angels,
and all just men; and to all the Potentates, Nobility, Rulers, Magistrates,
Justices of Peace, and to all People in this Nation; and to all the whole
World; and to every particular Person where this may come: and according to the
truth of this our Testimony, we desire the Lord may judge us; and we never to
expect his Blessing upon us if we do it not with all sincerity of heart, and
uprightness before him.

First of all, We cannot but testify unto all with boldness, That we love the
King's person, and desire his good in that which pertains to this life, and
that which is to come, and that his Throne may be established in Righteousness,
that we under him may live a Godly, Honest and Peaceable life, serving God in
our generation, and doing that which is acceptable in his sight, and that which
becomes true Members of this Kingdom, that it might be preserved in
Righteousness and Peace.

2. We utterly deny all such, as not to be of us, and did never, neither can,
nor shall ever own such to be of us, who plot or contrive any Sedition,
Rebellion, Insurrection or Misdemeanor against the Peace of the Nation, to
embroil it again into Wars; we utterly do deny all such things from our hearts,
and also every individual person that has, does, or may act any thing
conducing to such a mischievous end; and deny all desperate persons and their
designs, who wish or deny all desperate persons and their designs, who wish or
desire in their hearts evil to the King, or to any of his Magistrates, or that
act any thing conducing unto War for the hurt of the Nation in general, or any
particular men therein.

3. We utterly deny all such Councils, whether few or many, and their
confederacies, who hold any correspondency with any foreign Enemy or
domestic, if any such there are, have been, or shall be; and likewise any such
Order as any person or persons shall send abroad in any part of the Nation, to
the disquieting or disturbing the Peace of the Nation, as is mentioned in that
Letter.

4. We utterly deny such as have provided any Arms, or listed any men, (if any
such there be) to aid or assist any Foreign Enemy, or to breed any Contention
at home in the Nation; and have not fellowship with such unprofitable works of
darkness, but do utterly deny them, and all such contrivances.

5. We deny all such as by any false insinuation or suggestions alienate the
minds of any of the People from their duty to their Prince or Nation; but
rather do exhort all men, To study Peace, to be quiet, and cease from Strife
and Contention; and to stop their ears from hearing, or receiving that which
tends to the hurt of the Nation, or any particular man therein.

6. We are not so void of reason and understanding, but that we know and are
sensible that any foreign Nation, or People, who are Aliens unto another
People, if at any time they should prevail in way of War or Hostility upon any
Nation or part thereof, we know it would imbondage the whole, and make all
greater sufferers, as experience does daily teach; therefore knowing and being
sensible of such things, we cannot but judge and condemn all such desires in
any, much more their actions, if any should attempt any such things in the
discontent of their minds, to be foolish, treacherous and inhumane; and
whosoever are actors in any such things, we utterly disown them to be so far
void of truth, that they have lost their understandings as men.

7. And all such Meetings, or Conventicles, which are Seditious and Unlawful
in the sight of God, we deny; whose principal end is to confirm each other in
Malice against the Government; or do make any Collections to support any Party,
or raise any moneys for any listed men, who appear in any desperate
undertaking, or any that have designed either time or place for any such end,
as to raise War; or to yield to any aid, either in our own Nation, or to any
Party, if there be any such, or to any Foreign Enemy; we do utterly deny any
such, both their persons and practices.

8. But we freely confess unto all, and before all, we have met together this
many years for the Worship of God, to pray together in the holy Ghost, to
exhort one another unto Righteousness, and to build up one another in the most
holy Faith, as the Christians of old did, and dare not forsake the assembling
of our selves together unto this innocent and holy duty, that God requires all
Christian men to be exercised in; neither do we limit the Lord to time or
place, as some do, and would have us to conform to that which we are not
persuaded of in our hearts, neither are we convinced of by any, but rather
confirmed by the Scriptures of Truth, and by our daily witnessing of Gods
Presence amongst us: Although we are liable to many sufferings therefore, and
have undergone great penalties meetly for the Worship of God, for which end we
ever met, and no other, as God knows, and all that have been present at our
Assemblies from time to time can bear witness, who are not of us, nor of our
persuasion, either as to doctrine or practice in many particulars: Yet we
freely confess before God and all men, we have had Collections amongst us, God
having put it into our hearts, that of what we have, and what God has blessed
us with, we have been, and still are, out of our small estates ready to
maintain good works; for it is Christ and the Apostles Doctrine: For if we say
we love God, and suffer our Brother to want, how then dwells the Love of God
in us? Besides, we have many poor Widows and Fatherless, and many poor
Prisoners, who are sufferers for Christ and the Gospels sake, unto whom we have
ministered without being chargeable unto any Parish in the Nation for our Poor;
besides the Contribution for the Poor of the several Parishes in the Nation,
and other good and necessary works we have maintained, and shall be ready while
we enjoy any thing in this present world: Besides these works of Charity, God
he knows, and we are bold to challenge all the whole World to prove, that ever
we collected any thing but for the aforesaid virtuous and pious uses, according
to the will of God.

9. We deny all such, if any such there be, who make any such Collections in
their Assemblies to maintain War, or to buy any Weapons of War, and to
encourage or support any such desperate undertaking, to carry on any design
under any pretense whatsoever, against the Peace of the Kingdom or Government
of the same, or to the disturbing or hurting of any man, or men, either in
person or estate.

10. We our selves know that Sion must not be builded with Blood, nor the
Church of God by Weapons of War, nor Religion propagated by Violence; and
therefore we cannot strive with those Weapons, nor with any Carnal Weapons of
War, either fight to defend or offend, being redeemed out of those things; and
can forgive our enemies, and bless them that curse us, and pray for them that
persecute us, and do good to them that evil entreat us; and have learned the
Doctrine of Christ, knowing if any do us wrong or injustice, Vengeance belongs
to the Lord, and he has ways enough to recompense them, so that we need not,
neither are we careful in this matter, but have committed our selves unto the
Lord, the faithful Creator and Preserver of all that do believe; and we cannot
render evil for evil, nor seek revenge, nor reviling for reviling; Yet knowing
the Innocence of our own hearts, and that the glorious Truth of our God is
concerned with us, we cannot but deny all false slanders and accusations that
have been laid to our charge, and speak the Truth, and testify it before all,
and unto all, that it may be believed, and Truth cleared before all.

11. Whoever they be that have, do, or shall hereafter plot, contrive, consult,
levy War, raise Arms, join with any foreign or domestic Enemies, under any
pretense whatsoever, against the King or Government, or to the disturbing of
the Nation, or to bring it into any commotion, in any hostile way or manner, We
in the presence of the Lord, and before all men in the Nation do deny from our
sincere hearts all such, and their practices, as to be out of the Truth of the
Gospel, and we have not, nor cannot have any fellowship with them: Therefore
let none impute any such things unto us, or trouble us any more with their
groundless jealousies, surmises, or charges of this nature, which we are
innocent in. And O that the inmost part of all our heart were open and bare
before all in Authority in the Nation! And, O that you had no greater enemies
at home or abroad than we are! then might you all rest in peace and quiet,
without fear or jealousy of any harming you.

Last of all; Be it known unto all men We are resolved into
Suffering-Principles, to bear all things, endure all things, and fuffer all
things for Christ's sake; and if we must still suffer and undergo all those hard
and heavy censures which already are decreed and determined against us, Know
all people it is for Christ's sake and the Gospel, and for the Testimony of
JESUS, and the Word and Worship of God, and not for evil-doings; and this we
hope all good and tenderhearted people will believe and receive our Testimony,
which will balance the suggestions of our enemies; and we steadfastly do
believe the Lord will be with us in the midst of all Tribulations, and will
plead our Cause, and keep us from every evil way and work, and from the
Temptations of the Adversary, unto his heavenly Kingdom, that we shall not make
shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, nor faint in the midst of Trials; and
the Lord keep all men who thirst after Righteousness, from striving against the
Lord, or standing in opposition against his everlasting Power, which whosoever
does, cannot prosper; and though we be the only Mark and But to shoot at, and
are reckoned as the offscouring of all things, singled out from the rest of
the Nation as Abjects of Wrath, and Vessels of Contempt, yet we knowing our own
innocence, cannot betray it, but suffer in Faith and Patience, and travel in
hope to see an end of all sufferings, and bear the reproach for Christ's sake,
till he arise in his Power and Glory, and make his enemies his footstool. And
indeed we cannot but pity and commiserate their state who yet are in
opposition to us, that they should thus requite the Lord for all his kindness
after their deliverance out of their adversity, trouble and afflictions, as to
make it the main matter of concernment in the Nation to root out and destroy
the Flock of Christ, whom he has redeemed to himself as a purchased
Possession, and think by this means to settle all in rest and peace. Oh the
Lord open all their eyes that so judge; for they know not what they are doing,
neither how ill the Lord takes it at their hands, that instead of encouraging,
cherishing and being as a safeguard and refuge, they only should discourage and
make sad the hearts of many poor and innocent people, whom God never made sad,
and should add affliction unto affliction; and that the glorious Truth of Jesus
Christ, which has been so richly made manifest both in word and operation, to
the changing of thousands from sin and ungodliness, to bear the image of God,
and bring forth fruits of Righteousness, and season the Earth, that the Nation
might be blessed with the dew from above, and with the heavenly and spiritual
blessing in Christ-Jesus. But O how is all this slighted in the Nation! and O
how does Vice abound, and Wickedness and Ungodliness increase! and how do men
run after it as if it were the way to felicity and happiness! O what profaneness
is broken-forth like a land-flood over all the banks! what horrible Oaths and
Blasphemy, what prodigious Swearing and Cursing, as if it were even daring God
to damn them; nay, some do frequently use those very words of daring God to it,
and saying, [God confound them] is the frequent wicked speeches of many in the
Nation, and taking God's Name in vain at every trivial occasion; and O what
drunkenness and filthy uncleanness, not fit to be named among men! what
swearing and forswearing! that it may truly be said, Because of Oaths, as of
old, the Land mourns: and what sports, vain-pastimes, that begets people into
lightness and wantonness, are permitted, if not allowed! which are bad and
wicked fruits, and demonstrate the fear of God to be far away from them, that
act and countenance such things, as people running on heaps unto such vanities:
but to meet in the fear of God, and for the worship of God, or for holy
Exercises, this is reckoned Sedition, and counted dangerous and destructive to
the Peace of the Nation; and nothing but Persecution and Cruelty attends such;
which if it be continued and persisted in, will bring a scourge of God upon the
Nation. Therefore once more be warned; Break off these bonds of wickedness, and
cease from persecuting of God's People, and repent while you have time, if you
can find a place, Lest the fire of the Lords Jealousy smoke against you, and
there be none able to quench it, or deliver you.

By the suffering and afflicted People of God, who are persecuted for Christ's
sake, called QUAKERS.

It is the same Faith and Hope that we hold, and not another, for which the
Apostles of Christ suffered, and were persecuted: yet there is none will say in
our generation, that the Apostles did evil; nor none say, that they did well
that persecuted them. Therefore consider of it, you that are doing the same
thing you condemn in others.

THE END.

